Every single factual claim in a tweet President Donald Trump posted on Monday morning about the state of US coronavirus testing is either blatantly false or misleading. While there’s legitimately good news on the testing front the president could be talking about, like a steady increase in the number of tests completed per day, his latest public comment on the issue reads like a 279-character greatest hits of his favorite bogus talking points — blaming former President Barack Obama for a delay in test availability, overstating how much testing the US has already done, and turning a blind eye to ongoing supply shortages the federal government has done little to solve. Trump wants people to believe that coronavirus testing in the US has been a resounding success and that there’s already enough testing capacity to reopen businesses — and thereby resuscitate the economy ahead of November’s election. Progress is in fact being made, but we’re not there yet. And since the president has largely left states to fend for themselves when it comes to building out testing capacity, he really shouldn’t be trying to take credit for recent tentative successes.  “Wow! The Front Page @washingtonpost Headline reads, ‘A BOOST IN TESTS, BUT LACK OF TAKERS,’” Trump tweeted on Monday morning. “We have done a great job on Ventilators, Testing, and everything else. Were left little by Obama. Over 11 million tests, and going up fast. More than all countries in the world, combined.” Wow! The Front Page @washingtonpost Headline reads, “A BOOST IN TESTS, BUT LACK OF TAKERS.” We have done a great job on Ventilators, Testing, and everything else. Were left little by Obama. Over 11 million tests, and going up fast. More than all countries in the world, combined. Before we get to the Post story Trump referenced, it’s worth mentioning that his claim about being “left little by Obama” is completely absurd. As I’ve previously detailed on other occasions when Trump has tried to pin blame for testing issues on his predecessor, the novel coronavirus that causes Covid-19 didn’t even exist until nearly three years after Obama left office. So Obama would’ve had to have been some sort of time traveler to develop coronavirus tests during his term. It’s also not even close to true that the US has tested “more than all countries in the world, combined.” According to data compiled by Worldometer, while the US leads the world with 11.9 million tests conducted as of May 18, the next three countries on the list — Russia (7.1 million), Germany (3.1 million), and Spain (3 million) — have done more tests together than the US. So it isn’t correct to claim that the US has done more tests than the next three countries combined, let alone the entire rest of the world. And the US is nowhere near the top of the list when it comes to tests conducted per 1 million people. On that list, the US ranks an unimpressive 39th. And while Trump is in the habit of touting the raw numbers of tests conducted because it portrays his coronavirus response in the best possible light, he’s reluctant to discuss the total numbers of deaths — the more than 90,000 deaths that have occurred in the US is more than double that of the second hardest-hit country (the UK, with more than 34,000). There’s no denying the US has made significant progress on testing over the past six weeks — according to the Covid Tracking Project, the 422,024 tests completed on Sunday were a single-day high — but the country is still falling short of the 500,000 tests per day experts believe is the minimum necessary to fully control the outbreak.  Ironically, the Washington Post story Trump cited details how the federal government is hampering efforts to get the country above that 500,000 threshold. While the article — written by Steve Thompson, Juliet Eilperin, and Brady Dennis — does discuss how some states have more testing capacity than they do people seeking tests, it also details how a lack of supplies and a national testing strategy is making it difficult if not impossible for states to put that capacity to good use. From the article: Lab capacity remains untapped for many reasons, including lingering supply shortages. While most states say they are now able to test people in hospitals, nursing homes, prisons and other front-line settings, many continue to be hampered by a lack of personal protective equipment (PPE), nasal swabs and reagents, the chemicals necessary to process tests. [...] A national strategy could make [efforts to test more people] more effective, said Danielle Allen, director of Harvard’s Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics, which last week published a $74 billion road map that calls for 24-hour contact tracing and isolation facilities for people who test positive. Although many states are building those services, the patchwork approach means scarce resources may not be efficiently deployed. Instead of deploying the massive resources of the federal government to procure nasal swabs and reagents, Trump has largely left states to fend for themselves. Some, like Maryland, have resorted to buying test kits from foreign governments since help from their own hasn’t been sufficient. And rather than develop a national testing strategy, Trump has been pushing for states to reopen their economies even though very few if any meet the gating criteria for doing so developed by his own administration’s coronavirus task force. REOPEN OUR COUNTRY! While US testing numbers have been improving, coronavirus deaths in the country are still between 1,000 and 2,000 most days, meaning the country is on track to hit 100,000 coronavirus deaths before the end of the month. One of the reasons the coronavirus outbreak has been so bad in the US is because the country fell way short on testing in February and March, allowing the coronavirus to spread across the country in a largely undetected manner. When Trump compares America’s raw testing numbers favorably with other countries, he leaves out the crucial context that governments in South Korea, Germany, and elsewhere were able to get the coronavirus under control early because they had more testing capacity during a critical period. That’s not to say that Trump shouldn’t share good news about increases in testing capacity with the American public. But it’s worth noting that even in cases when the truth would suffice, he can’t help himself from unleashing a blizzard of false and misleading claims. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  It’s hard to believe that sometime before February, when news of the novel coronavirus began to garner public attention in the US, most Americans couldn’t identify Dr. Anthony Fauci from a lineup of austere male physicians. Fast-forward just a month or two and the 79-year-old’s bespectacled face can be found plastered on all sorts of customizable merchandise — T-shirts, mugs, cotton face masks, socks, bobbleheads, prayer candles. Fauci, the longtime director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, has established a near-ubiquitous media presence in no time at all, becoming the subject of glowing magazine profiles (“How Anthony Fauci Became America’s Doctor”), late-night talk show appearances, online thirst (#FauciFanClub), and, of course, kitschy fan-made merchandise. On e-commerce sites like Etsy, Redbubble, and Amazon, the keyword “Fauci” currently displays thousands of results, with all sorts of pro-Fauci slogans (#TeamFauci, Fauci Gang, I Heart Dr. Fauci). Out of the context of this pandemic, you would think the man was running for president. The cult of Fauci and its corresponding tchotchkes serve a purpose, much in the way that special counsel Robert Mueller (and the “It’s Mueller Time” tees) morphed into a political motif during the impeachment of President Donald Trump. A post shared by FUCKJERRY (@fuckjerry) on Mar 29, 2020 at 6:00pm PDT In the midst of a pandemic with no end in sight, people appear desperate for a figurehead, and believing in the soft-spoken and measured Fauci, it seems, is akin to believing in science. It means recognizing that America’s political leadership has failed to substantially curb the spread of the disease, and that the way forward is to trust the scientists and the experts — even if they don’t yet have the answers to some of our most pressing questions. “His comforting and intelligent demeanor has helped to lessen our national anxiety,” reads a petition signed by more than 26,000 people to designate Fauci as People magazine’s Sexiest Man Alive in 2020. “He speaks truth to power, a strength few have at this time.”  In these tumultuous times, Fauci has somehow managed to capture America’s imagination, but his old colleagues say he’s always had a magnetic personality. He was so charismatic that romance novelist Sally Quinn wrote a character inspired by Fauci after meeting him at a dinner party in the ’90s. When 65 percent of Americans feel that the White House has responded too slowly to the threat of Covid-19, it seems natural, then, to turn to the physician who has been hypervigilant in his public warnings, one who has decades of experience battling epidemics from the HIV/AIDS crisis to the swine flu. And so Fauci, like most political figures aggrandized by the internet, has been meme-ified and elevated into this larger-than-life hero who “speaks truth to power,” when in reality, he’s just doing his job. There’s a lot of misleading information out there. Thanks to Dr. Fauci and all of the other scientists, medical professionals, and experts educating the public based on facts, science, and truth. We appreciate it! pic.twitter.com/NbpZM6YwfD However, fellow expert Dr. Deborah Birx has hardly received the star treatment Fauci’s been given in the press and on the internet. Despite Birx spending decades researching HIV/AIDS and serving as a US Army physician, her scarves and press briefing outfits, rather than her professional accomplishments, have more frequently been the subject of media coverage. The pro-Fauci shirts, stickers, and slogans are an all-in-one visual display of performance, politics, and consumerism; Americans have long been obsessed with collecting political paraphernalia and merchandise, but in quarantine, it’s quite clear how these items serve little practical purpose other than self-expression. Plus, the Fauci merch collectors — like Katy Perry and Orlando Bloom in their Fauci Gang hoodies — are probably only able to showcase this gear on social media and Zoom.  Many companies have taken advantage of this proclivity for screen-printed apparel. While popular sites like Redbubble or CustomInk primarily sell user-generated merch, others have employed algorithms to create items with specific phrases that appeal to customers, based on data marketers have gathered. That means, as my colleague Rebecca Jennings previously reported, “for every possible political viewpoint, implausible hope, or conspiracy theory, there will be a way for merch sellers to capitalize on it.” Some purveyors of Fauci merch do promise to donate some profits to charity or emergency response funds, but purchasing an item means potentially putting workers at risk — to create it, package it, and deliver it, as opposed to donating directly to your nonprofit of choice. In quarantine, however, Americans with disposable income are giving in to their online shopping impulses out of boredom or as a feel-good remedy, and the plentiful options of Fauci merch available — and their charitable intentions — likely feed into people’s consumerist desires. A post shared by DATA BASED FASHION (@databasedfashion) on May 6, 2020 at 5:00pm PDT “As a seller, I feel like people want to buy T-shirts that promote the truth and to stand with who they believe in,” Justin Sharp, the founder of Arkansas Tees, told me. Sharp released a “Fauci Fan Club” tee (no affiliation with the @FauciFan Twitter account) sometime in early April, and the design quickly became the top-selling shirt on his Etsy shop. It was surprising, he admitted, that the item “hasn’t stopped selling since day one,” although he said before its release, several of his friends had approached him about a Fauci tee. Sharp sells on average about 10 to 15 Fauci shirts a day, and he has noticed that “if there’s any kind of battle between Trump or Fauci online,” he experiences a small bump in orders.  Casual clothing became a notable vehicle for political expression in the lead-up to and aftermath of the 2016 election, when bright red Make America Great Again hats, all-caps Nasty Woman tees, and pink pussyhats became a visual shorthand for politics. As someone who refuses to wear graphic tees in public, it pains me to admit that most Americans — regardless of their political leanings and economic status — are corny. We take pride in wearing hacky tag lines or garish emblems that seemingly portray our values, whether on a $6 mass-produced political tee or a $380 hand-stitched sweater. And in pandemic times, when supply chains are strained and mail carriers are slammed, you have to wonder: Is this item really worth it?  “That’s absolutely true on Etsy,” Sharp told me, adding that he only uses the site to promote shirts with more general slogans. Before the success of his Fauci design, his Nasty Woman shirt was his bestselling item. “I don’t show my Etsy that much love other than during heavy political moments. People’s interests change and they become less passionate about certain designs,” he said. If Sharp’s theory holds true, then interest in Fauci merch will likely subside in a post-pandemic America. However, the timeline for an effective coronavirus vaccine isn’t entirely clear, which means Fauci could stay relevant for months, if not years. For the most part, pandemic merchandise isn’t as clearly political as, say, “resistance” apparel after 2016; pro-Fauci items are “a memento of a certain moment,” according to The Cut’s fashion news writer Emilia Petrarca. It “allows us to repackage big ideas in ways that are eye-catching and easily digestible and fast.” Years from now, when Covid-19 (hopefully) becomes a pandemic of the past, most Americans will probably recall Fauci as one of the key experts who played a role in the US’s coronavirus response. In our stressful and uncertain reality, it might be comforting to lionize Fauci as our one true savior, rather than recognize that successfully flattening the curve depends on actions from many sources, most out of Fauci’s control: the White House, governors, state legislators, local officials, and even civilians like you and me.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.     A few months ago, I had dinner with a friend who argued that it was time to rethink Donald Trump’s presidency. After all, the economy was fine, we hadn’t ended up in a nuclear war, and the tough posture toward China was paying some trade dividends. Maybe the madman routine was working. Maybe it really was just a routine, and Trump was managing the presidency well enough. Wasn’t it time for critics like me to rethink their most dire warnings? Wasn’t it time to admit we’d gotten him wrong? There were, even then, obvious rebuttals, and I made some of them. The lethal mismanagement of the Hurricane Maria response, for instance. But there was a power to the argument. The worst hadn’t happened. Didn’t that require a reckoning? And then the novel coronavirus came, and President Trump did nothing for week after week, month after month. We sit, still, in the void where a plan should be, forced to choose between endless lockdown and reckless reopening because the federal government has not charted a middle path. Instead, we wake to presidential tweets demanding the “liberation” of states, and laugh to keep from crying when the most powerful man in the world suggests we study the injection of disinfectants. Trump has let disaster metastasize into calamity. The feared collision of global crisis and presidential recklessness has come, and it is not close to over.  There is a lesson here, one of particular consequence in an election year. In politics, we evaluate leaders on the clearest of metrics: what did or didn’t happen. Unemployment rose. The bill failed. The war began. We grasp for certainty, and understandably so. In a post-truth age, it is hard enough to discuss reality; it is maddening to try to debate hypotheticals. But much of any presidency takes place in the murky realm of risk. Imagine that there are 10 horrible events that could befall the country in a president’s term, each with a 1 in 40 chance of happening. If a president acts in such a way that they all become much likelier — say, a 1 in 10 chance — he may never be blamed for it, because none of them may happen, or because the one that does falls during his successor’s term. But in taking calamity from reasonably unlikely to reasonably likely, he will have done the country terrible harm.  The logic works in reverse, too. A president who assiduously works to reduce risk may never be rewarded for their effort because the outcome will be a calamity that never occurred, a disaster we never felt. We punish only the most undeniable of failures and routinely miss the most profound successes. “No one votes for anyone in government on whether they reduce pandemic risk from 0.9 percent to 0.1 percent in a decade,” says Holden Karnofsky, CEO of the Open Philanthropy Project. “That may be the most important thing an official does, but it’s not how they get elected.” Of late, I’ve been thinking back to 2017, when Trump began a war of tweets with North Korea, the world’s most irrational nuclear regime. “Just heard Foreign Minister of North Korea speak at U.N.,” Trump wrote. “If he echoes thoughts of Little Rocket Man, they won’t be around much longer!”  Trump’s behavior stunned even Republican allies. Sen. Bob Corker (R-TN), then the chair of the Foreign Relations Committee, warned that the president was treating his office like “a reality show” and setting the country “on the path to World War III.” But World War III didn’t happen. Trump and Kim Jong Un deescalated. They met in person and sent each other what Trump later called “beautiful letters.” The fears of the moment dissolved. Those who warned of catastrophe were dismissed as alarmist. But were we alarmist? Or did Trump take the possibility of nuclear war from, say, 1 in 100 to 1 in 50?  Moments like this dot Trump’s presidency. His withdrawal from the Iran nuclear deal dissolved the only structure holding Iran back from the pursuit of nuclear weapons. What’s followed has been not just a rise in tensions but a rise in bloodshed, culminating with Trump’s decision to do what both President George W. Bush and President Barack Obama chose not to do and assassinate Iranian military leader Qassem Soleimani. The end of that story is as yet unwritten, but possibilities range from Trump’s gamble paying off to Iran triggering a nuclear arms race — and perhaps eventually nuclear war — in the Middle East.  Trump’s withdrawal from the Paris climate accord, alongside his routine dismissals of the NATO alliance, similarly force us to imagine the future probabilistically. In both cases, Trump says he is simply being a tough negotiator, forcing the better deals America deserves. In both cases, unimaginable calamity may — or may not — result. The verdict will not come by Election Day. We will have to judge the risks Trump has shunted onto future generations.  Of the many risks that Trump amplified through lack of preparation, reckless policymaking, or simple inattention, a pandemic is the one that came due while he was still president. But it is not the only one lurking, nor is it somehow a charm against other disasters befalling us. Moreover, the coronavirus itself raises the risk of geopolitical crises, of financial crises, of disasters both expected and unexpected, manifesting.  Trump, in his daily rhetoric and erratic mismanagement, is placing big, dangerous bets, but he will not cover the losses if they go wrong: It’s America, and perhaps the world, that will pay, in both lives and money.  The federal government’s primary job is risk management. If that sounds strange to you, just follow the money. More than 50 percent of the federal budget is devoted directly to social insurance programs like Social Security, Medicare, or Medicaid — programs that insure Americans against the risks of illness, old age, and financial disaster. Another 16 percent goes to defense spending, which, in theory, protects us from the risks posed by other countries and terrorist networks. Together, safety net programs and military spending account for almost three-quarters of federal spending.  The US government is an insurance conglomerate protected by a large, standing army.  But the work doesn’t end there. Dig into the remainder of the budget and you find the government devoting itself to the management of more complex and exotic risks, in departments and programs that few Americans ever hear about. As Michael Lewis writes in his excellent book The Fifth Risk, risk management suffuses the entire federal bureaucracy in ways that are dizzying to try to appreciate in full: Some of the risks were easy to imagine: a financial crisis, a hurricane, a terrorist attack. Most weren’t: the risk, say, that some prescription drug proves to be both so addictive and so accessible that each year it kills more Americans than were killed in action by the peak of the Vietnam War. Many of the risks that fell into the government’s lap felt so remote as to be unreal: that a cyberattack left half the country without electricity, or that some airborne virus wiped out millions, or that economic inequality reached the point where it triggered a violent revolution. Maybe the least visible risks were of things not happening that, with better government, might have happened. A cure for cancer, for instance. The only way to manage that much risk effectively is to manage the government effectively. But Trump has never pretended to do that, or to want to do that. This can sometimes be mistaken for conservative ideology, but it’s more properly understood as disinterest.  Trump likes being the protagonist in the international drama that is America. He doesn’t want to make sure the world’s most massive, complex, and sprawling bureaucracy is well-run. He has shown little interest in nurturing the parts of the federal government that spend their time worrying about risk. His proposed budgets are thick with cuts to those departments, his proposed appointees often manifestly incompetent, his comments marinated in disrespect for the institution he oversees.  Former New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, who originally ran Trump’s transition team, relayed to Lewis a telling comment Trump made about the pre-administration planning, which he considered a waste of time. “Chris,” he said, “you and I are so smart that we can leave the victory party two hours early and do the transition ourselves.” Each day, the president of the United States receives the President’s Daily Brief: a classified report prepared by US intelligence agencies warning of gathering threats around the globe. US intelligence agencies warned Trump of the dangers of the novel coronavirus in more than a dozen of these briefings in January and February. But Trump “routinely skips reading the PDB and has at times shown little patience for even the oral summary he takes two or three times per week,” reported the Post. Two problems build amid this kind of executive impatience. First, the president is unaware of the nation’s constantly evolving risk structure. Second, the bureaucracy he, in theory, manages receives the constant message that the president doesn’t want to be bothered with bad news and does not value the parts of the government that produce it, nor the people who force him to face it.  It is, in fact, worse than that. “The way to keep your job is to out-loyal everyone else, which means you have to tolerate quackery,” Anthony Scaramucci, who served (very) briefly as White House head of communications, told the Financial Times. “You have to flatter him in public and flatter him in private. Above all, you must never make him feel ignorant.” In March, speaking at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention headquarters, Trump unintentionally revealed how much time his underlings spend praising him, and how fully he absorbs their compliments. “Every one of these doctors said, ‘How do you know so much about this?’” Trump boasted. “Maybe I have a natural ability. Maybe I should have done that instead of running for president.” To state the obvious, this is not a management style that will lead to complex problems being surfaced and solved. In 2014, after the Ebola epidemic, the Obama administration realized the federal government was unprepared for pandemics, both natural and engineered. And so they built a new team into the National Security Council: the Directorate for Global Health Security and Biodefense. Beth Cameron was its first leader, and she explains that it was designed to ensure not just a constant focus on the threat, but a bureaucratic structure, and a set of interagency relationships, that were constantly being exercised so coordination could happen fast when speed was most needed.  “Having that in place is really important,” Cameron says, “because it’s in anticipation of a truly catastrophic or existential threat. It is the ability to detect it early. And then it’s the ability to respond efficiently and to practice that at all levels of government.”  That way, when the crisis does come, the government knows how to react, knows who needs to be in the meetings, knows where the power and authority and expertise lie. It can focus on responding to the threat rather than building the structure needed to respond to the threat. The Trump administration dissolved that office in 2018 as part of John Bolton’s reorganization of the National Security Council. The leader of the team, Rear Adm. Timothy Ziemer, was pushed out. The decision attracted criticism at the time, but the White House defended the call. “In a world of limited resources, you have to pick and choose,” one administration official told the Washington Post. The administration has never explained how or why it chose to deemphasize pandemic risk, nor which threats it decided to prioritize instead.  So neither Trump nor his administration was focused on Covid-19 in the early days, when it would have mattered most. “I think that it’s possible if we’d taken this threat more seriously in mid- to late January, that we could be in a situation where we are containing coronavirus as opposed to having to suppress it,” Cameron says. I don’t want to overstate the consequence of that one decision: It is possible to imagine an administration that eliminated the office but remained focused, through other agencies or processes, on pandemic risk. But in this case, the dissolution of the office reflected the interests of the executive, and the evidence is everywhere. The administration responded exactly as you’d expect an administration that had shuttered its pandemic response operation to act — which is to say, it mostly did not act.  “When the president stands on top of a table and says, ‘This is super important, super urgent, everyone must do this,’ the government works moderately effectively,” Ron Klain, who managed the Obama administration’s Ebola response, told me. “That’s the best case. When the president is standing up and saying, ‘I don’t want to hear about it, I don’t want to know about it, this doesn’t really exist,’ well, then you’re definitely not going to get effective work from the government.” In his book The Precipice, Oxford philosopher Toby Ord considers the manifold ways humanity could die or destroy itself — the “existential” risks. He considers asteroids and supervolcanoes, stellar explosions and nuclear wars, pandemic disease and artificial intelligence. Surveying the data and building in his own estimates, Ord concludes that there’s a 1 in 6 chance humankind, or at least human civilization, will be annihilated in the next century.  Among the threats, one factor dominates: other human beings. Ord believes there’s only a 1 in 1,000 chance that a natural disaster — say, an asteroid or a supervolcano — will wipe humanity from the timeline. The likelier outcome is that humanity will annihilate itself, either accidentally or deliberately. It is the chances of a virus bioengineered for lethality, of artificial intelligence that erases us malevolently or casually, of nuclear war or runaway climate change rendering Earth uninhabitable, that drive the risk, in Ord’s view, to 1 in 6. Ord’s estimates are arguable. Perhaps the true probability is 1 in 12, or 1 in 3, or 1 in 50. But it is not zero. And Ord is, purposely, ignoring horrifying outcomes that don’t result in humanity’s extinction. A nuclear war that kills 50 million people does not fit his definition of existential risk. Nor does a bioweapon that kills 200 million, or a violent climate disaster that displaces billions. But the chance of any, or all, of these is inarguably higher.  Trump raises the risk of virtually every threat on Ord’s list. In some cases, he does so directly: in withdrawing America from the Paris climate accord and turning the Environmental Protection Agency over to oil industry executives, he has directly increased the risk of runaway climate change. In refusing to renew the New START treaty with Russia and dissolving the Iran nuclear deal, he has directly increased the likelihood of nuclear proliferation. In dismantling the government infrastructure meant to protect us from biological and natural pandemics, he has increased America’s vulnerability to pandemics — as we are seeing. But the most important argument Ord makes is this: Risks, even across vastly different spheres, are correlated. There are forces, events, and people that simultaneously raise — or lower — the risk of runaway climate change, nuclear war, pandemics, and reckless AI research. The simplest way to raise all of them at once, Ord suggests, would be a “great-power war.” Take a war between the US and China. It would raise the chances of nuclear launches, engineered bioweapons, and massive cyberattacks. And even if it never got to that point, the increase in hostilities would impede the cooperation needed to slow or stop climate change, or to regulate the development of artificial intelligence. And yet, increasing hostilities with China has been the hallmark of Trump’s foreign policy. Even prior to the coronavirus, the US-China relationship was “at the worst point since the forging of the relationship in 1972,” says Evan Osnos, who covers China for the New Yorker. Now the situation is much worse.  The Trump administration’s initial response to the coronavirus, and the one of which it remains most proud, was closing travel to and from China. It is possible that policy bought us time, but it was time we wasted. The coronavirus made its way to the US from Europe, and the Trump administration turned to blaming China. The president began calling it the “Chinese virus.” His administration stalled a United Nations Security Council resolution on the coronavirus because it didn’t pin sufficient blame on China for the virus’s origins. China has responded in kind, suggesting the US military carried the coronavirus into the country and expelling US journalists.  During a recent interview on Fox Business, Trump said of President Xi Jinping, “I just, right now, I don’t want to speak to him,” and threatened to “cut off the whole relationship.”  It is important not to pretend the US-China relationship is easy, nor that China has been, itself, a good actor amid the coronavirus (or even more broadly). But we are thinking here in terms of catastrophic risk, and it is clear that the deterioration of the US-China relationship worsened global pandemic risk. “Ask yourself: What would’ve happened if we’d had more constructive conversations with China over the past few years?” says Sen. Chris Murphy (D-CT). “Would they have been more willing to share information on coronavirus early? I don’t know the answer to that question. But we created a relationship that was purely antagonistic.”  Reasonable people can, and do, disagree on ideal China strategy. But in this case, there has been no strategy at all. An administration that wanted to confront China successfully would strengthen America’s other alliances, build US influence in Asia, reinforce our commitments in Europe, invest in retaining the world’s respect and trust. Trump has done none of that. Instead, has surrounded himself with professional China antagonists, like Peter Navarro, ratcheted up tensions continually, and made a hobby out of alienating and unnerving traditional allies. Now, in a moment that demands global cooperation, the relationship is in collapse, and America’s international capital is at a low ebb.  “We increasingly feel caught between a reckless China and a feckless America that no longer seems to care about its allies,” Michael Fullilove, head of Australia’s largest think-tank, told the Financial Times.  The rising tensions between the US and China worsen almost every existential or catastrophic threat facing the US. Coronavirus could have been a warning, a signal of how quickly catastrophe can overwhelm us in the absence of cooperation. Instead, it’s been used to pump more hostility, more enmity, more volatility into the most important bilateral relationship in the world. That is a political choice Trump has made, a risk he is running on behalf of future generations.  “I know we talk about trust all the time as the missing ingredient, but it matters when it comes to international politics,” Osnos says. “The big blinking risk is that there is not an assumption on the Chinese and the US sides that the other one basically has the same interest, which is global stability. There is a real feeling that the other one is seeking to hurt.” In normal times, the worst risks we face slip easily from our minds. We think of the threats we know, the ones we faced the year before and the year before that and the year before that. This is called “availability bias,” and it is natural: We think more about the dangers we’ve seen before than the ones we haven’t. Yet the worst risks are, by their nature, rare — if they came due constantly, humanity would be ash. As a result, we conflate the unlikely and the impossible. This pandemic, if nothing else, should shatter that conflation. It is hard to pretend the worst can’t happen when you haven’t been able to enter a store or see your parents for six weeks. And let’s be clear: coronavirus is not the worst that can happen. The H5N1 virus, for instance, has a mortality rate of 60 percent, and scientists have proven that it can mutate to become “as easily transmissible as the seasonal flu.”  Even scarier is the possibility of human-engineered pandemics. As bad as the coronavirus is, Bill Gates told me, “it’s not anywhere near bioterrorism — smallpox or another pathogen that was intentionally picked for a high fatality rate as well as delayed symptoms and a high infectious rate.”  We play for the highest of stakes. We must do what we can to improve our odds.  No one bears a heavier burden in that respect than the US president. But Trump is reckless with his charge. That reflects, perhaps, his own life experience. He has taken tremendous risks, and if they have led him to the edge of ignominy and bankruptcy, they have also led him to the presidency.  But he has always played with other people’s money and other people’s lives. “The president was probably in a position to make riskier decisions in life because he was fabulously rich from birth,” says Murphy. “But it’s also true he has had a reputation for risk not backed up by reality. His name is on properties he doesn’t own. We think of him as taking risk in professional life, but a lot of what he does is lend his name to buildings with risks taken by others. He’s built an image as a risk taker, but it’s not clear how much risk he’s taken.” In electing him president, however, we have taken a tremendous risk, and it isn’t paying off. Right now, the Trump administration is flailing in its health and economic response to a pandemic ravaging our society. The country’s chief risk officer failed, largely because the country hired someone who didn’t want to do that job. Maybe, next time, we should hire someone who does.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar spoke in optimistic terms about quickly reopening the US economy on CNN Sunday. And he did so while downplaying the severity of the coronavirus fatality rate nationally, seeming to suggest that demographics — rather than policy choices — are behind confirmed US coronavirus-related deaths approaching 90,000. But his positive gloss on the administration’s coronavirus response appears to be at odds with recent polling indicating that an overwhelming majority of Americans — including those who have lost their jobs or taken pay cuts due to stay-at-home measures — are concerned that states will lift social distancing restrictions too quickly. In an interview with CNN’s Jake Tapper, Azar said, “Thanks to the president’s historic response efforts here .... we are in a position to be able to reopen now.” “We have got to get this economy and our people out and about, working, going to school again, because there are serious health consequences to what we’ve been going through,” he said. However, his confidence about a swift return to normalcy — and the ability of state and local leaders to oversee that process competently — is not shared by most of the American public. A Pew Research Center poll taken from April 25 to May 5 (with a 1.4 percentage point margin of error) shows that 68 percent of all adults are concerned state governments will lift stay-at-home restrictions too quickly.   Strikingly, even among people who have been laid off or have taken a pay cut, the percentage of people with that concern is identical — 68 percent — which indicates concerns about the virus are serious even among those facing direct economic consequences from the coronavirus-spurred recession. (Among those who had not been laid off or taken a pay cut, the percentage concerned was one point higher: 69 percent.) These results also suggest it’s not just government shutdowns of businesses that are keeping people home and away from businesses, but fear of the virus itself.  Azar also answered questions from Tapper about the fatality rate in an eyebrow-raising manner, suggesting that communities of color are a key reason that the US has the highest number of reported casualties from coronavirus in the world.  When Tapper initially asked Azar to explain why the virus is “worse for us than it is for anyone else,” referring to the number of Americans who are dead, Azar first responded by pointing out that the US’s mortality rate as a percentage of reported cases was not exceptionally high.  HHS Secretary Alex Azar says that the high number coronavirus mortalities in the United States is due to "greater risk profiles," in certain communities and says the American response to the virus has been "historic" #CNNSOTU pic.twitter.com/0plz9pWekO But when Tapper pressed him further, and emphasized that the overall number of deaths in the US is the highest in the world, Azar said this could be explained by ethnic demographics. “Unfortunately the American population is a very diverse, and, it is, it is a population with significant unhealthy comorbidities that do make many individuals in our communities, in particular African American, minority communities, particularly at risk here, because of significant underlying disease, health disparities, and disease comorbidities,” Azar said. “That is an unfortunate legacy in our health care system that we certainly do need to address,” Azar added. Azar is right that public health inequities are contributing to disproportionate casualties among communities of color. But pointing to that as the primary reason the US has surpassed every other country in the world in terms of coronavirus-related deaths is a troubling dodge: it seems to imply that racial minorities are to blame for their deaths rather than the federal government. The more immediate and larger explanation for the US’s exceptional number of deaths is the disorganized and anti-scientific response by the federal government to the pandemic. But even setting that aside, the fact that many communities of color do have worse health outcomes is a function of longstanding socioeconomic marginalization and uneven access to nutrition, health care, and a healthy environment. In other words, Azar’s formulation could be flipped: it’s not people of color driving up America’s casualties, but America that is driving up people of color’s casualties. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.    The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted “emergency use authorization” to a new coronavirus testing kit on Saturday that allows people to submit self-collected nasal samples to labs by mail.  The new test, by Everlywell Inc, is the third at-home sample collection kit given special expedited approval from the FDA under an emergency use authorization — which uses a standard lower than the one the FDA normally adheres to for new treatments and products but allows for the use of items the administration thinks it is “reasonable to believe” will be effective during a public health emergency. The company previously faced congressional questions after it appeared to market a similar product for home use without FDA review; it told the New York Times it meant for its kits to be used only by health care providers pending federal approval.  The emergency use authorization will increase the number of credible sample collection kits Americans can use to test themselves from home, allowing them to avoid the risk of exposure at a medical facility, and also reduce the odds of spreading the virus if they are in fact positive. Jeffrey Shuren, director of the FDA’s Center for Devices and Radiological Health, said the speed with which the administration was able to give the kit a green light “was a great example of public-private partnerships, in which data from a privately funded study was used by industry to support an EUA [emergency use authorization] request.” Here’s how the testing process works, as reported by the New York Times: Someone who wants to get tested takes an online survey to ensure they meet federal guidelines to receive a test. Those guidelines suggest a person should be exhibiting symptoms or have had contact with symptomatic individuals before requesting screening. The results of the online survey are then reviewed by health care providers affiliated with Everlywell’s telemedicine partner. If the survey shows the person is at risk of infection, the collection kit ships out immediately. The person who receives the kit collects a nasal sample, places it in a saline solution, and then ships it overnight to a certified lab. The whole process, from taking the survey to getting results, is meant to take three to five days. Each kit costs $135, and according to Everlywell, will be available in late May. There are two other at-home sample collection kits that have also been granted emergency use authorization by the FDA; one also uses nasal samples, and the other uses saliva. As Recode’s Sara Morrison has reported, the FDA has been working to grant emergency use authorizations in part to push back against fraudulent vendors making false claims about at-home testing.  “In late March, the FDA even issued a stern warning for American consumers to be on the lookout for unauthorized or fraudulent test kits,” Morrison wrote. “One company, MicroGen DX, later told [STAT News] that it didn’t need FDA authorization for its at-home collection test at all. The FDA has also cracked down on shipments of unauthorized tests from other countries.” The FDA has not authorized any tests that can be done entirely at home — that is, sample collection and diagnosis. While a number of companies are working on such tests, experts say home tests with rapid results could be months away. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. In his first major national address since the coronavirus pandemic began, former President Barack Obama delivered a commencement speech to graduates at historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs) Saturday. And much of his advice encouraging students to become leaders doubled as an indictment of the Trump administration’s management of the pandemic.  “More than anything, this pandemic has fully finally torn back the curtain on the idea that so many of the folks in charge know what they’re doing,” Obama said in a video streamed online as part of the “Show Me Your Walk H.B.C.U. Edition” virtual commencement. “A lot of them aren’t even pretending to be in charge.” On the whole, Obama struck his signature tone of calm and measured optimism, and used the country’s current economic and public health crises as springboards for discussing his usual political themes, including the importance of community organizing and finding common ground outside of comfort zones. And he also emphasized the unique injustices faced by young black people like Ahmaud Arbery at a time when some political leaders are arguing that coronavirus is an equalizer of sorts. “Let’s be honest, a disease like this just spotlights the underlying inequalities and extra burdens that black communities have historically had to deal with in this country,” he said. “We see it in the disproportionate impact of Covid-19 on our communities, just as we see it when a black man goes for a jog and some folks feel like they can stop and question and shoot him if he doesn’t submit to their questioning.” Obama went on to tell graduates that it is because of challenges such as these that they are needed as active citizens who can engage deeply with the world in a time of crisis. “No generation has been better positioned to be warriors for justice and remake the world,” he said. And in encouraging his audience to foment change, the former president offered a thinly veiled criticism of Trump’s divisive political style. “So rather than say, ‘What’s in it for me?’ or ‘What’s in it for my community and to heck with everyone else,’ stand up for and join up with everyone who’s struggling — whether immigrants, refugees, the rural poor, the LGBTQ community, low-income workers of every background, women who so often are subject to their own discrimination and burdens and not getting equal pay for equal work,” Obama said. “Look out for folks whether they are white or black or Asian or Latino or Native American. As Fannie Lou Hamer once said, ‘Nobody’s free until everybody’s free.’” In some ways, the remarks were a more polished version of comments Obama made recently during a private call with members of the Obama Alumni Association, when he expressed sharp criticism of Trump’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic. “It has been an absolute chaotic disaster,” Obama said during the call, which included thousands of people he’d worked with in the past. “What we’re fighting against is these long-term trends in which being selfish, being tribal, being divided, and seeing others as an enemy — that has become a stronger impulse in American life.” But while Obama’s remarks on Saturday were less pointed than the criticisms made during his call, they were a call to action nonetheless. “And on the big unfinished goals in this country, like economic and environmental justice and health care for everybody, broad majorities agree on the ends. That’s why folks with power will keep trying to divide you over the means,” Obama said toward the end of the commencement speech. “Because that’s how nothing changes. You get a system that looks out for the rich and powerful and nobody else. So expand your moral imaginations, build bridges, and grow your allies in the process of bringing about a better world.” The speech won’t be Obama’s final commencement address in 2020 — his next graduation speech, to high school seniors, will take place Saturday at 8 pm ET, and he will deliver a third address to 2020 graduates at 3 pm ET on June 6. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.House Democrats voted in favor of offering stimulus payments to unauthorized immigrants Friday night, prevailing over Republican efforts to strike the provision from the latest $3 trillion coronavirus relief bill.  The HEROES Act, which passed the House on Friday, would make taxpaying immigrants and their families eligible for federal stimulus funds regardless of their legal status. Under the $2.2 trillion CARES Act signed in late March, only immigrants with Social Security Numbers — and who fulfilled certain residency requirements — were able to receive the payments, meaning unauthorized immigrants and many temporary visa holders were excluded. Republicans are not convinced that another aid package is warranted after the CARES Act, with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell saying he hasn’t “yet felt the urgency of acting immediately” on further legislation.  And Republicans in the House argued emphatically against the HEROES Act’s provision offering immigrants stimulus payments, with Rep. Denver Riggleman of Virginia calling it a “poison pill.” The Republican position was that relief funds should be dedicated to US citizens only. Despite being joined in their opposition by 13 Democrats, however, Republicans failed to block the provision in a 198-209 vote. But it isn’t likely to survive the Republican-led Senate, where McConnell has been explicit in his  objection to the plan.  “Another round of checks for illegal immigrants. Can you believe it?” McConnell said in a floor speech May 14. “We forgot to have the Treasury Department send money to people here illegally. My goodness, what an oversight. Thank goodness Democrats are on the case.” Democrats, on the other hand, have asserted that failing to offer financial aid to many immigrant families is an injustice that must be rectified, especially as the public has come to rely on immigrants to provide essential services during the current crisis. For instance, unauthorized immigrants make up about a quarter of farmworkers and 8 percent of the service sector and production workers.  “They pay taxes, contribute to our economy, and in many cases are fighting on the front lines of the coronavirus crisis,” Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi said in a call with reporters May 1.  The new bill would retroactively make unauthorized immigrants and their families eligible for the first round of stimulus checks, which the government started sending out in April, as well as a proposed second round of checks, which would amount to up to $1,200 for each tax filer and each of their dependents, depending on household income. These provisions are meant to correct for language in the CARES Act that left millions of people — some of them US citizens — without access to stimulus funds. The CARES Act gave most taxpayers up to $1,200 — along with $500 for each of their children under the age of 17. But immigrants without Social Security numbers, and who have not lived in the US long enough (usually five years) to file taxes as residents, weren’t eligible for the CARES Act’s stimulus checks.  The CARES Act also excludes those in households with people of mixed-immigration status, where some tax filers or their children may use what’s called an Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN). The IRS issues ITINs to unauthorized immigrants, as well as certain legal immigrants so they can pay taxes, even though they don’t have Social Security numbers. If anyone in the household uses an ITIN — either a spouse or a dependent child — no one in the household qualifies for the stimulus checks unless one spouse served in the military in 2019. This provision has led immigrant advocacy groups to challenge the CARES Act on the basis that it unlawfully discriminates against US citizens who have unauthorized immigrant family members. “The refusal to distribute this benefit to US citizen children undermines the CARES Act’s goals of providing assistance to Americans in need, frustrates the Act’s efforts to jumpstart the economy, and punishes citizen children for their parents’ status — punishment that is particularly nonsensical given that undocumented immigrants, collectively, pay billions of dollars each year in taxes,” Mary McCord, legal director of Georgetown Law’s Institute for Constitutional Advocacy and Protection, said in a statement. An estimated 16.7 million people live in mixed-status households nationwide, including 8.2 million US-born or naturalized citizens.  This number also includes those with deportation protections under the Obama-era DACA program, children and young adults whose parents often don’t have legal status. They’re left wondering how they can help support their families so that their parents don’t have to go to work, where they risk getting sick, and how they can help cover the costs of their parents’ medical care should they need it, Sanaa Abrar, advocacy director at the immigrant advocacy group United We Dream, told Vox. “With the national health crisis and what’s becoming a national unemployment crisis, folks are concerned about how they’re not only going to stay healthy and safe but also how they’re going to keep their jobs and how they’re going to find means of financial support,” she said. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.       In late February and early March, when much of the United States wasn’t yet taking the coronavirus pandemic seriously, the state of California — the first place in the country to spot community transmission — largely was.  Major tech companies in the state told their employees to work from home by the end of February or the first week of March. LA’s enormous TV and film industry largely shut down voluntarily in early March out of fears of spreading the virus among the hundreds of crew members and actors who circulate on sets every day.  Local leaders and the governor declared a state of emergency early in March while, in New York, Mayor Bill de Blasio was still infamously encouraging people to get out and enjoy themselves. For a while, the state was touted as a success story — and in some sense it is one. San Francisco, with only 36 coronavirus deaths, certainly deserves a victory lap. Statewide, the death toll has reached more than 3,000 in a state with 39 million people. If the country had managed the virus as well as the state of California did, America likely would have had far fewer deaths than the about 90,000 tallied so far.  But now, California is in limbo and is making very little progress toward an exit strategy. Case numbers aren’t falling, despite the lockdown. Testing is increasing, but too slowly. The state can’t meet its goals for contact tracing and isolating exposed people. The state’s guidelines for when to reopen look reasonable, but it’s not clear when (or if) they’ll actually be met.  This is bad news. It’s also jarring, because California has more resources, more public cooperation, and in many respects better leadership than most states. If all those advantages have nonetheless left the state with no real path to reopen, it seems as though most states should expect even worse. California’s experience illustrates just how vexing the coronavirus has been to deal with — and just how steep the challenge is for the country as a whole as it inches its way to a reopening that it hasn’t yet earned.  On March 20, when a statewide stay-at-home order was put into place across California (one had already gone into effect four days earlier in the Bay Area), about 1,000 cases had been detected in the state and about 20 people had died. The hope at the time was that the stay-at-home order would not just “flatten the curve” — causing new case numbers to grow more slowly — but crush it, getting case numbers much lower so that the state could safely reopen. For weeks, public health officials watched to see if the stay-at-home order had worked. Case numbers in California grew more slowly than elsewhere in the country — but they did keep growing. The order, originally set to expire April 7, was extended through April, and then extended through May. (The state has inched — more slowly than most other states — toward opening low-risk businesses, with social distancing measures in place.) Now there have been more than 75,000 cases reported in California. The first week in May had a spike in confirmed cases. The second week had even more, with cases at their highest numbers yet. That might be partially an artifact of improved testing — as more tests become available, more people test positive. But other indicators not dependent on testing aren’t that great, either. New deaths in the state have been effectively flat, at about 70 a day. The number of hospitalized coronavirus patients has also been effectively flat, maybe declining very slightly. (The state is not homogeneous; things look better in the Bay Area and worse in Los Angeles.) That’s a problem. One of the hopes for stay-at-home orders was that they would cause significant declines in new case numbers, not just get to a plateau. Once new cases become relatively rare, states could set up contact tracing, isolation of confirmed and possible cases, and other less restrictive strategies for combating the virus.  That remains the best way out of lockdown, but those strategies are harder to implement when case numbers keep rising. The fact that California’s stay-home order didn’t decrease, or only slightly decreased, the number of new cases means that the road ahead will be a very hard one.  “The US was not able to reach suppression with our lockdown,” virologist Trevor Bedford wrote last week, “and so we’re left with agonizing decisions about how to keep society functioning while holding the virus in check.” What went wrong? The best explanation is that California’s stay-home order, like many orders around the country, did not get the so-called R0 for the coronavirus to significantly below 1 (some preprints estimate it around 0.9). Let’s spell that out. An R0 of 1 means that the average person with the coronavirus transmits it to about one additional person. Things won’t get exponentially worse, but nor will they start to improve. Over time, case numbers will stay relatively flat and “crushing the curve” will be out of reach. What this all adds up to is that, despite months of lockdown, case numbers are not going back down.  The California stay-at-home order still involves more face-to-face contact with other people than the lockdowns in places that successfully controlled the virus. California hasn’t adopted centralized isolation, for instance, which would let sick people avoid infecting family members, and has a large homeless population exempted from the stay-home orders.  A CDC estimate suggests about 50 percent of Californians were still leaving their homes regularly after the stay-home order. In Italy, by contrast, mobility fell 85 percent under their lockdown. “That’s still 50 percent” at risk of exposure and of transmitting the virus, UC San Francisco epidemiologist and infectious disease expert George Rutherford told the Los Angeles Times.  If we take China’s statistics from Wuhan at face value — and, to be clear, while China is an authoritarian state with a long history of lying to the international community about infectious disease, there’s some virology data suggesting their numbers are in approximately the right ballpark — Wuhan’s comprehensive lockdown reduced the transmission of the coronavirus to an R0 of about 0.3. That means three infected patients will, between them, infect just one new person, so case numbers will drop fast.  “Big interventions in Wuhan, China, took about three weeks to start to reverse things. And then every day after the situation got better,” Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security director Tom Inglesby explained on March 23. Eventually, the virus was squashed, with China reporting no new internally transmitted cases. Now that they’ve started to reopen, they’ve found a few tiny clusters of more cases, but not many — letting the region focus its public health resources on each cluster as it appears. New Zealand has done something similar. The country maintained one of the world’s strictest lockdowns while case numbers declined, and residents are now exiting lockdown with lots of capacity for testing and almost no new cases. The country estimates that R0 was 0.4 under lockdown. That’s the path many US states likely were hoping they’d find themselves on when they issued stay-home orders in March. Instead, new confirmed case numbers suggest that many states — like California — entered a lockdown that was not strict enough to actually reduce case numbers and that instead produces a long plateau. (You can see this pattern in Nevada, Tennessee, Oklahoma, and South Carolina, for instance.) Successful suppression of the virus remains far in the distance. And even worse, California has largely been unable to take advantage of the time the lockdown buys them to increase testing capacity, provide hospital workers with sufficient personal protective equipment (PPE), or establish large-scale contact tracing programs. The state’s much-praised leadership had a hard job ahead of them, to be sure — but they haven’t gotten it done. In other words, the state is in limbo. Lockdown isn’t much improving things, but the state is increasingly itching to get out of it. Case numbers do not get better week to week despite the huge sacrifices of a lockdown. The situation will not improve until testing and tracing step up, which they did not meaningfully do in April and may be doing only very slowly in May.  “The whole point of this social distancing is to buy us time to build up capacity to do the types of public health interventions we know work,” Natalie Dean, a biostatistics professor at the University of Florida, told my colleague German Lopez. “If we’re not using this time to scale up testing to the level that we need it to be … we don’t have an exit strategy. And then when we lift things, we’re no better equipped than we were before.” The fact that California is in this boat portends poorly for other states. California was praised early in the pandemic for having good public health leadership. It is a relatively wealthy state with unusually high state revenues, a strong medical system, and lots of biotech companies. If California can’t make it out of limbo, what does that mean for other states?  California Gov. Gavin Newsom (D) said in April it would require contact tracing capacity, declining case numbers, PPE in hospitals and nursing homes, and 60,000-80,000 tests per day to consider reopening the state. That’s 150-200 tests per 100,000 residents. But even this modest goal has been excruciatingly difficult to achieve. Throughout the month of April, testing in California mostly didn’t increase, stuck at just over 25,000 tests each day. In May, that has finally started to change, but at a glacial pace. Last week, the state averaged 34,000 tests per day. Overall, the state is in the bottom half of states in tests per capita, worse than Mississippi, as of May 11. 
    Related
   The progress has been uneven. San Francisco is currently conducting about 168 tests per 100,000 residents a day, while neighboring Alameda County, where I live, is testing just 28 per 100,000. Efforts to expand testing have run into difficulty on all fronts, “complicated by regulatory restrictions, supply constraints, and a shortage of trained personnel,” MIT Technology Review argued in early May.  Other experts have pointed to overreliance on commercial labs in March and April as an explanation for the state’s slow start. Whatever the exact cause, it’s clear that the political leadership wasn’t able to deliver on one of the most critical elements of a reopening plan. When it comes to contact tracing, progress has been even slower. Mass hiring is needed to field the teams of thousands of contact tracers needed to reach out to people exposed to the virus. But all of April went by before California got started on substantially expanding its tracing ability. It is only in the last week that UCSF and UCLA announced plans to train 3,000 tracers a week.  And PPE remains in short supply at hospitals across the state — a reflection of worldwide shortages, to be sure, but still one of the problems the lockdown was supposed to help with and has not.  California isn’t alone in this. “[W]e all went into lockdown at incredible cost to ourselves right now, and to our kids in the future … and still six weeks go by and I don’t see huge improvements in testing capacity, in serology, in PPE, in hospital capacity. These things just haven’t happened,” the Center for Health Security’s Tara Kirk Sell said last week. Much of the blame there lies with the federal government. By refusing to exercise any national leadership on testing, officials have left states trying to invent the right policies on their own. By seizing state shipments of PPE, they’ve made it much harder for states to get the equipment they need.  But ultimately, the White House has abdicated all responsibility for improving the coronavirus situation, and states can only be judged by how well they perform in the face of that abdication. California might have been one of the states expected to perform well. After all, Newsom, an established critic of Trump, seems to have been well aware he couldn’t expect any aid from Washington. Instead, he formed reopening pacts with many neighboring states, caused a stir by referring to California as a “nation state” in its own right, and has proceeded with adjustments to the state lockdown order while ignoring the president.  And yet, the state remains stalled, both when it comes to case numbers and when it comes to the other criteria for reopening.  While California is stuck in limbo, some parts of the country have more promising statistics. Take Connecticut, New Jersey, and New York, the hardest-hit part of the country: In those areas, new case numbers, new hospitalizations, and new deaths dramatically declined (though Connecticut’s new case counts have leveled off in recent days). In the US overall, excluding those states, new confirmed case numbers haven’t been falling.  What’s going on in the rest of the country is pretty clear: There’s a mix of “limbo” states like California with stagnant or slowly declining case numbers, and “trouble” states where case numbers are actually increasing. But what’s going on in New York and New Jersey?  Their progress could stall. But one possibility is that the severity of the outbreak in those areas produced higher compliance with stay-home orders, which meant that R0 actually fell below 1. Another is that those states, by virtue of testing more, drove R0 down, and California might start to see the same results if officials ramp up testing to New York levels. A more discouraging explanation is that, since something like 15 percent of people in those states have now been exposed to the coronavirus, it’s easier to reduce transmission. A similarly strict stay-home order to California’s will do more to reduce transmission in a state where many people have already been infected. That interpretation would suggest that states can only get out of limbo at a horrific human price: New York has lost more than 25,000 people to the virus, and tens of thousands of others may suffer long-lasting effects.  Overall, this paints a scary picture; lockdowns alone, no matter how long they last, won’t save us. All they can do is buy us time, which doesn’t matter if we don’t have the capacity to use it well. Even the early success stories are now floundering when it comes to that. Lockdowns are worth it if they buy us successful suppression. But they cannot possibly replace lasting suppression, no matter how much economic hardship you’re willing to permit. In limbo, we lose the economy and lose lives to the virus. There has to be a better way out. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  The House on Friday passed the HEROES Act, Democrats’ $3 trillion proposal for the next stimulus package.  While it’s already been dismissed by Republicans in the Senate, the bill serves as an important marker for Democrats’ key priorities as lawmakers weigh how to address the economic fallout from the Covid-19 pandemic. The legislation, which includes over $900 billion in federal funding for states and cities, as well as another round of stimulus checks and an extension for expanded unemployment insurance, passed the House 208-199 predominately on party lines.  Thus far, the bill has garnered little interest from Senate Republicans who’ve been put off by its size, rediscovered their worries about the deficit and hinted that they might not move additional legislation until after the chamber returns from its Memorial Day recess in June. “We have not yet felt the urgency of acting immediately. That time could develop, but I don’t think it has yet,” Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell told reporters earlier this week, according to Politico.  Democrats note they’ve moved quickly on this measure due to the urgency of the crisis. The bill, which also contains a $200 billion fund to cover hazard pay for frontline workers, is Democrats’ stake in the ground as negotiations continue.  That’s not to say, however, that the caucus is united behind the entirety of the bill. On Thursday and Friday, ahead of the vote on the legislation, some moderate members including Reps. Abigail Spanberger (D-VA) and Kendra Horn (D-OK) voiced their opposition, and argued that the measure included priorities unrelated to the emergency at hand.  Earlier this week, progressives including Congressional Progressive Caucus co-chairs Pramila Jayapal (D-WA) and Mark Pocan (D-WI) also urged House leadership to give lawmakers more time to consider the bill, which they viewed as omitting key proposals like a federal paycheck guarantee.  Ultimately, Democrats were able to gather the votes needed to approve the legislation on Friday, though 14 members of the caucus voted against it. What happens next with the stimulus, however, likely won’t be so straightforward.  Congress has already passed close to $3 trillion in the past couple of months as part of its coronavirus relief efforts — and this latest House package ultimately weighs in at over $3 trillion itself.  While far from a final bipartisan bill negotiated with the Senate, it’s a recognition that there’s no immediate end in sight for Covid-19, or the havoc it’s wreaking on the country. Here are some of the big pieces of the House bill:  Money for state and local governments: The main focus of the House bill is getting money to state and local governments, many of which are looking at serious budget shortfalls due to the coronavirus. The bill contains $500 billion for states, $375 billion for local governments, $20 billion for tribal communities, and another $20 billion for territories like Puerto Rico, Guam, and the US Virgin Islands. The bill would also allocate $755 million to Washington, DC, in coronavirus aid. This is far more than the first CARES Act, which established a $150 billion relief fund for state and local governments. Per their state constitutions, most states have to balance their budgets and can’t borrow huge sums of money, as the federal government can. With small businesses closing and millions of people getting laid off, once-dependable income streams like sales and income taxes will take a hit, and public workers like police, emergency workers, and teachers stand to lose their jobs. Additional stimulus checks: There’s a consensus building among Democrats that the one-time $1,200 stimulus checks to Americans weren’t enough to meet the scale of the current economic crisis. Democrats are proposing another round of $1,200 payments to go out, but with some changes. The payments would still be $1,200 for single filers and $2,400 for joint filers, but filers would also be eligible for $1,200 per dependent (this would be capped at three dependents). On a Tuesday call with reporters, House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer said additional stimulus checks — along with state and local money — would be Democrats’ “red lines” that they won’t consider cutting from the next package, even if Republicans push for changes. More funding for testing and coronavirus tracing: The US still lags behind other countries in per capita testing. The country currently averages about 264,000 tests a day, and White House officials say they expect that to double. Even so, that would be nowhere near the 900,000 daily tests that public health experts at Harvard’s Global Health Institute say the US should be conducting now. Getting testing and contact tracing up to speed will take additional federal funding, and Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi has made it clear this is a significant priority for Democrats in their bill. An extension of expanded unemployment insurance: The CARES Act expanded unemployment insurance by $600 per week until the end of July and made more people, including freelancers and the self-employed, eligible for it. But with the unemployment rate at a staggering 14.7 percent, there’s a recognition that many people will need assistance beyond July. The House bill would extend expanded benefits through January 31, 2021, and put in a so-called “soft cutoff” to ensure some individuals could get benefits through March 2021. Many states need additional money to help cover their portion of unemployment benefits, with their coffers depleted due to the high demand, and the bill allocates $925 million to states to assist with processing claims. More money for small businesses: Lawmakers are closely monitoring both the Paycheck Protection Program and the Economic Injury Disaster Loan Program, two efforts designed to provide small businesses with loans and grants to help cover financial shortfalls. While demand for the PPP has slowed some, potentially because of the additional debt businesses could take on from the loans, the EIDL is pretty overwhelmed with applications, according to a report in the Washington Post. Underrepresented small-business owners have so far been less likely to obtain funding from the programs, and multiple lawmakers have proposed bills that would funnel more money to those specific entities. Democrats’ bill includes $10 billion for additional grants for small businesses. Support for SNAP benefits: Earlier this year, lawmakers approved provisions in the Families First Coronavirus Response Act that enabled families and individuals to receive the maximum monthly SNAP benefits for which they qualify. They haven’t, however, expanded the maximum amount, a move that could have serious implications for the poorest families, which haven’t seen any increase in the support they are receiving. Democrats have been focused on a 15 percent expansion to the maximum available benefit, similar to the increase implemented by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 — which was found to have had a significant impact in reducing food insecurity among lower-income households. Their latest proposal includes $10 billion to cover increased demand for SNAP. Money for elections and vote-by-mail: With a major presidential election just six months away, many states are trying to figure out how to safely hold elections without exposing voters to the coronavirus. Democrats in Congress want to put money toward expanding vote-by-mail access and extending the period for early voting, and the bill allocates $3.6 billion to that end. Rather than mandatory vote-by-mail, this money would help states with the costs of expanding vote-by-mail or no-excuse absentee voting, or increase funding for personal protective equipment for poll workers in states that keep in-person voting. Funding for the US Postal Service: The bill contains $25 billion in funding for the US Postal Service. The coronavirus pandemic has exacerbated long-standing problems at the USPS, which is saddled with debt in part because of the modern ways Americans communicate. The agency doesn’t typically rely on taxpayer money, but Democrats and some Republicans have been looking at a way to bolster the postal service, which is incredibly popular with the American public. But the White House has resisted past efforts to prop up the program with federal funding. COBRA subsidies: The bill funds approximately nine months of full premium subsidies for the existing health insurance program COBRA, which allows laid-off or furloughed employees to stay on their health insurance plans. COBRA is typically prohibitively expensive, but this bill would make it more affordable for millions of workers losing their health insurance along with lost jobs. Progressive Democrats, including Sen. Bernie Sanders, have criticized this provision of the House bill as giving money to insurance companies — and have suggested instead increasing funding to expand Medicare and Medicaid to more people. SALT tax deductions: Among some new tax provisions in the House bill is one that will reinstate the state and local tax deduction, known as SALT. The GOP tax bill passed in 2017 changed that deduction, capping the amount of state and local tax deductions someone could claim on their tax returns at $10,000. It typically impacted higher-income filers in states with higher taxes, like New York, New Jersey, and California. Pressure is building on Senate Republicans to consider another expansive stimulus measure, even as lawmakers including McConnell have voiced concerns about adding to the national debt. (Economists, meanwhile, argue that the scale of the problem, and low interest rates, bolster the case for more government spending.) One thing that McConnell does want a new relief bill to do: protect businesses from lawsuits they may face from customers and employees in the wake of the pandemic. President Donald Trump has also raised one of his favorite proposals, cutting the payroll tax, though this suggestion has gotten pushback from Democrats and Republicans alike.  Given the fact that any additional legislation will require the backing of at least 60 lawmakers in the upper chamber, and the majority of the House as well, it’s likely the final proposal will better reflect a semblance of the priorities from both parties. But, next steps for it aren’t exactly clear.  For the most recent “interim” spending bill, the impetus for quicker action was the depletion of the Paycheck Protection Program, which provides loans to small businesses. Republicans have conceded that more stimulus is likely needed, but just how quickly they’ll act on the subject is uncertain. The Senate is poised to leave town once again for the Memorial Day recess, which was scheduled to extend through May 29. Given this timing, and Republicans’ resistance to advancing more legislation quickly, the next stimulus may not get lawmaker consideration until June.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.    The US House of Representatives on Friday passed a historic resolution to temporarily allow remote voting during the coronavirus pandemic. The resolution, introduced by House Rules Committee Chair Jim McGovern (D-MA), allows for voting by proxy on the House floor, as well as for remote committee hearings and bill markups. The resolution also provides for future remote voting during the pandemic using technology, “after a system is developed and certified.” It’s the first time in centuries that the House has changed the part of its rules stipulating that “every Member shall be present within the Hall of the House during its sittings” when it comes time to vote. House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer (D-MD) and other Democratic leaders have stressed these changes will be temporary and will go away after the threat of the Covid-19 pandemic subsides. Unlike other parts of the country, Washington, DC, has not yet seen its number of cases meaningfully drop; DC Mayor Muriel Bowser extended a city-wide stay-at-home order until June 8.  House Speaker Nancy Pelosi has previously said proxy voting should only be used in a limited fashion and be related to coronavirus legislation until Congress can safely return to in-person voting on the floor. Hoyer in particular has been a proponent of proxy voting, citing other governments around the world that have made similar changes, as well as states around the US, including Iowa, Kentucky, Utah, and Vermont.  “We are seeing legislatures around the world and across our country working remotely, as well as the Supreme Court. There is no reason we cannot find a way to do so as well,” Hoyer told Vox’s Jen Kirby in a recent interview.  While Hoyer has stressed that remote voting during the pandemic should be a bipartisan issue, House Republicans haven’t been on board. The Friday vote passed 217-189 largely along party lines.  “The Democrats’ proposal calls for the House of Representatives to abandon ship — potentially for the remainder of the session,” House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-CA) said in a statement expressing his opposition to the measure. “As we have said from the start, any change to centuries-old rules of the House should only be done in a bipartisan way that achieves consensus. This proposal fails that critical test and would forever alter our democratic institution for the worse.”  The new resolution will give the House Speaker the authority to temporarily implement remote proxy voting and remote committee proceedings for 45 days, which can be extended or renewed.  The resolution spells out that proxy voting would happen in consultation with the minority leader, the House sergeant at arms, and the Capitol attending physician, and would be explicitly related to a public health emergency due to the coronavirus. The period of time for proxy voting could also be terminated early by the House speaker. Here’s how proxy voting will work: A member who cannot physically be present will submit a signed letter (which can also be submitted electronically) to the House clerk designating who their proxy is. The proxy will then enter their colleague’s vote into the record during voting, whether done electronically or through a roll call vote. The proxy for a member will indicate they are voting on behalf of another colleague during voting and are expressly not allowed to change their colleague’s vote. While the resolution allows for committee work and markups to happen over technology like Zoom or another type of videoconferencing service, that would not apply to voting on the floor. As Vox’s Jen Kirby wrote, videoconferencing has become the new mode of meeting, and sometimes voting, for many other legislative bodies around the world during the Covid-19 era. The UK Parliament has been meeting partially with a smaller number of its body in the chamber, and a larger number weighing in from home.  The United Kingdom’s “hybrid” Parliament has spent a few weeks in this mode, holding hearings and questions. About 50 members of Parliament are allowed to be present in the chamber, while another 120 can beam in from their computer screens. (Johnson, who had been hospitalized for the coronavirus, returned to the House of Commons on Wednesday for the first time since March.) Right now, Parliament is testing the technology it will need for remote voting, which could happen for the first time next week. But the need to abide by social distancing guidelines accompanied a recognition that Parliament had very serious work to do to confront the pandemic, and that now more than ever the government needed to be held accountable. Both MPs and their constituents needed a platform to scrutinize the government’s response to Covid-19. On Friday, the House joined this growing world trend. The Senate, which has been conducting some hearings remotely but has kept in-person voting, so far will not follow suit.  Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has been relatively firm about bringing senators back to the Capitol in order to work and vote. Senators of both parties, including Rand Paul (R-KY), Dick Durbin (D-IL), and Rob Portman (R-OH), have offered their own proposals for how remote voting could work. The bipartisan measure from Durbin and Portman, if passed, would grant McConnell and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer the authority to declare the need for a 30-day period of remote voting during a national crisis. “Remote voting would then be allowed for up to 30 days, and the Senate would have to vote to renew remote voting after every 30-day period afterward,” they wrote in a Washington Post op-ed. “This limitation will ensure that voting remotely cannot become the norm without a consensus around the continuity of an emergency.” The Senate has conducted some hearings over Zoom; the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions conducted a high-profile hearing on coronavirus with Dr. Anthony Fauci and other public health experts remotely this week, as committee Chairman Lamar Alexander (R-TX) was quarantining after a staffer tested positive for Covid-19.  Still, the Senate has also shown the limits of in-person voting this week; a bipartisan Senate amendment to shield Americans’ internet browsing histories from government surveillance failed on Wednesday by one vote because some lawmakers were working from home. McConnell hasn’t signaled interest in backing the remote voting resolution, though Democrats could use the leverage they have in the upper chamber to put pressure on him. Since every bill in the Senate requires 60 votes to pass, for example, Democrats could potentially withhold their support on future packages in an effort to force the consideration of remote voting.  Before leaving for an earlier recess, McConnell had said that lawmakers would use other means, like trying to stagger when they vote, to maintain social distancing in the Capitol. Correction: An earlier version of this story stated House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer introduced the proxy voting resolution. It was introduced by House Rules Committee Chair Jim McGovern. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. A basic tenet of immunology is that we are all safer if we are all safe. That should be a basic tenet for politics as well. And yet, our empathy too often runs up against border walls and dies out. Migrants are decidedly not to blame for the pandemic. To blame are international travel, the interconnectedness of global capital, grossly ill-equipped national health systems, and leisure tourism. As the United States continues its immigration detention and deportation programs, we can now add anti-immigration policies to that list.  Foisting culpability for disease and contagion on migrants and asylum seekers remains a common cliché, one that has a long and vile history. Covid-19 has been a boon to the anti-immigrant agenda that President Trump — along with other nativist leaders — has been aching to implement since he took office: wielding extraordinary executive powers to temporarily shutter the refugee resettlement program, lock down the US-Mexico border, suspend asylum processing, and push children fleeing danger back into Mexico. Invoking what he has allegedly called his “magical authority,” Trump’s latest move, after threatening to stop all immigration, was a 60-day suspension of visa issuances, with some broad exceptions for health care workers, investors, plus spouses or young children of citizens or green card holders.  It’s not hard to imagine the administration making excuses, even after we begin to recover, for extending or even expanding the lockdowns and turning a temporary state of exception into a lasting status quo. The administration is already moving to extend the suspension indefinitely. Such authority is “magical”— or effectual at solving our current health or economic crises — as much as smoke and mirrors are able to delude and distract. But while the government is willing to suspend immigration laws meant to protect or welcome people arriving to the country, it is not willing to suspend ones that keep people dangerously locked up in detention centers, where, as the coronavirus begins to creep in, it is almost certain to devastate. These detention centers are bad enough without the virus; in recent years, detainees have suffered outbreaks of measles and received dangerously substandard medical care, while the centers have been the sites of mass suicide attempts, ongoing waves of hunger strikes, rampant sexual assault from guards, and a host of other abuses including generally unhealthy, inhumane, and sometimes torturous conditions.   Nor has the government suspended its expensive wall-building or, most dangerous of all, deportation policies. Deporting people from the United States, the global epicenter of the coronavirus crisis, is another gust of wind to a raging wildfire. Hundreds of people deported to Guatemala and Haiti have tested positive for the virus. In Guatemala, some of the returned migrants are even facing discrimination, accused of bringing the virus with them. Baseless reproach, nativist scapegoating, and racist restrictions are nothing new when it comes to the intersection of immigration and disease. Amid a series of cholera outbreaks in the 19th century, Americans pointed the finger at Irish immigrants, even referring to the virus as the “Irish disease.” In the 1880s, Chinese immigrants were accused of bringing smallpox and the plague, among other diseases, to California — an accusation that bolstered the movement behind the 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act, one of the early and trend-setting pieces of racist and anti-immigrant legislation.  A decade later, the US suspended immigration for two weeks after “German authorities had blamed Russian Jews en route to America for a severe cholera outbreak in Hamburg,” as Tara Zahra writes in The Great Departure. It was the same year that Ellis Island was opened, not as a munificent welcome ramp to the United States — as it is sometimes memorialized — but as a bustling medical inspection center that eventually turned into a squalid detention center.  The misconception that migrants brought communicable diseases to the United States came up again in the 1930s in the Southwest, where Border Patrol agents subjected Mexican migrants who crossed the border to “gasoline baths,” spraying them with DDT and other noxious chemicals, including Zyklon B, the same poison the Nazis later used as their preferred killing agent during the Holocaust. As David Dorado Romo writes in Ringside Seat to a Revolution, “The fumigation was carried out in an area of the building that American officials called, ominously enough, ‘the gas chambers.’”  As recently as 1979, journalist Daniel Denvir points out in his recent book All-American Nativism, the Los Angeles Times wrote that “hundreds of thousands of Third World immigrants entering California and the rest of the United States are bringing with them a panoply of communicable diseases that could, according to health experts, move the country back toward nineteenth-century standards of public health.” Despite the lack of evidence, anti-immigrant diehards continue to latch onto that fear; arch-conservative talk radio host Michael Savage, for example, wrote a 2016 book called Diseases Without Borders, foisting blame on Obama’s “open borders policy” for America being “invaded by deadly viruses.” The Trump administration is using these same false flags and racist fears to deport and expel more migrants, more quickly. The New York Times reported recently that White House senior adviser and anti-immigration zealot Stephen Miller has repeatedly tried to use health concerns as an excuse to lock down the border and bar immigrants. According to an unnamed official, invoking public health “had been on a ‘wish list’ of about 50 ideas to curtail immigration” that Miller had written years before Covid-19. He has been digging for any evidence of a connection between immigration and disease, eagerly primed for a crisis to hit to unleash the new policies. The fact that immigration has nothing to do with the pandemic hasn’t stymied him. Antiquated, unscientific, and anti-immigrant invective has been repurposed not only against Mexicans and Central Americans, but especially against Muslims as Europe’s influx of refugees has grown. Hungary’s populist leader Viktor Orbán, a nativist homophobe who is one of Europe’s most outspoken anti-immigrant soapboxers, has led the charge on conflating the pandemic with illegal immigration: “We are fighting a two-front war, one front is called migration, and the other one belongs to the coronavirus, there is a logical connection between the two, as both spread with movement.”  Likewise, former Polish prime minister Jaroslaw Kaczynski began claiming, in 2015, that the Muslim migrants arriving to Europe were carrying diseases (a sentiment echoed by Trump when he declared that migrants bring “large scale crime and disease” into the country). Both Polish xenophobes and Donald Trump, however, are wrong. Migrants have been shown to be generally healthier than native populations, at least before they are marginalized and blocked from accessing standard medical care. As Sonia Shah, author of Pandemic and the forthcoming The Next Great Migration, told me, “The reflexive solution to contagion — border closures, isolation, immobility — is in fact antithetical to biological resilience on a changing planet.” Anti-immigration policy is actually the more pressing health danger — from regulations scaring away immigrants from accessing health care to disease-incubating detention centers. I reported from the migrant camps hastily raised in Tijuana in the fall of 2018: They were overcrowded and unsanitary — migrants had no bathrooms, no access to water, were hounded by Mexican officials, and were turned away or sprayed with tear gas by US border guards. Currently, there are around 2,500 people forced into a makeshift refugee camp in Matamoros, just across the river from Brownsville, Texas. The Mexican border city “has only 10 ventilators and 40 hospital beds for intensive care,” Foreign Policy reports.  As poet Carolyn Forché recently told me, “The contagion of lack of empathy is going to be more harmful to us in the long run than anything else, because it will have no bounds.” Even as we remain on lockdown or in quarantine, we cannot let the Trump administration take advantage of a crisis, levy scurrilous and racist claims against some of the world’s most marginalized populations, and deport and deny migrants and refugees. Doing so will not inoculate us from the virus, but, in fact, infect us with something even worse.  John Washington is a translator and writer covering immigration and border politics, as well as criminal justice and literature. His first book, The Dispossessed: A Story of Asylum at the US-Mexico Border and Beyond, is out in May 2020 from Verso Books. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Nearly four months after the first coronavirus case in the US was reported, President Donald Trump continues to struggle to come to grips with how testing for the virus works and why it’s important. During remarks on Thursday at the Owens & Minor distribution center in Allentown, Pennsylvania, Trump tried to downplay the severity of the US’s coronavirus outbreak by arguing the country wouldn’t be leading the world in cases if it weren’t for the fact that so much testing is being done here — as if coronavirus cases simply wouldn’t exist if we didn’t test to find them. “Don’t forget, we have more cases than anybody in the world. But why? Because we do more testing,” Trump said. “When you test, you have a case. When you test, you find something is wrong with people. If we didn’t do any testing, we would have very few cases. They [the media] don’t want to write that.” TRUMP: "When you test, you have a case. When you test, you find something is wrong with people. If we didn't do any testing we would have very few cases." pic.twitter.com/tEX1uXQbmp It stands to reason that conducting more tests correlates with finding more cases — but that’s a good thing. More testing helps public health experts and policymakers understand the full scope of the problem, isolate those who have tested positive, and then trace their contacts to help contain potential outbreaks. But for Trump, the downside is it undercuts his argument that it’s already safe for states to lift stay-at-home orders that are hurting the economy and therefore hurting his reelection hopes. Not doing any testing for the coronavirus might make it easier for Trump to argue he’s doing a great job handling the current public health crisis, but it’d result in the Covid-19 disease spreading in an even more out-of-control and deadly manner. Trump, of all people, should understand this. Just last week, Katie Miller, press secretary for Vice President Mike Pence, tested positive for the coronavirus. Miller, whose positive test came on the heels of Trump’s personal valet testing positive, said she was asymptomatic, meaning that if she hadn’t been able to get tested — as is still the case for many people throughout the country — she might have continued going to work and possibly spread the virus to Pence, Trump, or others working in the White House.  
    Related
   But if you thought that chain of events would serve as a wake-up call to Trump about the importance of businesses, schools, and other institutions having similar testing capacity to the White House, you’d be mistaken. Trump responded to the news of Miller’s positive test by claiming it served as evidence of “why the whole concept of tests aren’t necessarily great” because “she tested very good for a long period of time, and then all of the sudden she tested positive.” TRUMP: “Katie, she tested very good for a long period of time, and then all of the sudden she tested positive ... this is why the whole concept of tests aren't necessarily great ... today, I guess, for some reason, she tested positive."   pic.twitter.com/xNFEJn3W9s That is how communicable diseases work — you don’t have them until you do. The point of testing is allowing people to know when they have a disease so they can take the necessary measures to not spread it. That’s especially important for viruses like the coronavirus that can be spread by asymptomatic carriers.  Trump, however, has made it clear from the early days of the coronavirus outbreak that he’s not above juking the numbers. Recall his comments from early March about how he was reluctant to let American passengers off a coronavirus-infected cruise ship because the resulting increase in US coronavirus cases would look bad for him. "I like the numbers being where they are. I don't need to have the numbers double because of one ship" -- Trump explains that he doesn't want to let people off the Grand Princess cruise ship because he doesn't want the number of coronavirus cases in the country to go up pic.twitter.com/ELhZDjiZW9 During his remarks in Pennsylvania on Thursday, Trump went as far as to describe coronavirus testing as “overrated.” But experts broadly agree that for businesses and schools to reopen in some semblance of a safe manner, US testing capacity must be ramped up.  Whether the president is aware of it or not, progress is being made on that front. Despite what Trump would have you believe, the US is not leading the world in testing. According to data compiled by Worldometer, on a per-million-people basis, the US ranks 39th. That’s not to say that testing capacity in the US isn’t improving. As my colleague German Lopez detailed on Thursday, the roughly 300,000 tests per day being conducted in the country now is roughly double the number from early April. The numbers are still significantly short of the 500,000 tests per day that experts believe is the minimum necessary to fully control the outbreak, but progress is being made. It’s not the case, however, that the ramp-up in testing has caused the US to have more than five times more coronavirus cases (more than 1.4 million confirmed cases as of May 16) than the second-worst country (Russia, with about 272,000). People in the US aren’t just getting tested for fun — they’re actually getting sick and dying. This is reflected not only in the fact that the US has endured more than double the number of deaths as the second-hardest-hit country (more than 88,000 as of May 16, followed by the UK with more than 34,000), but also that the US is 13th in the world when it comes to deaths per million people. The high case number here correlates with high death numbers, not just high testing numbers. Ironically, one of the reasons the coronavirus outbreak has been so bad here is because the US fell way short on testing in February and March, allowing the coronavirus to spread across the country in a largely undetected way. So when Trump compares America’s raw testing numbers favorably with countries like South Korea, as he did in Pennsylvania, he leaves out the crucial context that South Korea was able to get the coronavirus under control early in a way the US wasn’t, because it had more testing capacity during a critical period.  Trump isn’t big on nuance of that sort, especially when it reflects unfavorably on him. He wants the economy to rebound as soon as possible, and to that end he wants schools and businesses to reopen ASAP. And if that means making a nonsensical case against the idea of object permanence, so be it. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.      House Democrats’ $3 trillion coronavirus relief package aims to address some people left out of previous bills, including unauthorized immigrants who have been critical to the US’s response to the pandemic but have not been eligible for stimulus funds.  The bill, known as the Heroes Act, would shield unauthorized immigrants working in essential fields from deportation and make them eligible for federal stimulus funds as well as clear the way for more foreign health care workers to help fight coronavirus in the US. It would also deliver additional health care benefits to immigrants who are eligible for Medicaid and require immigration authorities to release people from immigration detention where possible.  The bill makes significant strides toward closing the gap in relief for immigrant communities during the pandemic. But it includes one notable omission: It does nothing to help refugees at a time when resettlement efforts have come to a standstill and refugees who have recently arrived in the US aren’t eligible for federal stimulus checks.  The bill is facing opposition within both parties. Republicans are not convinced that another aid package is warranted after the $2.2 trillion CARES Act signed in late March, and progressive Democrats are pushing for even more aid. The bill, therefore, isn’t likely to pass the House, but Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi is still planning to move forward with a vote as early as Friday, according to Politico. Even if it fails, it could be a starting point for future negotiations over coronavirus relief.  Here are five provisions the bill makes for immigrants: The bill would issue coronavirus stimulus checks to unauthorized immigrants and their families, who are currently excluded from such relief under the CARES Act. They would become eligible for the first round of stimulus checks, which the government started sending out in April, as well as a proposed second round of checks, which would amount to up to $1,200 for each tax filer and each of their dependents, depending on household income.  The CARES Act gave most taxpayers up to $1,200 and $500 for each of their children under the age of 17. But even if they pay taxes, unauthorized immigrants are not eligible for the stimulus checks. Neither is anyone else in their household, including their spouses and children, even if their spouses and children are US citizens. The CARES Act excludes those in households with people of mixed-immigration status, where some tax filers or their children may use what’s called an Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN). An estimated 16.7 million people live in mixed-status households nationwide, including 8.2 million US-born or naturalized citizens. The IRS issues ITINs to unauthorized immigrants so they can pay taxes, even though they don’t have a Social Security number. If anyone in the household uses an ITIN — either a spouse or a dependent child — no one in the household qualifies for the stimulus checks unless one spouse served in the military in 2019.  Immigrant advocacy groups have challenged the CARES Act on the basis that it unlawfully discriminates against US citizens who have unauthorized immigrant family members.  The bill would require US Immigration and Customs Enforcement to review all the files of detained immigrants and release all those who aren’t subject to mandatory detention and don’t pose a risk to public safety or national security. Alternatively, the agency could explore comparatively low-cost alternatives to keeping immigrants in detention.  That could include requiring them to wear ankle bracelet monitors or entering them into programs like the now-defunct Obama-era Family Case Management Program. Under that program, which Trump ended in June 2017, families were released and assigned to social workers who aided them in finding attorneys and accommodation and ensured that they showed up for their court hearings. The bill also exacts new standards for immigration detention. Detainees would have to be provided with free and unlimited soap as well as phone and video calls so they can communicate with their family members and attorneys, who are not allowed to visit most detention centers in person during the pandemic.  Only after an outcry from immigrant advocates did ICE recently institute national policies encouraging social distancing in its facilities and provide soap, hand sanitizer, cleaning supplies, and personal protective equipment. The agency has also been releasing detainees who are medically vulnerable to Covid-19, but there are still almost 30,000 immigrants in detention across more than 130 private and state-run detention facilities nationwide. As of May 14, 943 detainees tested positive for the virus. There is, therefore, a national advocacy push for the administration to alter its enforcement priorities to release all detainees or at least those who haven’t committed serious crimes; while immigrant advocates campaign for their release even in the best of times, their message has become even more urgent amid the outbreak. These immigrants have been accused of civil immigration violations, such as overstaying a visa or residing in the US without authorization, and they have been detained while they wait for the outcome of their deportation cases. Some may well be allowed to remain in the US eventually, depending on what an immigration judge decides. The federal government has significant discretion to determine who it subjects to this kind of civil detention. Toward the end of Barack Obama’s presidency, he prioritized only those immigrants who had a record of committing serious crimes, releasing others into the interior of the US. But President Donald Trump, by contrast, has sought to detain any unauthorized immigrants anywhere in the US — even amid the pandemic. Under the bill, essential workers would be shielded from deportation and offered employment authorization during the pandemic, and employers in critical industries would not be penalized for hiring unauthorized immigrants.  Americans have relied on low-wage workers to keep essential services running during the pandemic, from harvesting and delivering food to cleaning public spaces. But many of these workers who lack legal immigration status have done so without receiving any financial assistance from the federal government. Unauthorized immigrants make up about a quarter of farmworkers and 8 percent of the service sector and production workers. Many don’t have any choice but to continue working despite public health warnings to stay home because they aren’t eligible for unemployment benefits or federal stimulus checks. The Heroes Act would at least give them some financial safety net and relieve them of fear of deportation.  The bill would speed up the processing of visas and green cards for medical professionals. Anyone seeking to practice medicine, conduct medical research, or pursue education or training to combat Covid-19 could be approved for a visa on an expedited basis. Consulates that are closed for regular business abroad would have to conduct visa interviews over teleconference or grant an emergency visa appointment in person. Foreign physicians who have already completed residency programs in the US could also get green cards more quickly.  Once they’re approved for a visa or green card, medical professionals would have more flexibility to go where they’re needed under the bill. Those on H-1B visas for skilled workers would be able to transfer to other hospital systems and offer telemedicine services without having to apply for a new visa under the bill. Medical students will also be able to transfer their rotations within their host institution and may be compensated for their work during the pandemic. They could also do work outside of that approved program if it relates to fighting Covid-19.  Foreign doctors have long faced barriers to practicing in the US. Despite being willing to contribute to the country’s coronavirus response, many have been unable to do so, either because they have been shut out of American residency programs or because the immigration system stands in their way. Hospitals across the country are facing staffing shortages. New York City has asked former medical workers to come out of retirement to deal with the increased patient load. So has the Veterans Affairs medical system, which already has about 44,000 medical vacancies that it has been struggling to fill amid a competitive market. Washington, DC, has even been recruiting volunteers without any medical training. The US was projected to face a shortage of doctors even before the pandemic hit: The Association of American Medical Colleges had estimated the shortage could reach 46,900 to 121,900 physicians by 2032. And in rural areas, particularly in states like Mississippi and Arkansas, doctors were already in short supply. The US health system relies heavily on immigrants, who make up 17 percent of all health care workers and more than one in four doctors. The bill would allow unauthorized immigrants without health care coverage to qualify for no-cost testing, treatment, and vaccines related to coronavirus.  Under the CARES Act, several categories of immigrants have been excluded from such benefits: green card holders who have lived in the US for less than five years, immigrants who have been granted Temporary Protected Status, and young, unauthorized immigrants who have been allowed to live and work in the US under the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program. US Citizenship and Immigration Services has announced that it won’t consider the use of free testing services when evaluating whether immigrants will likely end up relying on public benefits under the “public charge” rule, which went into effect in February. That rule gives immigration officials much more leeway to turn away those applying to enter the US, extend their visa, or convert their temporary immigration status into a green card if it is deemed they would likely use public services now or in the future. The agency also said it won’t weigh Covid-19 treatment or preventive care, such as a vaccine if it is eventually developed, under the rule — even if those services are covered under Medicaid. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The coronavirus pandemic is ravaging America. More than 80,000 people have lost their lives, and thousands more are expected to follow. Tens of millions of people have lost their jobs, and unemployment is at its highest level since the Great Depression. The country has no plan. And yet, two months into the thick of it, Washington haggles as the economy craters. Conservatives in Congress are worrying about being too nice to the unemployed and demanding protections for businesses that could be held liable for sickening or killing their workers. Millions of living people are without stimulus checks, but the IRS is trying to figure out how to get back checks that were accidentally sent to the dead.  Some Republicans have suddenly rediscovered their deep passion for guarding the deficit — you know, the one they gave up for that giant corporate tax cut in 2017. Oh, and by the way, those corporations that got the tax windfall? They need a $500 billion bailout. How could they have been expected to save up in anticipation of a pandemic?  But the low-paid essential workers and the people suddenly finding themselves out of a job? Well, that’s just a lesson for them on the importance of having a rainy-day fund. The same goes for the states and cities now in dire straits, or the small businesses that struggled to get loans and are already starting to worry about how to pay them back. The country is facing an unprecedented crisis, and many legislators, policymakers, and people in power are now offering a tepid reaction. Congress has provided about $2.9 trillion in fiscal support, according to the Federal Reserve, and is going to need to do more in order to salvage the economy. But the White House has suggested a pause on further legislative stimulus, and as Democrats put forth a new proposal for a major legislative package, key Republicans aren’t eager to move ahead. It’s not a time to test the waters, it’s a time to dive in. In a conversation in March as the gravity of the economic crisis set in, former Obama economist Betsey Stevenson issued a warning: “The risk of doing too little is much greater than the risk of doing too much.” That’s playing out right now in real time. Things, they are bad. Unprecedentedly and extremely bad. The US leads the world in the number of confirmed coronavirus cases after having failed to get the virus under control. Tens of thousands of people have died, and thousands of daily deaths are expected into the summer. Meanwhile, the economy, which government officials have put on pause to try to stop the spread of the disease, has plummeted. GDP shrank in the first quarter at its fastest rate since the Great Recession, and projections indicate that the worst is yet to come. In April, the unemployment rate jumped to 14.7 percent, but even the Bureau of Labor Statistics has acknowledged that it’s likely closer to 20 percent. More than 36 million people have filed new jobless claims in two months, and each week, millions of people are filing more. By comparison, during the last recession, 8.7 million total jobs were lost over the course of many months, and the highest week of losses was about 600,000. Tomorrow's @nytimes cover shifts its typical format to illustrate today's record weekly initial unemployment claims pic.twitter.com/IFxaNb43vF “Our base case is that you don’t return to normal for a while and that we will see unemployment peak at over 20 percent, and then as you start to get to the end of 2021, you’re down to about 9 percent,” Bob Michele, chief investment officer at JPMorgan, told Bloomberg in a recent radio interview. Unemployment peaked at 10 percent during the Great Recession, and remember how bad that was. “There’s a lot of hardship ahead,” he warned. Meanwhile, states and cities are sounding the alarm about billions of dollars in budget shortfalls they’re facing. Their expenses have skyrocketed due to the health crisis while their revenue sources have dissipated. States can’t run deficits; if the federal government doesn’t step in, they’ll be forced to make deep cuts to their spending, which will only harm the economy more. “The last recession felt like running down a hill,” Phoenix Mayor Kate Gallego recently told me. “This one feels like falling off a cliff, it happened so quickly.” In a speech at the Peterson Institute for International Economics on Wednesday, Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell highlighted the actions that Congress and the Fed have taken to try to uplift the economy during the pandemic. Congress has provided nearly $3 trillion in fiscal support to households, businesses, health care providers, and state and local governments. The Fed has taken extraordinary actions as well; it’s cut interest rates to near-zero and announced a series of sweeping measures to boost the economy and ensure liquidity in the markets. And still, he emphasized, there’s a need for more, and a grave risk to underreacting. “The record shows that deeper and longer recessions can leave behind lasting damage to the productive capacity of the economy,” Powell said. Debt, unemployment, and shuttered businesses can weigh on the economy for years. “At the Fed, we will continue to use our tools to their fullest until the crisis has passed and the economic recovery is well under way,” Powell said, though he cautioned the central bank can only do so much. “Additional fiscal support could be costly, but worth it if it helps avoid long-term economic damage and leaves us with a stronger recovery. This trade-off is one for our elected representatives, who wield powers of taxation and spending.” Congress has thus far enacted three sweeping coronavirus-related packages, the last one being the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act, a $2.2 trillion stimulus package that President Donald Trump signed into law in March. Lawmakers have rolled out a variety of proposals and plans for potential legislation, and on Tuesday, House Democrats revealed their proposal for a fourth package, the $3 trillion HEROES Act, which will go to a vote on Friday. As Vox’s Ella Nilsen and Li Zhou explained, this is just an opening salvo from Democrats — some Republicans have signaled they don’t plan to spend more without making cuts elsewhere. 
    Related
   But is now really the time to worry about the deficit, especially when interest rates are low and the economy is in such disarray? As Vox’s Matt Yglesias laid out, one huge way to boost the economy right now is to “just spend the damn money.”  It will be worth it in the long run if Congress sends money to people who need it, gives full support to the states, and shores up small businesses. Officials have to think beyond the liquidity problem — the actions taken to keep the economy afloat now — and make sure the country doesn’t have a sustained solvency problem, where demand is so diminished it can’t bounce back. Charlie Anderson, an adviser to Sen. Michael Bennet (D-CO), worried on Twitter that “we’re about to watch a slow-motion train wreck” in the country. “From up close, it feels like we are sleepwalking toward a gut-wrenching, painful failure,” he wrote. “Many are really trying to shake the system awake. But inertia feels like it’s taking us inevitably toward a half-hearted, incoherent response.” The country has seen what happens when government response falls short — now and in recent history. As Vox’s Ezra Klein recently wrote, 60 days into the coronavirus crisis, the US has no coordinated plan of action, or even a stated goal. “It is not that the president is doing the wrong thing — he is doing basically nothing,” Klein wrote. “But he has combined a substantive passivity with a showman’s desire to dominate the narrative and a political street fighter’s obsession with settling scores, so he is making the job of governors and mayors harder, neither giving them what they need to beat the virus nor leaving them to make their own decisions free from his interference and criticism.” Some states have begun to gradually reopen, but their economies aren’t bouncing back. It turns out people are not eager to crowd into restaurants and hop on planes while a deadly disease circulates. In other words, just ignoring the crisis and hoping for the best doesn’t fix it.  The current inaction has led to a flailing economy and a deadly pandemic with no end in sight. And after the global financial crisis and Great Recession, America experienced how long and terrible a slow recovery can be. It took years for unemployment to get to where it was pre-recession, and even then, wages remained stagnant. State funding for higher education, K-12 education, and local aid was still down even years later. The worse off the economy is allowed to become during the current crisis, the slower the recovery will be if and when it ends. Jobless workers and closed businesses will drag everything down. Congress can do a lot to try to soften the blow, the question is whether it will, or if instead the country is doomed to spiral even more. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Poll after poll shows that Republicans and Democrats are responding to the coronavirus crisis in starkly different ways. One from ABC News and Ipsos last week, for example, showed that 65 percent of Republicans want the American economy to reopen right now, while only 6 percent of Democrats do. And their behaviors, ranging from buying extra food to wearing masks, seem to fall along partisan lines. How is it possible that Americans are polarized along party lines even on something as seemingly apolitical as a virus? One big reason is what Jennifer Kavanagh, a senior political scientist at the Rand Corporation, calls “truth decay.” Simply put, Americans no longer rely on facts and data as much as they should. That’s a problem at any time, but it’s especially troubling during a pandemic, when people need the best, most reliable information to stay safe.  I called Kavanagh to talk to her about what her research shows about the causes of truth decay, the impact it’s having on the country’s coronavirus response, and whether this crisis could be the big jolt that finally convinces Americans of the importance of objective facts.  She told me that, so far, the coronavirus crisis “hasn’t been the unifying event we might have hoped for like during the Great Depression or World War II,” in large part because “different segments of society have been differently affected.” Yet she remains hopeful that America’s “truth decay” will one day improve: “I don’t know what it’ll take, but I’m not willing to give up yet.” Our conversation, edited for length and clarity, is below. The project you work on is called “truth decay.” What does that actually mean, and how does that apply to America’s coronavirus situation? Truth decay encompasses four trends, each of which is relevant to what we’re experiencing now.  The first is increasing disagreement about facts and data. An example in this context would be the disagreement about the safety of vaccines and whether people will take them once they’re made and distributed. The second trend is the increased blurring of the line between fact and opinion. This is caused a lot by commentary in cable news or social media, places where facts and opinion are mixed together and make it really hard to determine what’s real and what’s someone’s opinion or analysis.  The third trend is the increasing volume of opinion compared to fact. You’re just seeing a lot more opinion out there. If you’re looking for facts, you have to work pretty hard to dig through all that commentary before you can actually find the raw facts you might be looking for.  Finally, declining trust in key institutions that provide information. We’re experiencing this now with the government and the media.  Put together, people are not sure what’s true what’s not, and they don’t even really know where to turn to find factual information they’re looking for. Let’s focus on the government piece. Dr. Anthony Fauci, for example, seems to be the guy providing the media and the public with the necessary facts about the coronavirus right now. But because the president undercuts him and disagrees with a lot of what he says, he’s become somewhat of a polarizing figure. If you’re a Trump fan, you might not be a Fauci fan, and vice versa. At such a crucial time, how is the expertise of someone like Fauci or other public health experts not innately trusted? Trust in experts has been on the decline for a while. It’s not a new phenomenon during the coronavirus, and it’s part of the four trends I laid out earlier.  But to go further, the ability to access any information online makes us feel empowered. It can also lead to a kind of overconfidence. Getting a medical degree is different from going on WebMD and reading about an illness, but sometimes people conflate the two. The authority and the respect for expertise, then, have been undermined by the diffusion of information. The second issue here is that people like to confirm their own beliefs. They don’t necessarily want to hear information that disagrees with their views, and it leads people to reject information from experts that doesn’t fit their narrative.  And there now seem to be two narratives of the coronavirus forming on the left and right. That can have an effect on trust in expertise. If the information provided by the experts and by the government ends up being portrayed in different ways in two different communities, you can end up with experts becoming a casualty of that bifurcated view of the world. It seems like these trends and long-term problems have converged at a really inopportune time. If there were ever a time for Americans to get on the same page, the coronavirus epidemic would be it. Without experts providing the facts, the government providing the rules, and a society abiding by the right guidelines, the country’s response is going to be hindered. These problems definitely hinder America’s coronavirus response in a couple of ways. The most important is that people are really uncertain of who to trust. It’s unclear if they should trust that what government agencies say is accurate, especially if different agencies come out with different information and recommendations at different times. And when there are reversals in policy, they sometimes reflect new data. That can be confusing if it’s not messaged properly. If you aren’t a scientist, then seeing the recommendations of scientists change dramatically or the recommendations of models change dramatically can be disconcerting if you don’t understand the underlying reasons.  What’s worrying is that as we transition into a recovery phase, the public’s trust has likely already been lost. Regardless of who’s in the White House a year from now, two years from now, or 10 years from now, that trust has to be rebuilt.  America’s recovery will thus start from a lower place as government tries to get people believing in its message again. That matters for public health reasons, of course, but also for economic reasons. The economic recovery depends on people believing that the public health issue has been addressed. If that trust remains low, though, then whoever is in the White House is going to be really, really challenged in terms of getting that economy restarted. How do we solve this? We’re only a few months into this crisis, and all indications point to the coronavirus being a long-term problem. Yet we’re seeing people polarize into camps about all kinds of things related to the pandemic, most prominently over how and when to reopen the country. Is there a way to get everyone on the same page anytime soon? One piece is just the individual taking the initiative. It’s not a time to be lazy and read the same news sources, or just one source, without challenging one’s perspective. That’s a change anyone can make right now. Another is making sure you know where you’re getting your information from. The sources that I’m most interested in hearing from about coronavirus are scientists and public health officials. They’re the ones who should have the most accurate information. While I may hear lots of other facts or opinions, they seem to be the authority to trust on this issue. That’s the individual responsibility and media side. What about the government side? That’s a much more challenging, long-term problem.  We did some historical analysis to see whether such distrust in government and official institutions existed before. We see some periods like this in the past, such as the rise of “yellow journalism,” and even in the 1920s and ’30s around the Great Depression.  One of the things that seems to snap people out of the willingness to reject facts and expertise is a realization of the consequences, especially in terms of people getting sick or the economic fallout. It’s possible that will reaffirm for people who were doubting that facts do matter.  But there has to be both a bottom-up and a top-down component to that. There has to be a role for the government to be providing us consistent and clear messaging. I’ll be honest that I’m skeptical this moment will lead to only facts coming from the top and an extra effort from the bottom to seek facts. Tens of thousands of Americans have died, millions have fallen ill, and yet there doesn’t seem to be a change. The US isn’t rising to the moment. Am I wrong to feel pessimistic that the coronavirus — one of the most severe moments in modern history — is enough to get the US on the right track? No, I don’t think you’re wrong to be worried or cynical. My fear all along has been that what reverses truth decay is some kind of disaster. What I don’t know is how severe that disaster would have to be, but it seems like this should be enough. But the virus hasn’t impacted everyone the same way, so it hasn’t been the unifying event we might have hoped for like during the Great Depression or World War II. And not only has the virus hit different parts of the country in different ways, but different segments of the society have been differently affected.  Maybe we need more time? Maybe. Maybe we need to be on the other side of this and look back on what happened. Maybe it’ll take waiting in limbo for over a year without a vaccine to change people’s minds. I don’t know what it’ll take, but I’m not willing to give up yet. I would agree with you, though, that thus far it doesn’t seem to have been enough.  So let me ask this directly: Does the US have a major truth problem? And if so, is it a problem at the margins of American society or a national failure we’re living through? I would say the latter because it’s bleeding through to basically every major issue we have, whether it’s health care, immigration, unemployment, or poverty and homelessness. All these things require facts and data to handle, and they’re all hard problems that take more than two or four years to solve. If we don’t have agreement on the underlying facts of the issue, we can never mount a sustained response to actually overcome these challenges.  So, to me, this is a national failure because it prevents us from making progress on the big issues that our country needs to confront if we want to continue being a prosperous nation and maintain the position we have in the world. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Dr. Rick Bright, previously the director of a US research agency working on a coronavirus vaccine, testified Thursday morning to a House subcommittee that “without better planning, 2020 could be the darkest winter in modern history.” Bright warned lawmakers in his testimony before the health subcommittee of the House Energy and Commerce Committee that the US needs to take “simple but critical steps” to control the coronavirus pandemic and head off a disastrous second wave of infections this winter. “We need to have the right testing for everyone who needs it. We need to be able to trace contacts, isolate, quarantine, and appropriately — while striving to develop a cure,” Bright said. “There will be plenty of time to look back to assess what has happened so we can improve, but right now, we need to focus on getting things right going forward.” Dr. Rick Bright: "Our window of opportunity is closing...I fear the pandemic will get worst and be prolonged...Without better planing, 2020 could be the darkest winter in modern history."Full video here: https://t.co/2qnGXlaRG2 pic.twitter.com/j3oL7udqoY He also told the committee in his opening statement that he believes a Covid-19 vaccine is a question of when, not if, but cautioned that “12 to 18 months is an aggressive schedule and I think it will take longer than that” to manufacture a vaccine. Until last month, Bright led the Department of Health and Human Services’ Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA). He alleges that his removal from that post was an act of retaliation by Trump administration officials because he resisted a push by the White House to promote unproven coronavirus treatments using hydroxychloroquine. In his opening statement, Bright backed Tuesday’s Senate testimony by Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nation’s leading infectious disease expert and a member of the White House coronavirus task force. “Dr. Fauci delivered a message in a voice that’s clear and trustworthy as he encouraged us to act with caution as we return to our daily lives,” Bright said. “We must increase the public education about the basics — washing hands, social distancing, appropriate face covering.” Bright’s written testimony, submitted ahead of Thursday’s hearing, had an even stronger warning: that without clear planning and quick action, the coming winter will be the darkest in recent history. He modulated that warning slightly on Thursday but still struck a sobering note. “If we fail to improve our response now, based on science, I fear the pandemic will get worse and be prolonged,” Bright said. “There will be likely a resurgence of Covid-19 this fall, and it will greatly compound the challenges of seasonal influenza.” In his written testimony, Bright describes “dismissive” HHS leadership. He said that, as early as January, he warned the department to ramp up production of ventilators, personal protective equipment, and testing swabs in anticipation of a pandemic, and that his warnings were ignored. “I was met with indifference, saying they were either too busy, they didn’t have a plan, they didn’t know who was responsible for procuring those,” Bright said of his push for HHS to obtain more PPE. “A number of excuses. But never any action.” Bright also said in prepared testimony that he was “cut out of key high-level meetings to combat COVID-19.” In April, Bright filed a whistleblower complaint over his removal from the top BARDA job. In the complaint, he claims that he resisted a White House push to promote and fund the now-discredited antimalarial drug hydroxychloroquine as a potential coronavirus remedy over more promising solutions. “Sidelining me in the middle of this pandemic and placing politics and cronyism ahead of science puts lives at risk and stunts national efforts to safely and effectively address this urgent public health crisis,” Bright wrote in the letter. The complaint was first reported by Michael D. Shear and Maggie Haberman of the New York Times. The Office of the Special Counsel has since concluded that there are “reasonable grounds” to believe that Bright was retaliated against and that he should be reinstated to his former job as BARDA director. The same watchdog reportedly found a “substantial likelihood of wrongdoing” in Bright’s removal, according to a statement released by his lawyers Thursday. During Thursday’s hearing, however, Republicans on the committee focused more on making that case that President Trump had good reason to promote hydroxychloroquine than they did on getting to the bottom of the circumstances surrounding Bright’s removal. Republicans keep using their questioning time to defend Trump by promoting hydroxychloroquine. It's beyond parody. pic.twitter.com/tQulEleIkL Others attacked Bright. Rep. Markwayne Mullin (R-OK), for instance, suggested Bright was trying to “deceive the American people” by taking a medical leave for hypertension, and Rep. Billy Long (R-MO) attempted to spin Bright’s criticism of HHS leadership as an attack on Fauci. Meanwhile, during a Q&A with reporters ahead of Trump’s trip to Pennsylvania, administration officials tried to undercut Bright’s testimony by attacking him. Azar, yelling, attacks Dr. Bright: "While we are launching Operation Warp Speed, he is not showing up for work." pic.twitter.com/jck5cm4PXt “While we are launching Operation Warp Speed, he is not showing up for work,” Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar said. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. This month, two shoppers at a Target in Los Angeles fought a security guard, breaking his arm, when he tried to tell them to follow the store policy and wear masks. The American Covid-19 response has been befuddling to say the least; at times, it seems like we are facing two battles — one against the virus, and one against each other.  A central part of this frustration between fellow Americans has been a failure of leadership to unite us against a common enemy. With confusion and inconsistency around everything from masks to medications, it’s become harder to navigate information and misinformation, find direction, or even know if we are going in the wrong one.  And as much as there is uncertainty among the general public, so too is there across levels of leadership, including at the federal government, the Centers for Disease Control, and the World Health Organization.  What is unequivocal is this: We are operating under extreme uncertainty. Most of us have never been so directly impacted by a pandemic; the best comparisons we have are to the flu, yet it is quite clear we are dealing with something very different.  As a doctor, I have always had to embrace uncertainty in the hospital when I am caring for patients, and to understand my clinical decisions less as absolute truths and more accurately as careful calculations of risks and benefits. As such, uncertainty has not felt to me as foreign as it has to many other Americans in this moment. Decision-making under uncertainty demands that we are careful enough that our hoped-for benefits outweigh our feared risks, yet not so careful that it stops us from taking action altogether.  In a March 13 press conference, the WHO’s executive director of the Health Emergencies Program, Dr. Mike Ryan, remarked on the pandemic response, “If you have to be right before you move, you will never win.” Yet what we’ve seen is the failure to move on a number of critically important decisions by those who are paralyzed by the lack of perfect information.  Universal mask-wearing is one example: Opponents, including the CDC early on, have  said that universal masking has not yet been proven to reduce transmission of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19. While it is true that we aren’t sure what the effect of universal masking at a population level will be, that is because we have not had time to study this effect with Covid-19 yet. This doesn’t mean masks won’t help us greatly — it means we aren’t completely sure if and how much they will.  Here, the practice of weighing risks and benefits can help us realize that masks are worth using. The potential benefits of consistent universal masking, particularly if using a high-filtrate equivalent mask, like N95, are huge. We could potentially prevent thousands of deaths, slow the spread significantly, and eventually drive R0 (a measure of how quickly the disease spreads) consistently below 1, forcing the epidemic to burn out.  If masks are not all that they were cut out to be, we really don’t lose much. Some have also argued that there is a risk that masks may reduce how much people physically distance (thinking they are safe), but there is no data to support this “risk-compensation” argument. The same was assumed for seat belts — the possibility they would increase reckless driving — and that was shown to be untrue. The CDC has endorsed population-level masking, and many have felt they should have done this much sooner.  The decision to close schools was another such exercise in the challenge of decision making under uncertainty. There were a number of debates over the benefits of closing schools, with some prominent academicians arguing against it because we lacked the data to know whether it was worth doing. Now, reports suggest that children likely play a notable role in transmission, and that closing schools may in fact have reduced the epidemic’s surge by 40 to 60 percent.  This is a prime example of the old saying: Better the devil you know than the devil you don’t. If you’re not sure, close the schools. You can reopen them (or address the ripple effects of closing them), but you can’t rewind a runaway outbreak.  The same logic could have been applied on a broader level, as it relates to instituting city-wide lockdowns. Data now suggests that the New York City outbreak alone may have accounted for most of the other outbreaks throughout the country so far. And even early in the pandemic, we had reason to believe that a city-wide lockdown could potentially have a notable effect — with Wuhan, China, as our case study. (Even now, it is hard to know how much of an effect each intervention had, the lockdown being one of many.) But the authorities hesitated to close down travel into and out of our country’s most populous city, while quick action here may have changed the US Covid-19 trajectory.  It is also important to consider the consequences of moving too fast and being wrong — because being wrong can also cause unnecessary harm.  President Trump’s tweets about hydroxychloroquine-azithromycin come to mind as an example. Acting on the preliminary findings of a small French study with a number of methodological limitations, the president jumped to promoting the medications. Ultimately, they have yet to be proven to have significant benefit for Covid-19 patients, but are well-known to increase the risk of deadly heart rhythms and have already resulted in harm in a number of cases.  Acting without robust data can be reckless and harmful when the risks are just as great, if not greater, than the possible benefits. Medicine’s mantra of “First, do no harm” must temper the predisposition of leadership to act too fast and rely on unproven treatments. With masks, the risk of being wrong — that masks don’t have a huge benefit at the population level — leaves us still with our remaining strategies of testing, tracing, and isolating, and likely does not set us back significantly. But with unproven medicines, there is a much quicker path to making life and death calculations. Here, taking a chance is a much higher-stake move. The preprint publishing industry has also perpetuated this rush-to-conclusion tendency. Preprints are research that is made publicly available before being formally vetted for publication in a printed scientific journal. These early reports allow for rapid dissemination of research, but in a form that has not undergone peer review by other experts in the field and which can be easily misinterpreted by nonexperts.  It is fueled, in part, by the insatiable appetite for quick scientific results, which is understandable during a rapidly evolving situation like the one we are in now. But they also must be read with extreme caution.  There have been a number of examples of this system failing. One prominent one was a preprint about early serological data from Santa Clara County, California, which epidemiologists and public health experts swiftly called out as problematic.  
    Related
   To add an additional layer of complexity to this, we have to overcome the challenge of countering misinformation, a gargantuan task in itself. As if it weren’t enough to be simultaneously dealing with uncertainty and complex trade-offs, misinformation is truly the “parallel” epidemic in almost all infectious disease outbreaks; it happened with Ebola and Covid-19 is no exception.  Misinformation erodes trust, and in turn limits the possibility of coordination or collaboration in an outbreak response. It also creates even more uncertainty and makes people less likely to believe robust scientific data when we do have it.  The antidote to misinformation is a reliable countermeasure from trustable leaders. This may come at a national level. But when it does not, it must come from trusted professionals who hold technical expertise teamed up with journalists and communicators who can help translate information to the masses.  As a doctor working closely on the Covid-19 public health response, I can appreciate the challenges of getting responses perfectly right — avoiding being too slow or too quick, either of which could cause unintended harm, and properly weighing the risks and benefits.  We must recognize that we are operating under uncertainty now — but that we always were, even in the pre-Covid-19 world. We just didn’t need to think about it quite as often, as the consequences of our decisions were less far-reaching.  It’s not easy, but the world we live in has always been dictated by trade-offs, with both successes and failures. We also have to realize, perhaps most importantly and humbly, that we could be wrong, and that we may need to correct course. In the end, the only thing that we know with certainty is that we need to keep moving forward, together.  Abraar Karan is a physician at Brigham and Women’s Hospital/Harvard Medical School, and a part of the Covid-19 Massachusetts state epidemic response. (Twitter: @AbraarKaran) Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  After an April that some experts described as “wasted,” it looks like America is finally making some real progress on coronavirus testing in May. Over the past couple of weeks, the United States has seen significant improvements not just with the raw number of Covid-19 tests but also with other metrics experts use to gauge the scope of the US’s coronavirus outbreak and its testing capacity. During the week of May 5, the US averaged nearly 300,000 new coronavirus tests a day, according to the Covid Tracking Project. That’s nearly double the roughly 150,000 daily tests performed in early April, although it still falls short of the number of new tests a day experts say is needed to fully control the outbreak — a number that ranges from 500,000 on the low end to tens of millions on the high end, depending on which plan you’re reading.  The US also saw a significant improvement in another key metric for coronavirus testing: the positive rate, or the percentage of tests that come back positive for Covid-19. Generally, a higher positive rate suggests there’s not enough testing happening: It indicates only people with obvious symptoms are getting tested. The US’s positive rate over the week of May 5 was nearly 8 percent — down from almost 21 percent the week of April 5. Experts have said the positive rate should be no higher than 10 percent, but preferably much lower. “Daily [Covid-19] testing continues to increase nationally while the positivity rate continues to decline,” Scott Gottlieb, former head of the Food and Drug Administration, tweeted. “These are hopeful signs that — at least in many parts of the nation — the epidemic is slowing.” This doesn’t, however, mean the whole country is ready to start reopening the economy just yet. Even the latest numbers, as promising as they are, fall short of what some experts have called for. And by other metrics, the US is still behind where it needs to be. It’s also unclear if the gains will hold and continue. There were significant improvements in testing for much of March, only for those gains to stop in April. Future problems with testing could slow more increases. But, at least for now, America has — finally — made some real progress. Testing is crucial to controlling the coronavirus pandemic. Paired with contact tracing, testing lets officials track the scale of an outbreak, isolate the sick, quarantine those with whom the sick came in contact, and deploy community-wide efforts as necessary. Aggressive testing and tracing are how other countries, including South Korea and Germany, got their outbreaks under control, letting them start reopening in the past couple of weeks (though even they have scaled back their reopenings after new spikes in Covid-19 cases). That Covid-19 tests are increasing while the positive rate is falling indicates the US is now moving toward enough testing capacity to match the scope of its outbreak. Some of the drop in the positive rate is likely the result of improvements in New York state, which had the worst Covid-19 outbreak in the US so far. New York state’s positive rate peaked above 50 percent in late March and early April, before falling to around 9 percent in the week of May 5. Even excluding New York, though, the US’s positive rate has also dropped: from around 17 percent in mid-April to nearly 8 percent the week of May 5. A majority of states now have coronavirus positive rates below 10 percent, which experts say is the acceptable maximum. Only 15 states and Washington, DC, had a positive rate above 10 percent during the week of May 5. The US is still far from where some other countries are on testing. According to Our World in Data, New Zealand, Taiwan, and South Korea — all places that have done a better job controlling their Covid-19 outbreaks — have positive test rates below 2 percent and even 1 percent.  “‘Test, test, test’ means numbers more in that low range,” Natalie Dean, a biostatistics professor at the University of Florida, told me. She added, “We need a lot more testing.” Much of the progress so far is despite a lack of federal leadership. Over much of April, testing numbers stagnated due to supply shortages for swabs, reagents, and other materials needed to collect samples and run coronavirus tests. Experts have said that the federal government, led by President Donald Trump, should lead national efforts to boost testing. But Trump’s “blueprint” for testing explicitly leaves the problem to the states and private sector, saying the federal government will only act as a “supplier of last resort.” Despite the improvements, experts caution that the US shouldn’t rush to fully reopen its economy just yet. The White House’s guidelines and experts’ proposals lay out which standards states have to meet to reopen — letting each of them slowly reopen with a phased approach that unlocks parts of the economy bit by bit. For that phased reopening to begin, the proposals typically call for decreases in new Covid-19 cases for two weeks and enough testing to diagnose all of the sick and their contacts. Most states don’t meet either standard. With testing, most states now fall below the 10 percent positive rate. But when it comes to reaching the positive rate seen in, say, South Korea or New Zealand, just six states — Alaska, Hawaii, Montana, Vermont, West Virginia, and Wyoming — have rates below 2 percent over the week of May 5. 
    Related
   Testing also has to be paired with contact tracing, in which “disease detectives” track down who the infected came in contact with and get those contacts to quarantine. Experts have called for the US to hire between 100,000 to 300,000 contact tracers. Based on a tally kept by NPR, 44 states and Washington, DC, plan to hire about 66,000 contact tracers as of May 7 — almost two-thirds of the minimum. With overall cases, the country as a whole has seen its daily new reported Covid-19 cases drop in May. But much of that decrease originated in Connecticut, New Jersey, and New York — the three states included in the New York City metro area, which suffered the worst outbreak. When those three states are excluded, the US has seen daily new Covid-19 cases at best start to drop only in recent days — far from the two weeks of decreases that experts recommend. Some of the upward trend in Covid-19 cases outside Connecticut, New Jersey, and New York in recent weeks is likely due to increased testing. Even though fewer tests are coming back positive, doing many more tests can still mean finding many more cases than a state would otherwise. Still, the numbers suggest it’s too early to declare victory. Based on data compiled by the New York Times, just 18 states have seen their daily new reported coronavirus cases drop in recent days — much less the two full weeks experts have called for. Seven states have seen their daily new cases increase, while the remaining 25 have seen theirs remain roughly flat. Taken together, these figures suggest that the majority of states are not ready to start to reopen just yet. While America has made decent progress throughout May in confronting the challenge of this pandemic, there’s still a bit more work to be done. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Correction: The positive rate map originally had incorrect data for Utah and Virginia due to a bug in the map-making program. It’s been fixed. Editor’s note: New political science research finds that partisanship is a fairly strong predictor of one’s likelihood of wearing a mask, as Vox’s Zack Beauchamp reports. The piece below, originally published March 31, explains why the epistemic crisis is a threat to public health The US is a land divided. Americans have sorted themselves into opposing factions, with different values, sources of authority, and shared understandings. In some ways, there is no longer any meaningful US “public,” but rather two publics that want and believe different things.  The current state of deep polarization in the US is the subject of a great deal of discussion and research right now, including in an excellent new book by my colleague Ezra Klein. One aspect of it that I have highlighted in a number of posts (start here) is what I call America’s epistemic crisis. Epistemology is the branch of philosophy having to do with knowledge and how we come to know things; the crisis is that, as a polity, we have become incapable of learning or knowing the same things, and thus, incapable of acting together in a coherent fashion. I have been wondering when that epistemic crisis might spiral out into a full-fledged political crisis. I wondered if it might happen around the Mueller investigation, or when Trump sent 5,000 troops to the southern border to stop a phantom migrant invasion, or when Trump was impeached.  Now the Covid-19 crisis has me wondering again. A bit of research, published in March, from three leading political scientists shows pretty convincingly that, in the face of the pandemic, Republicans and Democrats are once again hearing different things, forming different understandings, and reacting in different ways.  But this time, the epistemic gap could have devastating public health consequences. This picture is from 3pm today.You can see exactly where Duval County ends and St. John’s County begins.All beaches in Duval are closed, while St. John’s only blocked parking at the beach.Gov. DeSantis needs to order a state-wide closure of all Florida beaches. pic.twitter.com/JfKzCGCPLq Vox’s Zack Beauchamp, drawing on the work of Tufts University political scientist Brian Schaffner, has written about how partisanship shaped the response to Covid-19 from the very beginning, with Republicans expressing more skepticism and taking fewer precautions, largely following the cues of their political and media leaders (as most people do). Emily Badger and Kevin Quealy at the New York Times recently analyzed data from some similar polls and surveys, finding a wide but closing partisan gap in views. While suggestive, research thus far cannot precisely isolate partisanship’s influence from competing explanations like geography, age, or exposure to the virus.  Shana Kushner Gadarian, Sara Wallace Goodman, and Thomas Pepinsky — political scientists at Syracuse University, UC Irvine, and Cornell respectively — have just released the results of a survey of 3,000 Americans on a wide range of “health behaviors, attitudes, and opinions about how to respond to the crisis.” (The survey was done March 20-23, a week after the initial declaration of emergency.) Their survey design has allowed them to isolate the effects of different variables on attitudes and behaviors.  Here’s how they summarize the results: Our results collectively describe a broad political divide in reaction to COVID-19: Republicans are less likely than Democrats to report responding with CDC-recommended behavior, and are less concerned about the pandemic, yet are more likely to support policies that restrict trade and movement across borders as a response to it. Democrats, by contrast, have responded by changing their personal health behaviors, and supporting policies that socialize the costs of testing and treatment. Partisanship is a more consistent predictor of behaviors, attitudes, and preferences than anything else that we measure. [emphasis added] Partisanship shapes everything, even direct experience. “What we find is that even when you account for the zip codes people live in, i.e., their actual level of exposure to the disease,” Gadarian told me, “partisanship still matters.” Democrats are more likely than Republicans to wash their hands more often, avoid contact with others, and self-quarantine, more likely to support increased social spending, more likely to worry about getting themselves and others sick, and more convinced that normal life must be temporarily suspended. Just about the only virus responses that Republicans support more than Democrats are restrictions on movement (closing borders) and trade tariffs — policies they support regardless of circumstance.  Disagreements about the wisdom of hand-washing and social distancing are not mere differences of political opinion. They are differences about matters of epidemiology. And in disregarding the reports and recommendations of experts, and trusting Trump and right-wing media instead, Republicans are putting not only themselves but everyone at greater risk. The spread of a virus can only be stopped by concerted collective action. If a large bloc of the public cannot be convinced of the threat or the need for a response, that bloc can prevent collective action all on its own. It can ensure the virus spreads faster and more widely, no matter what the majority does.  And that, more or less, is what is happening. America’s epistemic crisis is having a direct impact on public health. Crowded beaches, confusion amid coronavirus orders as DeSantis won’t mandate statewide lockdown https://t.co/Cl2xt45nfF pic.twitter.com/WPU6it8ikQ This is one survey, a snapshot, so it cannot measure how opinion may be changing. “We will do more surveys going forward that track the same respondents,” says Pepinsky, “and these will allow us to test very conclusively if partisan differences dissipate over time.” In the meantime, surveys up to mid-March analyzed by the New York Times suggest that concern over the virus is rising among Republicans, as do surveys from the Pew Research Center.  One explanation of this shift is that the influence of partisanship, its ability to shelter conservatives from the truth, is waning as the crisis becomes more severe. “While the effects of partisanship are incredibly pronounced,” Schaffner told the Times, “I think they also hit their limits.” Gadarian says that “once people become anxious about an issue, they act very similarly in their behaviors and attitudes.” In a series of experiments with Bethany Albertson (a political scientist at UT Austin) around the time of the H1N1 scare, they randomly assigned students to groups that were asked to either list their thoughts about H1N1 or their worries; they then artificially increased the anxiety of both groups. “The worried group was more likely to trust in health experts to give them information about H1N1,” she says, “and were slightly more likely to take a hand sanitizer versus a pen on their way out of the lab.” So it’s at least possible that, as the Covid-19 crisis grows more severe and people become more anxious about it, Republicans will start listening to Dr. Anthony Fauci and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) — and will continue to do so going forward, mitigating the damage their irresponsible behavior has already done to public health. At the risk of being predictable, let me offer a more pessimistic prediction. Since Covid-19 came on the scene, Americans getting their news from mainstream sources have heard that: Meanwhile, Republicans — who, as a landmark 2017 Harvard study of media consumption found, get their information from a small cluster of ideologically extreme sources, now including the president — have heard that: In this clip, Trump:1. Denies WHO's coronavirus death rate based on “hunch"2. Calls coronavirus "corona flu"3. Suggests it's fine for people w/ Covid-19 to go to work4. Compares coronavirus to "the regular flu," indicating he doesn't get the difference pic.twitter.com/uC9c03zX31 Republican concern about the virus is increasing, but there’s an alternate explanation: The right-wing base is still listening exclusively to conservative political and media elites; it’s just that those elites have now decided that it is in their best interests to begin acknowledging the threat.  In late March, according to the New York Times, Trump was finally convinced that the data on the coming death toll “could not be bent to his will,” so he begrudgingly extended social distancing measures through April 30.  While conservative elites may have changed their tune about the existence and severity of the crisis, they have not ceased searching for a scapegoat against which to turn their credulous followers. Trump and his allies are still blaming the media, blaming China, and blaming Democratic governors. Trump has also floated the idea that New York is spreading the virus and should be isolated. Rudy Giuliani, Charlie Kirk, and now Laura Ingraham have been forced to delete tweets by Twitter. https://t.co/JoXxgokzYm The details of the dangerous myths being fed to the conservative base are changing, but they are still being fed dangerous myths. They are still disregarding experts and following shifting narratives built around venerating Trump and shielding him from accountability. As they come to believe those myths and act on them, the anti-social nature of their behavior will not be quite so self-evident as their failure to wash their hands, but it will still be anti-social. Progressive reformers tend to cling to the myth that a sufficiently dramatic shock or disaster will have the effect of dispelling misinformation and propaganda, like a mighty wind blowing dust from all the lenses. I hear it around climate change all the time, the notion that people will wake up to the threat when there is a bad enough storm, or a series of storms. And I’ve heard it about the epistemic crisis again and again. Surely the Iraq War is a big enough disaster to puncture the bubble. Surely the botched response to Katrina. Surely the Great Recession. Surely 10 fruitless investigations of Benghazi. Surely Trump’s impeachment. It never happens. The battle to keep Americans from understanding what went on January to March is going to be one of the biggest propaganda and freedom of information fights in modern US history. https://t.co/6IRbc4Mi2K Precisely because so much of it is public, confusion has to be made massive. People forget, but the response to H1N1 flu in 2009 was also split along partisan lines — it was visible in vaccination rates. So was the response to Ebola in 2014. Conservative political and media elites were spreading misinformation and conspiracy theories then, too. It’s just that they weren’t in charge, so their ability to amplify their message and do real harm to public health was limited.  Now they are running things, spreading misinformation and conspiracy theories live on primetime TV every night, leading the US into a historic catastrophe in which more Americans have already died than died on 9/11. And the death toll seems fated to rise for the foreseeable future. The epistemic crisis has been underway for many years now. It was inevitable that it would spill over into a full-fledged political and health crisis. If it were not clear before, it has become unmistakably clear now: Right-wing misinformation is a direct and immediate threat to the American public.President Donald Trump has been cheerleading states that are relaxing restrictions in the Covid-19 pandemic and encouraging protests in states that aren’t. At the same time, states are struggling to meet the White House’s guidelines for reopening their economies. This has proven deeply frustrating for some lawmakers. “My state has no clue how to implement and pay for that system without help from the federal government,” Sen. Chris Murphy (D-CT) told members of the White House coronavirus task force during a Senate Health Committee hearing Tuesday. “You work for a president who is frankly undermining our efforts to comply with the guidance you’ve given us, and the guidance you have provided is criminally vague.” Similarly, Virginia Gov. Ralph Northam (D) told the Washington Post that President Trump held a conference call with governors emphasizing that Covid-19 cases need to decline before states can relax, only to tweet “LIBERATE VIRGINIA!” two days later. “Unfortunately, we’ve been receiving mixed messages from Washington,” Northam said.  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has prepared a more detailed set of instructions for states than what the White House has provided. The Associated Press obtained a 63-page draft that lays out specifics for reopening places like child care centers, mass transit, and businesses.  But the White House told CDC officials the guidance “would never see the light of day,” AP reports, and that it would not follow that guidance. CDC Director Robert Redfield said more guidance would be made available to states soon, pending review.   One of the central problems for states is the federal government is still struggling to define what counts as safe, let alone help states meet those targets. Meanwhile, some jurisdictions are plowing ahead with plans to relax and reopen their economies while failing to meet even the few standards available. States like California and New York have also established their own benchmarks.  But the lack of clear and consistent goalposts means that, even in the most ideal scenario, cities and states risk a resurgence of cases by relaxing restrictions. And that could end up making the situation worse in the short and long term. Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told the Senate Committee on Tuesday he was concerned that states are starting to disregard criteria in the White House’s guidelines he helped develop for when it is safe to relax pandemic control measures.  “If that occurs, there is a real risk that you will trigger an outbreak that you may not be able to control,” he said Many health officials agree broadly on the elements that need to be in place. Testing vastly more people for Covid-19 has to be the centerpiece of any path to reopening. Contact tracing, the ability to care for infected patients, a declining case count, and some ongoing social distancing are also key components of plans to get people back to work. Most plans also call for a gradual relaxation, proceeding in phases with their own checkpoints. But the different guidance documents put out by the federal government and some states have proven frustratingly thin on details. And with a persistent shortage of tests, personal protective equipment, and funding, some parts of the country don’t have the resources they need to even assess whether it’s safe to relax.  There are several key elements that experts agree have to be in place to start pulling back on blanket stay-at-home orders and nonessential business closures. But some of the guidance from states and the federal government is short on details.  Testing capacity  Figuring out who has SARS-CoV-2 is the first step in any plan to reopen the economy. Since Covid-19 can spread from people who don’t have symptoms, sometimes for weeks, testing is critical for identifying the infected. Those with the virus can then be instructed to isolate themselves. Repeat this often enough, and the pandemic will fizzle out.  How many tests are needed? Experts have reached different answers, but almost all agree that the US needs vastly more tests than the 300,000 or so per day being conducted right now. The high-end estimates demand testing almost the entire US population every two weeks plus daily tests for workers on the front lines of the pandemic. That would demand upward of 35 million tests per day across the country.  In the meantime, one heuristic could be the percentage of tests that report back positive. William Hanage, an epidemiologist at Harvard University, told NPR that less than 10 percent of tests for Covid-19 should be positive. If it’s higher than that, it means you aren’t testing enough to stay ahead of the disease.  New York, the current epicenter of the pandemic, is aiming for 30 diagnostic tests per 1,000 people in each region considering reopening. California did not specify a benchmark for testing rates beyond “sufficient testing capacity to meet demand.” Declining cases Another key metric for judging whether it’s safe to reopen is the number of people reporting infections; it has to trend downward before states and cities can start letting businesses reopen. The White House guidelines say that new Covid-19 cases have to decline for two weeks straight, and right now, few states meet that threshold. And it’s not just the number of confirmed cases that has to fall; the guidelines also say that reports of influenza-like symptoms also have to fall for two weeks in a row. California and New York both have a similar standard. New York’s guidelines also call for a decline in deaths and fewer than two new hospitalizations per 100,000 people. For places that had few Covid-19 cases to begin with, they can begin to relax if they never exceeded 15 new hospitalizations a day and five deaths a day over a 14-day period, measured as a three-day rolling average.  Baked into these metrics are monitoring and testing to figure out just how many people have the virus at a given time, and it serves as a proxy for the effectiveness of pandemic control measures like social distancing.  But a decline only tells you about the trajectory of the pandemic. It doesn’t say much about the absolute numbers of people who are infected or the rate of decline. If the infection peak was high and the decline is long and slow, it may not be safe to relax for a long time, lest infections creep back up.  There’s also a time lag between exposures and detected cases since it can take weeks for infected people to show symptoms, so two weeks of falling Covid-19 cases could mask an infection spike in the background. Contact tracing One of the ways to better use the limited number of Covid-19 tests available is to trace the footsteps of the infected to see who they encountered. Those contacts can then be tested or told to isolate themselves.  The problem is that this kind of detective work requires a lot of labor, or it requires a level of surveillance that may prove uncomfortable or politically untenable. The US would need between 100,000 to 300,000 people trained to perform this work, according to researchers at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. It estimated it would cost about $3.6 billion to hire and train these workers. New York state says it’s aiming to “recruit and train an army of contact tracers,” but that the number needed will be region-specific. The state estimates it will need 30 tracers per 100,000 residents.  Health system capacity Hospitals and clinics must have enough resources — beds, ICU beds, ventilators, personal protective equipment, staff — to cope with a potential surge in Covid-19 infections. The threat of a shortage in health care capacity is why we had to flatten the curve of cases with measures like social distancing.  The question then is how much headroom is enough. The White House suggests that states have enough capacity when they can treat patients “without crisis care.” That is, there is enough room at normal hospitals and patients don’t have to be treated in makeshift field sites. Those guidelines also call for a “robust testing program” for health care workers without defining what counts as “robust.” Meanwhile, California’s standard is “hospital surge capacity to meet demand,” also not clarifying how much surge capacity is enough. New York state’s guidelines are more specific. They state that regions must have at least 30 percent of their total hospital beds open as well as 30 percent of intensive care unit beds available before they can begin moving through the phases of relaxing restrictions. Based on these metrics, New York state reports three regions are on track to proceed toward a phased reopening, where more businesses can reopen and others can open but under restrictions on capacity and requirements for more sanitation.  President Trump has made no secret of his desire to end all the measures to control the Covid-19 pandemic and has set their complete removal as his ultimate goal.   “I see the new normal being what it was three months ago,” Trump told representatives from the restaurant and hospitality industries. “I want to go back to where it was, that’s where we’re going to be.” However, until there’s a vaccine, cure, or widespread immunity, Covid-19 still poses a threat. That means precautions still have to be in place to control the spread of the virus, even as cases decline. People will still have to wear masks. Venues can’t get too crowded. Businesses will run at a diminished capacity. Gatherings will remain small and distant.  Even in places like South Korea and Germany, countries hailed for their responses to the crisis, they have suffered rebounds in infections as they loosened some of their restrictions. Germany’s Covid-19 cases nearly tripled on May 12 compared to the day before, prompting calls for another lockdown. South Korea reported 34 new infections on May 10, the highest daily case count in a month.  So the world that existed a few months ago is long gone, and it may be much longer before we return to anything like it. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Experts have a range of ideas to suppress the Covid-19 pandemic, save lives, and avert new waves of economic misery. But President Donald Trump seems to be embracing another plan — massaging the numbers to make inconvenient deaths go away. But experts believe the problem with the numbers is the opposite — official statistics understate the Covid-19 death toll. Recent methodological changes have annoyed the president by pushing death numbers higher. These changes, according to experts, are a sound and reasonable effort to reduce the amount of undercounting. They factor in that deaths have surged by more than the official coronavirus stats say.  On Wednesday, the Daily Beast reported that Trump and members of his coronavirus task force are now pressuring the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to get states to change how they count deaths, a campaign designed to lower the numbers.  As Trump tries to juke the stats, he’s committing the original sin of America’s pandemic response — falling way beyond the curve in terms of testing and surveillance. For Trump, that seemingly doesn’t matter because it’s more politically convenient to keep official infection numbers low. The original way the United States counted coronavirus deaths started with the fact that if you were seriously ill, you might (or might not) be tested for Covid-19. If you were tested, the test came back positive, you were admitted to the hospital for treatment, and then you died, that was counted as a Covid-19 death.  But we’ve known all along that many more people were infected with the virus than were actually receiving tests and obtaining positive results. Tests have been in short supply, and some of the most widely used tests have fairly high false negative rates.  Consequently, people who’ve died at home or in a long-term care facility without making it to the hospital were initially not counted as Covid-19 deaths. In mid-April, however, New York City added nearly 4,000 “probable” Covid-19 deaths to its official count based on doctors’ assessment of the symptoms of the deceased.  This shift is in part an effort to obtain more accurate statistics, and in part an effort to use testing capacity in a more efficient way. There is no Covid-19 pill to give people who test positive, so it makes little sense to prioritize gravely ill people for testing when those scarce tests could be better used on sick people’s close contacts.    That makes sense as a process, but adding these suspected cases into the mix makes the situation look worse, and Trump isn’t happy about it. On May 6, Jonathan Swan and Sam Baker reported for Axios that “Trump has complained to advisers about the way coronavirus deaths are being calculated, suggesting the real numbers are actually lower — and a number of his senior aides share this view, according to sources with direct knowledge.”  They specifically reported concern about the CDC moving broadly to adopt New York’s method of classifying probable Covid-19 deaths as Covid-19 deaths.  Then on May 13, Erin Banco and Asawin Suebsaeng reported that the White House, including Dr. Deborah Birx, is pressuring the CDC to exclude not only probable Covid-19 deaths but also the deaths of some people who have tested positive for the infection: The White House has pressed the CDC, in particular, to work with states to change how they count coronavirus deaths and report them back to the federal government, according to two officials with knowledge of those conversations. And Deborah Birx, the coordinator of the administration’s coronavirus task force, has urged CDC officials to exclude from coronavirus death-count reporting some of those individuals who either do not have confirmed lab results and are presumed positive or who have the virus and may not have died as a direct result of it, according to three senior administration officials.  This stems from an idea, long simmering in virus-skeptical circles, that public health officials are improperly classifying people who died “with” coronavirus as having died “of” coronavirus instead. The basic thinking is that a large share of the dead are older, a large share of Covid-19 cases are mild, and consequently, older people with mild Covid-19 infections may be dying for unrelated reasons. It’s a fair hypothesis to offer, but empirically it seems to be false — many more people are dying than can be accounted for by the official statistics.  Testifying before the Senate’s health committee on Tuesday, Dr. Anthony Fauci expressed the view of most public health professionals that even with the attempted adjustment for probable cases, the official numbers still underestimate the true death toll. Sanders asks Fauci if coronavirus deaths are being undercounted. Fauci says "most of us feel the numbers of deaths are likely higher" than the official numbers. pic.twitter.com/dxyQj7C914 The basic issue is that even the “probable” standard still requires an individualized assessment of symptoms, while broad statistical aggregates show that a lot of people are dying.  You see this by doing an excess deaths calculation. First, you take the number of people who would die in a typical month in the United States, and then look at how many people actually died. When a Yale School of Public Health team did this for March 2020, they found about 15,400 excess deaths, of which only 8,128 were officially attributed to the coronavirus.  Are all 7,000 of the unexplained deaths really Covid-19 cases? Probably not. Some excess mortality is due to people not getting medical treatment for other ailments. On the other hand, it’s likely fewer people will have died in traffic accidents than you see in a typical March. A group of economists calculated that several hundred air pollution deaths were avoided in April with fewer cars on the road.  At the same time, the death reporting infrastructure in the United States is very decentralized and a little clunky, so the tendency is for all death counts to be revised upward over time as more jurisdictions report. It’s going to take a long time and a fair amount of statistical work to get a really clear picture of how many people died of Covid-19 this year.    But it’s pretty clear that the CDC’s case counts are an underestimate, a product of a gap between the health care system’s ability to make individualized determinations about cause of death, and the statistical reality that people are dying at an unusually high rate. Trump is pushing to make inaccurate numbers even less accurate, and that’s dangerous.  It’s not unusual for politicians to want to spin away unflattering facts or for Trump to lie about something.  But as policymakers, business leaders, school officials, and individual citizens are making day-to-day decisions about how to cope with the pandemic, spreading bad information is risky. The more people underestimate how bad the situation is, the more likely they are to engage in excessively risky behavior and make the situation worse.  Trump is a shrewd person attuned to the political relevance of data. In early March, he infamously opined that he didn’t really want to see infected American citizens on cruise ships brought home for treatment because “I like the numbers where they are.” Bringing them on shore for treatment would create a worse statistical record, but also lead to a better outcome in the real world since they could get better treatment. In that case, Trump was persuaded to do the right thing and simply complained about it.  But the same basic tension has bedeviled American policy since at least February.  Stark warnings to the public could have saved lives but also risked spooking the stock market. Widespread testing would have made it easier to contain the outbreak but also would have meant much higher confirmed case numbers. Accurate death counts help people make smart decisions but also undermine the president’s push for a quick relaxation of restrictions on business.  Throughout his career in both business and politics, Trump has gotten far by relying on spin and bluster to paper over problems of substance. And while this seems unlikely to be the best way to cope with the pandemic, it’s something he’s good at and there’s at least an outside chance he could make it work for himself politically. But a strategy focused on juking the stats is overwhelmingly likely to end with more real-world deaths than necessary. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. On Wednesday evening, Republicans on the Wisconsin Supreme Court issued a broad order striking down that state’s stay-at-home order, which was issued by the head of the state’s health department to prevent the spread of coronavirus. Among other things, the court’s decision concludes that the state health department exceeded its authority by instructing people to stay at home, and by “forbidding travel and closing businesses” deemed nonessential. The case is Wisconsin Legislature v. Palm. The Court’s order was 4-3, with Justice Brian Hagedorn, a Republican initially appointed to a lower state court by former Gov. Scott Walker (R), writing one of three dissenting opinions. Justice Daniel Kelly, a lame duck who recently lost an election to retain his seat by nearly 11 points, cast the key fourth vote to strike down the stay-at-home order. If not for a Wisconsin law that allows Kelly to serve until August, the stay-at-home order may well have been upheld. The decision appears to be animated by the kind of political considerations that are more at home on conservative talk radio than in a court of law. During oral arguments last week, when a lawyer defending the stay-at-home order pointed out that there was recently an outbreak of coronavirus in Brown County, Wisconsin, Chief Justice Patience Roggensack dismissed the significance of that outbreak because it primarily impacted factory workers. “These were due to the meatpacking, though,” Roggensack said. “That’s where Brown County got the flare. It wasn’t just the regular folks in Brown County.” At that same oral argument, Justice Rebecca Bradley compared the state’s stay-at-home order to “‘assembling together and placing under guard all those of Japanese ancestry in assembly centers’ during World War II.” The majority opinion, by Chief Justice Roggensack, is not at all clear as to whether this decision takes effect immediately, or whether the stay-at-home order remains in effect for another week. Roggensack also concludes that Andrea Palm, the head of the state’s health department, exceeded her lawful authority. But then Roggensack’s opinion contains this extraordinary line: “We do not define the precise scope of DHS authority under Wis. Stat. § 252.02(3), (4) and (6) because clearly Order 28 went too far.” Thus, as Hagedorn notes in dissent, the majority opinion “has failed to provide almost any guidance for what the relevant laws mean, and how our state is to govern through this crisis moving forward.” Wisconsin now has no stay-at-home order preventing the spread of coronavirus — or maybe it does have such an order for just one more week. And it is not at all clear which powers the state health department still has to fight the spread of a pandemic. Moreover, one consequence of the Court’s decision is that if Palm does want to take additional steps to fight the spread of a deadly disease, she will likely need to jump through a series of procedural hoops that, at best, take weeks to complete. And her decisions can now be overridden by Republicans in the state legislature. In the meantime, there is no court decision ordering coronavirus to stop spreading. Wisconsin law gives the state Department of Health Services extraordinarily broad power — or, at least, it did until today — to confront a public health crisis. Among other things, the department may “close schools and forbid public gatherings in schools, churches, and other places to control outbreaks and epidemics.” It may “issue orders ... for the control and suppression of communicable diseases,” and these orders “may be made applicable to the whole or any specified part of the state.” And, on top of all that, an additional provision permits the health department to “authorize and implement all emergency measures necessary to control communicable diseases.” Yet the majority opinion in Wisconsin Legislature diminishes this power considerably by imposing procedural limits on Palm’s authority. Much of Roggensack’s majority opinion rests on a distinction between “rules” and mere “orders.” The reason this distinction matters is that a mere “order” from a state agency can go into effect immediately, but a “rule” can take weeks or even months to promulgate. Even under an expedited process for “emergency” rules, a state agency must first draft a “statement of the scope of the proposed emergency rule.” That statement must be reviewed and approved by the governor and the state Department of Administration, and then appear in an official state publication that only publishes once a week. After the statement is published, the agency must complete a 10-day waiting period before it is allowed to move forward, with no apparent way to waive this requirement. And then the rule can be delayed even longer if certain legislative leaders require the agency to hold a public hearing on the new rule. Then the new rule can potentially be suspended by a legislative committee — which may require the agency to start this process all over again. Nevertheless, the Court’s Republican majority concludes that Palm’s stay-at-home order exceeds her power to issue mere orders. Under the Court’s decision, any order that applies to a class of people that “is described in general terms,” and that can be expanded to more individuals, must be issued as a rule. That means that new efforts to fight the coronavirus are likely to be delayed for weeks or more. There are several problems with the Court’s conclusion, but the biggest one is that it is inconsistent with the text of the state’s public health law. That law gives the health department the power to “promulgate and enforce rules or issue orders for guarding against the introduction of any communicable disease into the state” or “for the control and suppression of communicable diseases,” and it provides that “any rule or order may be made applicable to the whole or any specified part of the state.” Thus, the statute explicitly states that the health department may issue an “order” and not just a “rule” that is applicable to the entire state. As Justice Rebecca Dallet notes in one of three dissenting opinions, the state legislature purposely added this language to the state’s public health law to expand the health department’s power to issue statewide orders. “Originally,” Dallet writes, the state public health law “did not allow for the issuance of orders; DHS could only ‘adopt and enforce rules and regulations.’” And these rules had to comply with limits similar to the ones the state Supreme Court imposed in Wisconsin Legislature. But “in 1982, at the beginning of the AIDS epidemic, the Legislature amended the [public health law] to explicitly include as part of DHS’s power the ability ‘to issue orders’ of statewide application.” So the state legislature explicitly amended the law during a previous public health crisis to give the health department a broad power to issue statewide orders. The Court’s decision in Wisconsin Legislature effectively nullifies that 1982 amendment. Having stripped the state health department of much of its authority, and having done so in the middle of the pandemic, the majority opinion then descends into confusion.  For one thing, it is not at all clear if the Court’s decision takes effect immediately, or if it does not take effect for several days. Although the Republican-controlled state legislature, which is the plaintiff in this case, requested a six-day stay of the Court’s decision, the majority opinion does not grant such a stay. Nevertheless, Roggensack, who wrote the majority opinion, also wrote a separate concurring opinion where she states that “although our declaration of rights is effective immediately, I would stay future actions to enforce our decision until May 20, 2020.” So it is unclear whether Roggensack voted to grant a stay or not. She authored the majority opinion, which does not grant a stay. But she also wrote a vague concurring opinion saying that she “would stay” enforcement of the Court’s decision. Roggensack’s decision to cast Schrödinger’s vote inspired an incredulous dissent from Justice Ann Walsh Bradley. “Assuming Chief Justice Roggensack is actually voting for a stay, as her concurrence seemingly indicates, there appear to be four votes for issuing a stay (Chief Justice Roggensack and Justices Ann Walsh Bradley, Dallet, and Hagedorn),” Bradley writes. “So, is there a stay or isn’t there? It can’t be both ways.” Similarly, after Roggensack’s majority opinion concludes that the health department must use a “rule” and not a mere “order” if it wants to hand down something like the stay-at-home order, Roggensack then tacks on several additional pages concluding that the health department’s power to issue rules also must be limited. That’s the section that concludes with a declaration that “we do not define the precise scope of DHS authority.” And it’s the section that inspired Hagedorn to write that the majority “has failed to provide almost any guidance for what the relevant laws mean, and how our state is to govern through this crisis moving forward.” The plaintiff in this lawsuit is the Wisconsin state legislature, which is controlled by Republicans. But the Wisconsin legislature is one of the most egregiously gerrymandered bodies in the nation. In 2018, Democratic candidates received 54 percent of the popular vote for the Wisconsin state Assembly, but Republicans won 63 of the body’s 99 seats. Similarly, it is likely that the reason the Court did not vote 4-3 to uphold Wisconsin’s stay-at-home order is that Justice-elect Jill Karofsky, who defeated Justice Kelly in an April election, has not yet taken her seat. Because Kelly will continue to sit for months as a lame duck, the state health department has now been stripped of much of its power to fight a deadly virus.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The recent spike in Covid-19 cases in some of the countries thought to have best contained the virus — first Singapore, now South Korea and, potentially, Germany — is a glimpse into America’s possible future as states start reopening businesses and public activities after several months of lockdown. All it can take to reverse the positive trends is a single undetected case. As Vox’s Alex Ward reported this week, one South Korean man who went out for a night on the town at several Seoul dance clubs has been linked to nearly 80 new cases there. Suddenly the country’s curve is rising again and the local government ordered bars and restaurants to be closed, an abrupt reversal of its reopening plans. Since we’re thinking of things in terms of curves and waves these days, here is the situation in South Korea: South Korea had been a poster child for an effective Covid-19 response, having learned from its experience with SARS last decade. As Ward notes, the country had even held a national election without any obvious public health consequences. It had started to see days with no new domestic cases. The government was warning the virus could rebound, but it was possible to look at South Korea as evidence that a country could beat coronavirus and get life back to normal in short order. But then a man who didn’t yet know he was infected decided to go dancing, and now businesses are being shuttered again. The news out of South Korea would be worrying enough on its own. But it’s not the only place to see the start of a second wave. Vox’s Jen Kirby reported in mid-April on the second waves hitting Singapore and Hong Kong. She wrote in stark terms about the implications: This may be the world’s new normal, at least until an effective medical therapy is widely available that lessens the intensity of the disease, or the world acquires immunity, most likely through a vaccine. Social distancing measures may be a recurring tool — intensifying, easing, and intensifying again as outbreaks surge, diminish, and surge again. Because as long as the coronavirus is spreading somewhere, it can spread everywhere. That is why no country has beaten the coronavirus yet. “We will not get rid of the disease until every country has a system to detect the disease and stop it near the origin, as or as close to the origin as possible, before it spreads,” Olga Jonas, a senior fellow at the Harvard Global Health Institute who formerly helped to coordinate the World Bank’s response to avian and pandemic flu threats, told me. A month later, Singapore’s curve is on a gradual but steady incline. The coronavirus has not been beaten back again. And now Germany, a paragon of good testing and early containment in an otherwise ravaged Europe, is seeing a sudden and worrying jump in cases. As Business Insider reported, the number of new coronavirus cases there tripled from Monday to Tuesday, up to more than 900 in 24 hours. The leap came just about a week after schools and shops started to reopen; astute readers might remember the virus’s incubation period is four or five days on average. The bump could be a mirage due to inconsistent or delayed reporting. But if the new case numbers continue to rise, Germany would go right back into lockdown. The government has established thresholds that, if crossed, would trigger the resumption of social distancing measures. This could be America’s future, too. Vox’s Brian Resnick laid out some of the reasons to worry that state plans to relax social distancing could backfire and lead to a new wave of cases. Jeff Duchin, an epidemiologist for the King County, Washington, public health department, told me that critical to any reopening plan is an ability to “cut off the transmission chains.” Better testing and contact tracing would enhance our ability to contain new outbreaks. “If we can’t do that successfully,” Duchin said, “we’ll have to go back to social distancing.” But, as the South Korean example shows, just one person with an undetected infection could jumpstart the virus’s spread. This has been a difficult task even with the most diligent testing-and-tracing regimen. And the US certainly does not have that as of yet. The real solution to the coronavirus, and the best hope for an eventual end to these lockdowns, would be effective treatments or vaccines. Otherwise, we’re left with blunter instruments. “Without a vaccine or antiviral drugs,” Duchin said, our best hopes are social distancing, widespread testing, and contact tracing. That is a herculean task for understaffed and overwhelmed public health agencies. “We have to be able to identify almost all the cases,” he said. “Even a few cases, if unrecognized, will spark an outbreak that will spiral out of control.” This story appears in VoxCare, a newsletter from Vox on the latest twists and turns in America’s health care debate. Sign up to get VoxCare in your inbox along with more health care stats and news.  Get our newsletter in your inbox once a week. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  Wearing a mask is one of the easiest ways to contribute to the fight against coronavirus.  Infected people wearing masks are less likely to spray virus-containing droplets onto others, which means that universal mask-wearing should, in theory, make everyone safer. There’s some evidence from across the world that suggests the widespread use of masks has played a role in reducing coronavirus transmission. Studies on mask-wearing generally support it, finding that masks generally provide at least some protection. At worst, masks are a low-cost intervention that might help at the margins. But in recent weeks, mask-wearing in the United States has become another flashpoint in the partisan culture wars. President Trump refuses to wear a mask in public appearances — including one at a factory that produces masks — or in his office, despite a recent outbreak among the White House staff. Vice President Mike Pence opted not to wear one when he visited the Mayo Clinic, a prominent medical facility in Minnesota that’s treating coronavirus patients. Many Republicans in Congress have opted not to wear masks on the House and Senate floors, despite several members of their caucus testing positive for the illness earlier this spring.  People tend to take signals from their political leadership, and rank-and-file Republicans appear to have gotten the message. New research from three political scientists —  Syracuse’s Shana Gadarian, UC-Irvine’s Sara Goodman, and Cornell’s Tom Pepinsky — analyzed polling data on over 2,400 Americans’ attitudes and self-reported behaviors during the pandemic. They find that, after controlling for “a full set” of confounding variables, partisanship is a fairly strong predictor of one’s likelihood of wearing a mask. “Democrats are more than 20 percentage points more likely than Republicans to (75% versus 53%) to report wearing masks in public,” Pepinsky writes in a blog post summarizing their findings. “Mask-wearing levels are consistently lower across the board in states that voted strongly for Trump.” Why would Republicans treat masks as a partisan issue? A series of tweets from R.R. Reno, the editor of the conservative religious magazine First Things, is clarifying: In a diatribe that went viral on Tuesday night for all the wrong reasons, Reno praised Trump for failing to wear a mask when meeting a group of World War II veterans — and went on to describe the very idea of masks as a kind of surrender: By the way, the WWII vets did not wear masks. They're men, not cowards. Masks=enforced cowardice. Just to reinforce. Talked to my son in Seattle. The mask culture if fear driven. Masks+cowardice. It's a regime dominate by fear of infection and fear of causing of infection. Both are species of cowardice. Look, let's face it. There are those who are terrified, and those who are not. Where do you stand? Terror or a more reasonable position? Will you visit our mother? If so, the mask is a PC gesture. If not, you are a moral monster. Reno has written a lot of goofy stuff during the coronavirus epidemic. But what he’s saying here tells us a lot about the right’s approach to coronavirus more broadly. The first thing that leaps out is that the anti-mask crusade reflects a particular vision of masculinity. Reno’s reframing of an obvious public health measure as a kind of cowardice, something tough World War II veterans would never do, is a thinly veiled way of calling protective masks unmanly. As my colleague Anna North argues, this strain of anxious masculinity is a consistent theme in anti-mask arguments on the right. The second is the argument that mask-wearing is a form of “political correctness.” Reno’s reasoning is incoherent — if you’re willing to visit your mother, presumably you should take mask-wearing even more seriously — but it illustrates the category of thinking he’s relying on here. The question in his mind is not “does wearing a mask contribute to public health,” but rather “what does wearing a mask say about where I stand in the culture war.” He sees the issue not through the lens of substance, but of symbolism. When you look at the broader Republican response to masks through the lens of Reno’s thinking, it starts to make a lot more sense. This is a political movement that has been built to wage a culture war; it has no greater objective than owning the libs. And the best way to own them is to defeat them in combat over identity: gender, race, sexuality, and the like. The war on masks is a way of taking a public health crisis — a situation that demands political unity and best practices in governance — and reshaping it into a culture war competition. The question is not “are we doing a good job handling this” so much as “whose team do you want to be on, the namby-pamby liberals or the strong fearless conservatives?”  It is difficult for members of the modern organized conservative movement to see political issues outside the lenses of partisanship and the culture wars. At a time when unity on public health matters is paramount, on issues ranging from masks to testing to the timing of reopening, this is dangerous. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The Trump administration has agreed to clear the way for foreign doctors to make a larger contribution to America’s coronavirus response, waiving restrictions that prevented foreign doctors assigned to rural areas from administering medical care and providing telehealth services outside their approved locations, according to Sen. Amy Klobuchar (D-MN). Wednesday’s policy change will allow up to 1,500 foreign doctors to practice in crisis areas.  Foreign doctors have long faced barriers to practicing in the US. Despite being willing to contribute to the country’s coronavirus response, many have been unable to do so, either because they have been shut out of American residency programs or because the immigration system stands in their way.  Physicians in the Conrad 30 program, which is designed to encourage foreign doctors to practice in underserved areas, can now go where they are needed without jeopardizing their visas or green cards. Klobuchar, along with a team of bipartisan lawmakers, had requested in April that the Trump administration lift restrictions on where Conrad 30 doctors can practice in order to bolster hospital staffing in areas hard-hit by the coronavirus.  “Doctors need to be able to act now to use their knowledge and training to save lives without fear of the loss of their immigration status,” the lawmakers wrote at the time. US Citizenship and Immigration Services did not immediately respond to requests for comment on the policy change Wednesday. Hospitals across the country are facing staffing shortages. New York City has asked former medical workers to come out of retirement to deal with the increased patient load. So has the Veterans Affairs medical system, which already has about 44,000 medical vacancies that it has been struggling to fill amid a competitive market. Washington, DC, has even been recruiting volunteers without any medical training. Despite these shortages, some for-profit hospitals have nonetheless been forced to lay off health care providers because they’re facing rising costs associated with treating coronavirus patients, including purchasing expensive equipment such as ventilators and additional personal protective equipment for staff, as well as a decline in revenue due in part to bans on elective procedures.  The US was projected to face a shortage of doctors even before the pandemic hit: The Association of American Medical Colleges had estimated that it could reach 46,900 to 121,900 physicians by 2032. And in rural areas, particularly in states such as Mississippi and Arkansas, doctors were already in short supply. The US health system relies heavily on immigrants, who make up 17 percent of all health care workers and more than one in four doctors. Every year, roughly 4,000 foreign doctors come to the US on J-1 visas for residencies at teaching hospitals, which rely on Medicare funding to pay their salaries. While most of those doctors would like to stay in the country after they complete their training, only about 1,500 of them are ultimately able to do so.  That’s because they are required to return to their home countries for at least two years upon completing their training in order to be eligible for an H-1B skilled worker visa or a green card, unless they can obtain one of a few sought-after waivers. The Conrad 30 program offers waivers to 30 doctors in every state who agree to practice where the government has designated a health care worker shortage, primarily in rural areas. Sen. Klobuchar has been pushing for legislation that would expand the program since at least 2013. That bill, which has been endorsed by the American Medical Association, would allow more than 30 waivers to be granted to physicians in a given state depending on need. Doctors can also obtain waivers through the Department of Health and Human Services by conducting medical research in a field that is of interest to the agency, or by practicing in underserved areas designated by the agency. But even for those who are able to obtain waivers, the process of applying for a green card can involve long waits, particularly for immigrants from India, which produces about one-third of all foreign doctors training in the US. There are per-country caps on the number of green cards issued annually, and India gets the same number of green cards as any other country, despite being one of the most populous nations in the world. (A bill that would have eliminated these country caps recently failed in the Senate.) Not only does the current system make it exceedingly difficult for doctors to stay in the US long term, but it also severely restricts where they can go in the country. Under the terms of both J-1 and H-1B visas, doctors can’t just change jobs. They usually can’t even moonlight at another hospital and take on extra hours.  Those in the Conrad 30 program now have some more freedom — but they still represent only a fraction of the foreign doctors currently in the US on these visas. At a time when doctors need flexibility to go to areas of the country hit hard by the coronavirus, these restrictions are a huge obstacle. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   In an interview with Time magazine published on Tuesday, President Trump’s adviser and son-in-law Jared Kushner made an odd claim. When asked if the November election could be postponed due to the coronavirus pandemic, Kushner said it would not be his decision, adding that “I’m not sure I can commit one way or the other, but right now” holding the election on schedule is “the plan.”  Kushner is hardly a reliable narrator, but it’s not like this concern arises in a vacuum. Not long after many Americans started social distancing in an effort to slow the spread of coronavirus, Ohio’s director of health, Dr. Amy Acton, delayed that state’s primary election, which was originally scheduled for March 17. She did so with the blessing of Republican Gov. Mike DeWine and the state Supreme Court. As a matter of law, the decision to delay was defensible, and there is no evidence that Acton or DeWine acted in bad faith — their efforts to postpone voting appear to be motivated by a genuine desire to slow the spread of the coronavirus pandemic. But this delay of a state primary election, among others, understandably triggered fears that other officials, potentially even Trump, might take advantage of the Ohio precedent to postpone or cancel November’s election if it appears that Trump is likely to be defeated.  The good news is that’s not allowed — or, at least, it’s not allowed unless Congress allows it to happen. A trio of federal laws set Election Day for presidential electors, senators, and US representatives as “the Tuesday next after the first Monday in November.” If Republicans want to change this law, they will need to go through the Democratic House. The 20th Amendment, moreover, provides that “the terms of the President and the Vice President shall end at noon on the 20th day of January.” Thus, even if the election were somehow canceled, Trump and Vice President Mike Pence’s terms would still expire as scheduled — although, as explained below, the question of who would succeed them is devilishly complicated. A more realistic threat, as the Nation’s Elie Mystal writes, is that state officials could use the extraordinary powers available to them during a major public health crisis to manipulate who is able to cast a ballot. It’s not hard to imagine a circumstance, for example, where the heavily Democratic counties of Miami-Dade and Broward, in Florida, are placed under a “shelter in place” order on Election Day, while residents of Republican counties in the panhandle are free to head to the polls. But an outright cancellation of the election is unlikely in the extreme. There are different sets of rules for congressional elections and presidential elections.  For congressional elections, the Constitution provides that “the times, places and manner of holding elections for Senators and Representatives, shall be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof; but the Congress may at any time by law make or alter such regulations, except as to the places of choosing Senators.” This means that both Congress and state lawmakers have control over when a congressional election is held, but Congress has the final word if there’s a disagreement. Congress has set the date of House and Senate elections for “the Tuesday next after the 1st Monday in November.” Neither Trump nor any state official has the power to alter this date. Only a subsequent act of Congress could do so. The picture for presidential elections is slightly more complicated. A federal statute does provide that “the electors of President and Vice President shall be appointed, in each	State, on the Tuesday next after the first Monday in November,” so states must choose members of the Electoral College on the same day as a congressional election takes place. That said, there is technically no constitutional requirement that a state must hold an election to choose members of the Electoral College. The Constitution provides that “each state shall appoint, in such manner as the Legislature thereof may direct, a number of electors, equal to the whole number of Senators and Representatives to which the State may be entitled in the Congress.” So a state legislature could theoretically decide to select presidential electors out of a hat. More worrisome, a legislature controlled by one party could potentially appoint loyal members of that party directly to the Electoral College. Yet while state lawmakers theoretically have this power, the idea that presidents are chosen by popular election is now so ingrained into our culture that it is highly unlikely any state legislature would try to appoint electors directly. By 1832, every US state except South Carolina used a popular election to choose members of the Electoral College. South Carolina came around in the 1860s. Moreover, once a state decides to hold an election to choose members of the Electoral College, all voters must be afforded equal status. As the Supreme Court explained in Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections (1966), “once the franchise is granted to the electorate, lines may not be drawn which are inconsistent with the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.” Additionally, even if a state did decide to appoint electors directly, that would require the state to enact a law changing its method of selecting members of the Electoral College. Several crucial swing states, including Wisconsin, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and North Carolina, have Democratic governors who could veto such legislation. All of which is a long way of saying that the risk that an election will be outright canceled — or that a state may try to take the power to remove President Trump away from its people — is exceedingly low. Let’s presume, for just a moment, that the election does not happen as scheduled, for whatever reason. Who does that leave in charge? It turns out that the answer to this question is surprisingly complicated, and it may turn on whether at least one state manages to name individuals to the Electoral College. Buckle up. This is about to get really deep into the constitutional weeds. The 12th Amendment provides that after the members of the Electoral College are chosen, those electors shall meet and cast their ballots, and “the person having the greatest number of votes for President, shall be the President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed.” It’s unclear what happens if only some states hold the presidential election as scheduled, while others fail to appoint electors at all, but the 12th Amendment’s text (“a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed”) suggests that the total number of electors needed to choose a president declines if some states do not appoint anyone to the Electoral College. If only 100 electors are appointed, 51 electoral votes could potentially be enough to choose a president. Needless to say, this quirk of the Constitution’s text gives every state an incentive to hold their election. If a bloc of red states delays the election, while blue states do not, Republicans could effectively forfeit the Electoral College vote. But let’s say that no one wins a majority of the electors. If that happens, the power to choose a president falls to the House — but with a twist. If the House is called upon to choose a president, it must choose one of the three candidates who received the most electoral votes. Moreover, each state’s congressional delegation has only one vote, and “a majority of all the states shall be necessary to a choice.” While Democrats have a substantial majority in the US House as a whole, Republicans control a majority of the House seats in 26 states — just enough to choose a president. That said, this number could easily change. In many states, one party controls only one or two seats more than the other. If a handful of House members are incapacitated due to coronavirus, that could potentially alter the outcome of a House vote to choose the president. Now let’s shift gears to a scenario where no members of the Electoral College are appointed. In this scenario, the House cannot choose a president because the 12th Amendment requires it to choose from among the three candidates who receive the most electoral votes. Under the 20th Amendment, “the terms of the President and the Vice President shall end at noon on the 20th day of January, and the terms of Senators and Representatives at noon on the 3d [sic] day of January.” So, if no one is elected to replace these officials, Trump and Pence cease to be elected officials the minute their terms expire on January 20. Members of the House serve two-year terms, so all members of the House will cease to be representatives on January 3; one-third of senators’ terms also expire on that date. Ordinarily, if the presidency and vice presidency are both vacant at the same time, the office falls to the speaker of the House. But if there is no election, there will be no speaker when Trump and Pence’s terms expire because all House seats will become vacant on January 3. If there is no president, vice president, or speaker, the next official in line is the president pro tempore of the Senate, a largely ceremonial position that is traditionally held by the most senior member of the majority party. Right now that is Sen. Chuck Grassley (R-IA). But wait! Recall that the terms of many senators also expire on January 3. As it turns out, 23 seats held by Republicans and only 12 seats held by Democrats are up for election this year, so if no election is held, Democrats will have a majority in the Senate once these seats become vacant. Which would mean that Senate Democrats would be able to choose a new president pro tempore. If they follow the tradition of choosing the most senior member of their caucus, that would place Sen. Patrick Leahy (D-VT) next in line for the presidency. Things actually get even more complicated from here. The 17th Amendment permits state governors to name temporary senators to vacant seats, but not all states allow their governors to do so. It’s also not immediately clear who would be the governor of many states if no election takes place in 2020, because much of the line of succession in those states could be rendered vacant as well. In any event, if you’ve read this far, your eyes are probably glazing over by now. The quirks of presidential succession provide fodder for constitutional lawyers to chew over, but, at the end of the day, the federal government’s power flows from the consent of the people. We allow our leaders to govern because we trust that they’ve been selected in a constitutionally valid process. And we trust that process because it is, at least, vaguely comprehensible. If someone starts calling themselves “president” because they were chosen by a subset of a Senate that is missing a third of its members, a likely outcome is civil unrest — especially in a nation that is already on edge because of the extraordinary measures needed to check the spread of a pandemic. In the exceedingly unlikely event that the 2020 election is canceled, the result isn’t likely to be an extended term for President Trump. The most likely result is chaos.President Donald Trump has given up on a coordinated federal response to the coronavirus pandemic, preferring to juke the stats and argue that the country is overcounting deaths (even though the data pretty clearly demonstrates that the opposite is true). What’s frustrating about this is that although the pandemic presents difficult policy problems, they are not insurmountable. Multiple countries have suppressed the coronavirus and significantly curbed the rate of new infections. America’s leading biological and social scientists say there is plenty the US can do here, too. New: President Trump has complained to advisers about the way coronavirus deaths are being calculated, suggesting the real numbers are actually lower — and a number of his senior aides share this view, according to sources w direct knowledge. w @sam_baker  https://t.co/n9Fs6J8oSi We’re just not trying. We’re not doing things that have worked in Asia, and we’re also not trying bold new ideas that American experts have dreamed up. We’re underresourced in combating the virus but have millions of people unemployed. And we’re worried about the economic toll of social distancing, but we’re not enacting economic relief measures that are equal to the scale of the problem. Here are seven ideas collected from the work of dozens of experts in multiple fields that, if combined, would attack the pandemic from multiple directions simultaneously — aiming to make it safer and more sustainable to go about our lives, speed the development of a vaccine, reduce caseloads to manageable levels, and alleviate economic suffering. Wearing masks is really important for reducing coronavirus transmission. A study by a team of five researchers out of Hong Kong and several European universities calculates that if 80 percent of a population can be persuaded to don masks, that would cut transmission levels to one-twelfth of what you’d have in a mask-less society. Widespread use of masks is likely part of the reason Japan’s coronavirus outbreak has been mild thus far, and grassroots mobilization starting with masks is almost universally seen as part of the Hong Kong success story. For the broad population, the key fact is that while wearing a mask does little to protect the wearer from the risk of getting infected, it does a lot to prevent the risk that the wearer spreads the virus to other people. Consequently, an interdisciplinary Yale team featuring biologists, medical doctors, economists, and public health specialists calculates that “the benefits of each additional cloth mask worn by the public are conservatively in the $3,000-$6,000 range due to their impact in slowing the spread of the virus.” And the benefits of professional-grade masks for health care workers may be even higher. The big problem is that, months into the crisis, the US continues to be afflicted by shortages of N95 respirators for medical personnel, never mind ordinary Americans. The situation has improved since early March, but not by nearly enough. A huge barrier to increasing production of either kind of mask is that nobody knows how long high levels of demand will last. Prestige Ameritech, a Texas-based company and the largest American manufacturer of surgical masks in the United States, thought the surge in demand associated with the H1N1 flu pandemic in 2009 would be a godsend. But in a recent NPR interview, co-owner Michael Bowen recalls that efforts to scale up rapidly during that crisis nearly killed the company. “We hired a lot of people and ramped up,” he told NPR’s Mary Louise Kelly. “And then we nearly went bankrupt afterward. We laid off 150 people and nearly went out of business. You know, it’s not like flipping on a switch. It’s building machines. It’s hiring people. It’s training people. That’s the issue.” Caleb Watney from the R Street Institute and Alec Stapp from the Progressive Policy Institute suggest avoiding this situation with an idea that will recur several times on this list: The federal government should agree to pay above the pre-crisis market rate and guarantee that it will buy lots of masks and lots of respirators for an extended period. That gives business owners confidence to invest. The risk is that the country ends up “wasting” money on unneeded equipment if things end up going better than expected. But surplus equipment can be stockpiled so the US doesn’t get caught short in the next pandemic, or can be donated to lower-income countries that don’t have the financial capacity to engage in massive purchase guarantees. The science of developing safe and effective vaccines is difficult. But over and above the scientific issues, the process of demonstrating that a vaccine is safe and effective to the satisfaction of the Food and Drug Administration is time-consuming. We can speed it up. A conventional phase three trial involves recruiting a very large sample of test subjects. Some of them get a vaccine (the safety of which has already been demonstrated in smaller trials), and the rest get a placebo. Then they’re told to go out and live life as usual, including normal efforts to not get sick. Because it’s fairly unlikely that any particular person will get sick on any particular day, it takes months to gather statistically meaningful information about the vaccine’s effectiveness. If it is effective, then you need to start manufacturing doses that will inevitably be scarce at first — short-term demand is sky high, but nobody wants to invest in manufacturing facilities that will be mostly idle in a year. Bioethicist Nir Eyal, epidemiologist Marc Lipsitch, and vaccine specialist Peter G. Smith advocate speeding up that process with human challenge trials. In a challenge trial, you deliberately expose the test subjects to the virus, allowing you to obtain data much faster and get away with a smaller number of participants. The downside is that a large share of people in your placebo group are going to get sick, and if the vaccine proves ineffective, people in your treatment group will get sick too. But the advocacy group 1 Day Sooner has lined up thousands of potential volunteers, and with reasonable safety measures — such as making sure you enroll young people with healthy hearts and lungs — the risks are relatively low and the benefits of speed are immense. But there is still the problem of manufacturing. Bill Gates advocates spending billions of dollars to manufacture promising vaccines before they’re approved. This means money will be wasted on making doses of vaccines that turn out not to work. The upside is that many doses could be available soon after approval does come, saving many lives and carrying huge economic benefits. A team of economics professors — Susan Athey, Michael Kremer, Christopher Snyder, and Alex Tabarrok — pushed this logic even further, calling on the US government to create an advance market commitment that guarantees “to spend about $70 billion on new vaccines — enough to make direct investments to support capacity installation or to repurpose capacity and to pay, say, $100 per person for the first 300 million people vaccinated.” The idea is that it’s hard to anticipate logistical snags and supply-chain bottlenecks. But if you commit in advance to spend lavishly on buying the finished product, you ensure that businesses start thinking now about how to create large-scale production and win the race to get those doses flowing. South Korea had one of the biggest Covid-19 outbreaks early on, but it rapidly developed enough testing capacity to identify and isolate positive cases. In China, authorities have responded to the identification of six new cases in Wuhan with a crash program to test up to 11 million people in 10 days, by some accounts — after which all positive cases, whether symptomatic or not, can be isolated. Widespread testing makes the pandemic much easier to manage. The Trump White House recognizes this implicitly, and it’s able to function with a reasonable approximation of normalcy precisely because the president, the vice president, and their top aides are all tested frequently. Because of that, White House staffers are reasonably certain they’re not infected and thus can do their work and even travel around the country. And thanks to frequent testing, if someone does become infected, they’ll be isolated rapidly and the epidemic won’t spread (as happened just last week with one of Trump’s personal valets and Vice President Mike Pence’s press secretary). Paul Romer is an economist rather than an epidemiologist, but some calculations he’s made help illustrate the power of widespread testing. In a simulation that you can see for yourself on Romer’s website, he shows the virus could successfully be repressed by testing every American once every two weeks and isolating the positive cases, even with no additional contact tracing or social distancing. In fact, it works even if you posit that the test returns false negatives 20 percent of the time. In the real world, the US is nowhere near doing 20 million tests per day. It’s also not forced to rely on tests as the sole countermeasure against the coronavirus. But the country should increase its testing capacity nonetheless. A secondary problem, as Romer has explored in tandem with bioethicist and medical doctor Zeke Emanuel, is that could be testing the wrong people. The vast majority of current Covid-19 testing in the US is being used for diagnostic purposes, to tell if someone who’s sick is infected with the virus. This may have made sense in February, when lots of people had the sniffles and few people had Covid-19. But right now, you don’t need a test if you’re sick; rather, you should stay home and self-isolate — unless you’re worried you might need to be hospitalized, in which case you need a pulse oximeter to test your blood oxygen levels, not an RNA test for the virus. Romer and Emanuel argue that as the US does more tests, it should “focus them on the people most likely to spread Covid-19, not sick patients.” As my family’s dedicated grocery shopper, I am more likely to spread Covid-19 than my wife is. But I’m less likely to spread it than the people who work in the supermarkets, who in turn are less likely to spread it than the people who work in hospitals. For any given volume of tests, the priority should be on ensuring detection of cases among people who, if they are positive, are very likely to spread the infection to large numbers of other people. That will get us the most “bang for the buck” in terms of reducing infections. Then, as test capacity grows, more people can be tested.  Shifting from diagnostic testing to surveillance testing also helps with the problem of scaling up tests.  “Imagine a world in which the only way to get a soda is to get your doctor to write a prescription,” Romer writes. “It costs $20 per can. Your insurance company pays. The economy produces about 100,000 sodas each day. If you lived in this world, do you think you could get people to scale up the production of soda to a level of millions of cans per day? It would be a challenge, but not because it is hard to produce and distribute soda.” His point is that for all the talk about specific bottlenecks to testing — swabs, reagents, etc. — the underlying malady is that the diagnostic business model doesn’t give anyone a real way to get paid for solving the problems of massively increased test capacity. A team of Rutgers researchers has received emergency FDA approval for a saliva-based test that doesn’t require swabs or trained health care personnel. But “no one has proposed a way to pay the researchers at Rutgers, or their peers in comparable laboratories located throughout the United States, for the tests they could supply.”  As in the PPE and vaccine cases, guaranteed purchase could make a huge difference. The federal government should be willing to pay for tens of millions of tests per day for a year. If America’s labs never get to that point, then at least we tried. And if the country ends up suppressing the virus surprisingly quickly and end up with too many tests, then it’s a small price to pay.  Romer’s idea of suppression through mass testing is an appealing theoretical construct.  But real-world suppression success stories have relied on a mix of ample testing with robust contact tracing. Asian countries, including Singapore and Korea, have been doing this with a variety of digital tools as well as old-fashioned elbow grease. The basic idea is that if someone working in, say, food delivery gets sick, you want to quickly track down everyone they’ve been in contact with — coworkers, household members, customers — because you know those people are at elevated risk for infection.  This basic kind of work has long been ongoing in the United States, but it’s mostly focused on HIV and other sexually transmitted infections. Dealing with Covid-19 would require doing it on a much larger scale. The Center for Health Security at Johns Hopkins recommends hiring 100,000 people to do this work for state and local agencies. Tom Frieden, a former director of the CDC, is calling for 300,000 tracers. That’s a lot of people, and it would cost a lot of money to pay them. But millions of people have lost their jobs recently in the United States, so it’s not as though the labor is genuinely unavailable.    The sheer scale of the pandemic, though, makes this daunting.  “I tend to be somewhat on the pessimistic side about contact tracing as a general control strategy,” Lipsitch told reporters on a call last week. “What we are pretty sure about is that contact tracing works well when you have relatively few cases, you have the resources to do it, and when you have even fewer cases that are unknown.” None of that currently applies in the US. But the key point about contact tracing is that, as with testing, you gain benefits on the margin. We’re a very long way from Romer’s 20 million tests per day, but every additional test performed helps get a handle on the outbreak, especially if the US is able to be intelligent about whom it tests. And every additional contact tracer lets us be more intelligent about how we use our tests. Working in tandem, more testing and more tracing can slow the spread of the disease. And they’d be even more effective if the country did more to isolate people who do test positive.  Another thing detailed contact tracing would let us do is speak more definitively to the question of how it is that people get sick in the first place. Right now we can’t do that, but we can look at studies from Asian countries that have done more extensive contact tracing and learn from them.  Muge Cevik, a virologist at the University of St. Andrews, did a helpful roundup of research from Asian countries, and paper after paper emphasizes that the attack rate within households is extremely high. A lot of people, in other words, are getting sick from roommates or family members.  New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s look at his state’s data paints a similar picture. Even though there’s an obvious sense in which people doing “essential” jobs are at elevated risk, older people who are staying home actually account for a larger share of cases. New data from New York state suggests that new cases are not primary occurring among people working in essential services but among older people at home. Although, one might need to be careful with this. pic.twitter.com/ea152QkONJ People staying home aren’t getting sick by magic, and transmission among people who are leaving the house is critical to keeping the epidemic running. But a key reason even serious social distancing efforts only bring case volumes down very slowly is that the virus spreads so easily inside households, meaning that one infection picked up at work could swiftly into two or three or four at home.  Current CDC guidelines call for infected people to “stay in a specific room and away from other people and pets in your home” and “use a separate bathroom.”  This is not practical in many cases. Not everyone has a large house and some people need ongoing care and attention. It also appears that the coronavirus could be spreading effectively through ducts, so it’s not clear that the CDC’s ideas would work even if rigorously applied. Regardless of the exact reason, the statistics signal it’s not working in practice.  Successful virus suppression strategies in Asian countries have all relied on one form or another of quarantining sick people (and sometimes their close contacts) outside the home so that transmission chains end sooner.  Even as the federal government does too little to suppress transmission of the virus and as many jurisdictions seem excessively eager to reopen businesses that could potentially be dangerous for transmission, significant swaths of the country are living through outdoor space closures that are not necessarily well-grounded in evidence.  In Washington, DC, where I live, many city-run parks are closed, along with the National Arboretum, Kenilworth Aquatic Gardens, and Fort Circle Park. Maryland has closed access to all beaches. And there seem to be endless rounds of wrangling on social media about whether too many people are out in this or that park in this or that city on a nice day.  Outdoor air is not magic, and it is possible to inhale droplets from another person’s mouth outside. But the evidence seems to indicate that outdoor transmission is not, in practice, a huge problem. A detailed study of public outdoor spaces in Wuhan, China, found “undetectable or very low” levels of virus everywhere they looked. A study of more than 1,000 confirmed Covid-19 cases in other Chinese cities could only document one case of outdoor transmission.  Former FDA chief Scott Gottlieb has stated that he wants states to encourage more business and social activity to happen outdoors.  Studies suggests activities held outdoors as temperatures warm pose lower covid risk than those done in confined indoor spaces. As we re-open, states should look to ease rules to allow more recreational, religious, and business activities to occur outside. https://t.co/6AVfr4TiMi Whether or not one goes that far, a few things seem clear:  Last but by no means least, letting people go outside can be helpful because it helps make restrictions on activities more socially and psychologically bearable. Current political debate has featured a fairly overwhelming emphasis on the idea of “opening up the economy,” but the government could actually do an enormous amount to cushion the economic blow by spending more money. But fiscal stimulus can’t replace the mental health benefits of fresh air and sunshine.  The recommendations on this list add up to a few hundred billion in total spending. That’s both a lot of money and a drop in the bucket compared to what Congress has already appropriated for coronavirus relief efforts. Given that the country could be contemplating a procession of five-figure death toll week over week, the case is strong for simply spending whatever it takes on genuinely useful suppression measures.  The bigger issue comes in the opposite direction.  There is a perception, rightly or wrongly, that social distancing measures are inflicting horrendous pain on the economy and state governments are feeling intense pressure from business owners to lift restrictions. In reality, it’s far from clear that the restrictions (rather than the pandemic itself) are the actual economic problem. Regardless, the view of many leading economists is that there is a better way to alleviate economic problems: Spend more money.  Right now, the interest rate the federal government pays on its bonds is less than the expected rate of inflation. This means that even as debt reaches eye-popping levels, it’s actually relatively affordable for the government to go deeper into debt, and there’s little reason to let financial concerns per se stop the country from doing what’s right for public health.  Claudia Sahm, a macroeconomist with the Washington Center on Equitable Growth and a former staff economist at the Federal Reserve, emphasizes that Congress “must commit to stay the course and provide relief until we are all back on track,” which means “a trigger based on economic conditions to determine when the relief can be phased out” rather than an arbitrary time limit.  There are two big buckets where more money would be helpful. One is Sahm’s longstanding proposal to simply send money to everyone on a regular basis as long as economic help is needed. The second major bucket of need is fiscal help for state and local governments that don’t have the federal government’s borrowing power. Despite Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell’s efforts to characterize this as a “blue state bailout,” all states like having money. If GOP-dominated states don’t want to use their extra money to finance state spending, they can always cut taxes. The point is, there’s little reason for states to be running out of money when the federal government can borrow in essence for free. Last but by no means least, we need to do something to support America’s small businesses. The Paycheck Protection Program is too complicated and prescriptive to work. In a policy brief for the Economic Innovation Group, Adam Ozimek and John Lettieri propose giving zero-interest loans equal to up to the lesser of $5 million or 200 percent of 2019 operating expenses. This could help ensure that no business with a realistic long-term future needs to close due to a pandemic-related fall in demand, meaning that restrictions could stay in place as long as is prudent without jeopardizing entrepreneurs’ livelihoods or imperiling the long-term structure of the American economy.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Here’s the truth: Lockdown is economically ruinous, and America can’t sustain it from now until a vaccine. And you don’t have to take it from me. “You can’t be in lockdown for 18 months,” says Dr. Michael Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy. “We’ll destroy society as we know it, and we don’t know what we’ll accomplish with it.” But this is also the truth: Reopening without a way to control the coronavirus will be lethal to both human life and economic growth, as an escalating death toll will force states back into lockdown. “We can’t just let the virus go,” Osterholm says. “Lots of people will die and it’ll shut down our health system, not just for Covid patients, but for anyone with a health problem. “What we need,” he continues, “is a plan.” It is shocking. More than 60 days after President Trump declared a national emergency over the novel coronavirus, there is still no clear national plan for what comes next. “The lockdown is not meant to be a permanent state of affairs; it’s intended to be a giant pause button that buys you time to get ready for the next phase,” Jeremy Konyndyk, of the Center for Global Development think tank, says.  But the Trump administration wasted the pause. Over the past two months, the US should have built the testing, contact tracing, and quarantine infrastructure necessary to safely end lockdown and transition back to normalcy — as many of its peer countries did. Instead, Trump has substituted showmanship for action, playing the president on TV but refusing to do the actual job. He has both dominated the airwaves and abdicated his duties. As a result, America’s progress against the coronavirus has stalled, even as the lockdown has driven the economy into crisis.   I am more sympathetic than some to the protesters, and others, who want to see states reopen, who believe the cost of lockdown overwhelms the apparent benefits. The economic agony is real, and they have been given no way to imagine its end, no clear understanding of the purpose behind their sacrifice. But the awful choice they feel we face — between endless lockdown or reckless reopening — needs to be understood for what it is: the failure of our political leaders to create a safer, middle path. “What we want to avoid in the reopening process is creating the conditions that led to us having to stay home in the first place,” writes Caitlin Rivers of the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. That was the Trump administration’s job — either they needed to do it or they needed to support and empower the states to do it.  They have failed. It is the most profound and complete failure of presidential leadership in modern history.  We are used to policy debates revolving around whether the administration has chosen the right or wrong plan. You could imagine that being the case here.  There are, at this point, a slew of reopening plans from think tanks and academics, economists and epidemiologists, liberals and conservatives. They differ in important, controversial ways. There are proposals that go all-in on mass testing. There are others that imagine a vast architecture of digital surveillance. Some rely on states; others emphasize the federal role. And within the plans, details worth debating abound: What level of risk is acceptable? How should recommendations vary between dense cities and rural areas? Who counts as an essential worker? How do we prevent mass unemployment? What is technologically possible?  The Trump administration could have chosen any of these plans or produced its own. But it didn’t. The closest it has come is a set of guidelines for states to consult when reopening. You can read them yourself at the White House’s “Opening America” landing page. The guidelines are not quite a plan, but they are at least a framework: They call for states to reopen when caseloads have fallen for 14 days, when hospitals can test all health care workers continually, when contact tracing architecture is up and running. President Trump, however, shows neither familiarity with nor support for his own guidelines. He routinely calls on states to reopen though they have not met the criteria his administration suggests. For instance, his series of tweets calling on right-wing protesters to “LIBERATE!” Michigan, Virginia, and Minnesota from stay-at-home orders contradicted his administration’s guidance and created a distraction for state officials trying to manage a crisis.  Americans don’t have a functional president, but we have someone playing a dysfunctional president on TV, and he’s keeping other leaders from successfully doing their jobs.  Some of Trump’s allies have tried to frame the president’s policy response — or lack thereof — as a principled commitment to small-government conservatism. “He has given pride of place to federalism and private enterprise — lauding the patriotism and proficiency of our fantastic governors and mayors, our incredible business leaders and genius companies,” wrote Hudson’s Christopher DeMuth in the Wall Street Journal.  This is creative but unconvincing. Harvard’s Safra Center for Ethics has put together a detailed road map advocating for a federalist approach and showing how one might work. If states are to take the lead, they argue, the federal government has to support them in three ways: coordinate the supply chain so states don’t end up in a ruinous bidding war against each other, issue the debt necessary to backstop state and local spending as revenues collapse, and deploy the federal government’s vast scientific resources to ensure the best available evidence is being processed and disseminated to the states quickly and clearly.  But none of that is happening now. Instead, the authors write, “today disharmony reigns, as states compete for the supplies and personnel necessary to meet the exigencies of the moment.” Diplomatically, they omit any discussion of the president’s repeated efforts to foment political unrest against the governors he dislikes. Trump’s approach to state needs has been transactional, not philosophical. He has been explicit in his belief that his administration should only engage with the governors that have been sufficiently politically supportive of him. At a press conference, Trump said he told Vice President Mike Pence, “don’t call the governor of Washington. You’re wasting your time with him. Don’t call the woman in Michigan.’” In this, as in so much else, the Trump administration is maneuvering around the president’s grudges and impulses.  States, too, are having to maneuver around the Trump administration to secure their response. In a remarkable admission, Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan, a Republican, told the Washington Post that after purchasing 500,000 tests from South Korea, he made sure the plane bearing the tests landed under the protection of state troopers because he feared the federal government would take for itself the tests he had fought to procure. The move reportedly enraged Trump, who “saw Maryland’s deal with South Korea as a bid to embarrass the president.”  To state the obvious: This is not a president who believes in federalism. It is, in truth, incoherence all the way down. And I do mean all the way.  As my colleague Matthew Yglesias has argued, the White House — and thus the country — has not even chosen a goal. The Trump administration has never decided whether the aim is “mitigation,” in which we slow the virus’s spread so the health system doesn’t get overwhelmed, or “suppression,” in which we try to eradicate the virus so as to save lives. It is possible, as Thomas Friedman writes, that the US is actually pursuing neither goal; instead, officials are following Sweden’s laissez-faire approach to the virus, and Trump “just hasn’t told the country or his coronavirus task force or maybe even himself.” This, then, is the state of things: The White House does not have a plan, it does not have a framework, it does not have a philosophy, and it does not have a goal. That is not because these things are impossible. At this point, there are dozens of plans floating around and dozens of governments offering models it could choose from. Germany’s response has been a success, and I’m sure officials would share the lessons they’ve learned. In South Korea, professional baseball is restarting, and in Taiwan, there have been about a dozen new Covid-19 cases in the month of May so far.  It is not that the president is doing the wrong thing — he is doing basically nothing. But he has combined a substantive passivity with a showman’s desire to dominate the narrative and a political street fighter’s obsession with settling scores, so he is making the job of governors and mayors harder, neither giving them what they need to beat the virus nor leaving them to make their own decisions free from his interference and criticism. The result, as David Wallace-Wells writes at New York magazine, is that “the country has accomplished essentially none of the necessary preparatory work required to safely begin to reopen and return to some semblance of normal life.”  Americans have made tremendous sacrifices to buy their government time, and that time has been wasted. That is why we are left with an increasingly polarized, and polarizing, debate between endless lockdowns and reckless reopening: The government has failed to do what functional governments in other countries have done and create a better option.  “It’s like the Lewis Carroll line, ‘If you don’t know where you’re going, any road will get you there,’” Osterholm says. “Well, I don’t know where we’re going.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.When reporter BrieAnna Frank showed up to a Honeywell plant last week in Arizona to cover President Donald Trump’s visit, she was sure to wear a mask. Masks were the reason the president was there: The former aerospace plant in Phoenix has pivoted to producing them in recent months amid a nationwide shortage of personal protective equipment (PPE). But the dozen or so people who had gathered outside the facility to cheer on the president were not there to support masks. They had their faces uncovered, Frank told Vox. As she approached members of the crowd to interview them, the conversation quickly got heated. “They started to yell that me and the other journalists there were trying to incite fear and panic and paranoia” by wearing masks, said Frank, who works for the Arizona Republic. One man in particular seemed to take issue with the male journalists wearing masks, she recalled. “It’s submission, it’s muzzling yourself, it looks weak,” he said, “especially for men.” 9:32 am - myself + other journalists here are being harassed for wearing masks. One man says: “It’s submission, it’s muzzling yourself, it looks weak - especially for men.”We’re being accused of fear-mongering, not knowing anything + being “pieces of shit.”   @azcentral “I felt that it was a statement that people should know about,” said Frank, whose tweets about the encounter went viral. To the crowd in front of the factory, she said, “Masks clearly symbolized something beyond, ‘I am trying to protect my health.’” They’re not alone. Trump himself declined to wear a mask while being photographed at the plant, though he claims he wore one “backstage.” Vice President Mike Pence was criticized for failing to wear a mask during a tour of the Mayo Clinic in April. And when armed protesters showed up at the Michigan statehouse on April 30 to protest stay-at-home orders amid the coronavirus pandemic, many were mask-free. One shouting, bare-faced man who was photographed at the rally later said he was “not at all” worried about the virus and would never wear a mask — “ever.” Since the pandemic began, the issue of wearing masks has further exposed America’s racial and gender prejudices. Earlier on, wearing masks was associated with Asian countries and often dismissed because of racist assumptions about those countries. Then, as many cities began to require residents to wear masks, police began targeting black men for covering their faces, profiling them as criminals rather than as people trying to abide by health guidelines. And for a certain subset of mostly white, conservative men, not wearing a mask seems to have become a hallmark of manliness. For unmasked protesters like the ones in Michigan, “There’s an assumption of a kind of invincibility that is tied to this idea of white masculinity,” Jonathan Metzl, a professor of sociology and psychiatry at Vanderbilt University and the author of Dying of Whiteness: How the Politics of Racial Resentment Is Killing America’s Heartland, told Vox. It’s not just men — Frank noticed many women among the unmasked Trump supporters gathered at the Honeywell plant. And, of course, many men are happy to follow the recommendation from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to cover their faces in public. Still, a narrative has emerged on the right that wearing a mask is weak and refusing to wear one is somehow strong. And that narrative could put everyone at risk. “One thing about [being] macho is being fearless,” Melanye Price, a political science professor at Prairie View A&M University, told Vox. “But that fearlessness comes at a cost for every single person around you.” Long before the pandemic hit, masks were common in East Asian countries, where they’re seen as a simple way to protect yourself (and others) from disease, as Refinery29’s Connie Wang wrote in March. Wuhan, China, where the coronavirus outbreak began, started requiring them in January. The US was much slower to recommend masks for the general public, but in early April — with confirmed coronavirus cases jumping by the day — the CDC recommended that everyone wear a cloth mask in certain public settings. Some cities, like New York and Los Angeles, began mandating the wearing of masks in certain settings as well. Like much about the coronavirus, the impact of wearing masks on transmission isn’t entirely clear. But many experts believe that even cloth masks can offer some degree of protection for wearers — and perhaps greater protection for the people around them. The virus seems to spread “when germ-containing droplets make it into a person’s mouth, nose, or eyes,” as Vox’s German Lopez previously reported, and it’s true that “masks stop people from spreading their own droplets.” If everyone wears a mask — including those who are asymptomatic but may still be carrying the virus — it could help halt the spread of Covid-19. Most Americans appear to be on board with the CDC’s recommendation. In a Morning Consult poll (conducted from April 7 to 9), 72 percent of respondents said they planned to start wearing a face mask in public places over the next two weeks. Others, however, have chafed at the CDC’s advice. As people around the country protest their state’s shelter-in-place orders, many have appeared in public without masks. One example is the protesters in Michigan, which has become a hotbed of resistance to social distancing restrictions — a defiance Trump has encouraged via his tweets about “liberating” Michigan and other states. And on April 30, hundreds of protesters gathered at the state capitol in Lansing, some of them armed and many of them eschewing masks and standing close together in violation of social distancing guidelines, according to Reuters. One of the mask-less protesters was Brian Cash, who was photographed shouting during the event. He later told the Detroit Free Press he believes the coronavirus was “intentionally released” by the Chinese government and that the state’s stay-at-home order is useless because people still go to grocery stores and pharmacies. “So what is the point of staying at home?” he asked. The resistance to masks has also found support within the Trump administration. Pence, the head of the federal government’s coronavirus response, said he did not wear a mask while touring the Mayo Clinic in April because he is tested for Covid-19 regularly. (He later backpedaled and said he “should have” worn one.) But a mask-less Pence attended two events in Iowa on May 8, the same day his press secretary tested positive for the virus, according to the Intercept. At one of those events, CEOs were reportedly asked to remove their masks before joining Pence onstage. Trump, meanwhile, has consistently appeared in public without a mask. After he was photographed without one at the Honeywell plant in Arizona, he said he had worn one “backstage,” outside the view of cameras. “But they said you didn’t need it, so, I didn’t need it,” he went on. “And by the way, if you noticed, nobody else had it on that was in the group.” Aides tested positive for the virus days later, and staffers have since been asked to wear masks on White House grounds, according to the Washington Post. Trump, however, is still unlikely to wear a mask himself, aides say. The Trump administration’s behavior around masks has gendered overtones. For Trump and Pence, not wearing a mask may be a way to project a macho image, Metzl said, playing into “tropes of indestructibility.” “Appearing to play it safe contradicts a core principle of masculinity: show no weakness,” wrote social sciences professor Peter Glick at Scientific American. “Defying experts’ warnings about personal danger signals ‘I’m a tough guy, bring it on.’” Trump’s messaging has also helped promote the idea that ignoring the risks of coronavirus is the tough or strong thing to do. Despite warnings from public health experts about the dangers of reopening the country too early, he said at the Honeywell plant that “the people of our country should think of themselves as warriors” because “our country has to open.” Such militaristic, tough-guy messaging, along with Trump’s refusal to wear a mask, may encourage ordinary people — especially men — to minimize the risk of coronavirus for the sake of appearing manly. While the refusal to wear masks isn’t an exclusively male phenomenon — a Michigan woman was arrested last month after police said she attacked a grocery store employee who told her to leave because she wasn’t wearing a mask — there is some evidence that men may view mask recommendations with more skepticism than women. In the April Morning Consult poll, 76 percent of women said they planned to wear a face mask in public over the next two weeks, compared with 67 percent of men. Though Trump’s narrative around the virus may be reinforcing gender stereotypes, the issue of masks is revealing Americans’ racial biases as well. While white men have been able to appear in public without masks — and with guns — as part of a protest, black men have been targeted by police, both for wearing and for not wearing masks. In Philadelphia, officers were caught on video forcibly removing a black man from a bus for not covering his face, just one day after the city began requiring it, Fabiola Cineas reported for Vox in April. And a police officer in Miami handcuffed and arrested Armen Henderson, a black doctor who tests homeless people for Covid-19, as he loaded equipment into a van in front of his home — while wearing a mask. Black Americans often have to engage in “social signaling” to make white people feel comfortable in public spaces, said Price, the political science professor. “You say good morning first, you smile first,” she said. “None of that can be done with masks.” White people often already perceive black people as dangerous or not belonging in public places, Price said. “But a black body with a mask is something that somehow expresses even more danger.” Meanwhile, for white protesters like those in Michigan, not wearing a mask may signal a kind of immunity from danger — or at least a perceived immunity. As white Americans, they’re unlikely to encounter the same kind of police brutality that black people face when they engage in protest. “Imagine 10 black men and rifles walking up to any state capitol in the United States,” Price said. “They would be shot before they ever made it up the steps.” But congregating in crowds without masks is also a statement of perceived immunity from the virus, Metzl said. The unmasked protesters seemed to be sending the message that “nothing’s going to happen to me because of my whiteness,” he explained. “If you thought you were really going to get the coronavirus, you wouldn’t act like that.” The fact that black and Latinx Americans in many communities are disproportionately likely to become infected and die of Covid-19 may be influencing such attitudes. “I think for a lot of the country, people feel like this is something that’s happening to someone else,” Metzl said. Obviously, the feeling of invincibility that leads protesters to avoid masks could backfire if they get sick. Pence and Trump may also find themselves rethinking their stance in the coming days since White House officials tested positive — Pence himself is reportedly keeping his distance from Trump and other staffers to avoid potentially exposing them. But the especially disturbing thing about refusing to wear a mask is that, while it may seem like an expression of toughness, it actually increases the risk to others more than yourself, Metzl said. While some may feel that not wearing a mask expresses their own invincibility, “You could also think about this in terms of all the other people you’re putting at risk by not wearing a mask,” he added — your family, friends, colleagues, the rest of society. The failure to wear one is “symbolic of a kind of loss of a bigger common sense of responsibility to each other.” Remedying that loss is not going to be as simple as sending the message that “tough guys wear masks,” Metzl said. (Washington Post humor columnist Alexandra Petri has suggested a tagline for a potential “Masks For Him” line of accessories: “We put the ‘mask’ in ‘toxic maskulinity.’”) Rather, the country has to look at what the current mask debate says about racism and other prejudices. “What we need is a much more concerted effort to address the bigger issues that are represented by masks,” Metzl said. For the Arizona Republic’s Frank, the confrontation over masks outside the Honeywell plant is part of a wider narrative around the virus. She recalled another incident in which a female reporter was accosted, this time by a woman, for wearing a mask. “I do think that what happened to all of us out there in the field on Tuesday is indicative of a larger issue” with how masks are viewed in the US, Frank said. But for her, wearing a mask is about one thing: public health. Frank lives with her mother, a nurse who treats Covid-19 patients. “I try to be really careful,” she told the people gathered outside the plant. “I try to protect myself and those around me.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Dr. Anthony Fauci has become one of the most recognizable faces of America’s coronavirus response, as a member of the White House coronavirus task force and director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. But it was an earlier crisis that shaped his career — and that’s crucial to understanding his position today. As the above video shows, Dr. Fauci’s involvement in the AIDS crisis, from the virus’s discovery to the present day, has affected the course of his career and the way the disease is treated around the world. That history, in turn, informs how we learn about and treat the coronavirus in the US today. In addition to scientific progress, AIDS also necessitated bureaucratic changes in the government response to the disease. By negotiating these challenges, Dr. Fauci secured his place in the public health system and changed the way AIDS was treated. Watch the above video to learn how. You can find this video and all of Vox’s videos on YouTube, including our coverage of the coronavirus. And if you’re interested in supporting our video journalism, you can become a member of the Vox Video Lab on YouTube. A topic as broad as the AIDS crisis, even narrowed to Dr. Fauci’s involvement, could have an endless reading list, from primary sources like ACT UP’s historical archive or one of Dr. Fauci’s early lectures on AIDS. However, these books provide particularly useful context on a complex story. This book provides an exhaustive tour of the AIDS crisis from a drug research perspective, with extensive coverage of the NIH and FDA. This book extends beyond the 1980s period covered in this video to explore the long search for an AIDS vaccine. It’s highly useful as a history of pharmaceutical and government efforts. This book, and the documentary of the same name, describe the activist history of the crisis with plenty of research into the government response. Written by a former NIH history director and Dr. Fauci, this is something like an “official” history of the AIDs crisis, from the beginning to the book’s 2012 publication date. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  Many state governors have seen their popularity — and approval ratings — soar since the start of the coronavirus pandemic. But according to a new poll, how popular individual governors are seems to depend on how quickly they took steps to prevent the spread of the virus and whether they’ve thus far delayed reopening. A Washington Post-Ipsos poll of 8,086 US adults, with a margin of error of 1 percentage point, showed that state leaders like Democratic California Gov. Gavin Newsom and Republican Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine — who each took swift action to shut down their state’s economies quickly and have prioritized public health throughout the pandemic — are incredibly popular in their home states. Almost 8 in 10 (79 percent) of adults in California approved of Newsom’s handling of the pandemic, while 86 percent of Ohioans approve of DeWine’s handling of the pandemic.  On the flip side, of the dozen states included in the polling, people appear less happy with some Republican governors who acted slowly in response to the virus and are now rushing to reopen the economy. In Georgia, Republican Gov. Brian Kemp was one of the last governors to shut down for public health, and he’s now taken the lead among states looking to reopen. His coronavirus response approval rating sits at just 39 percent. Likewise, in Florida, 60 percent of adults give Gov. Ron DeSantis a positive rating, but one that’s far below his more cautious conservative counterpart, DeWine. In short, the April 27 to May 4 poll seems to indicate that whether constituents approve of a governor’s handling of the pandemic is much less about partisanship than whether people think their governor is acting in the public good to prevent the spread of the virus. People are still more scared of reopening too quickly and risking a second wave of new Covid-19 infections and are punishing more aggressive governors for trying to reopen too soon. Nearly half (48 percent) of Floridians, 59 percent of Texans, and 65 percent of Georgians said their states are reopening too quickly. This helps explain why Democratic governors, despite facing widely covered anti-shelter-at-home-order protests, have mostly remained popular or seen their approval ratings surge throughout the pandemic. Overall, governors are drawing majority support from both major parties, with 71 percent of adults approving of their governors’ performances. In contrast, President Donald Trump is much less popular than the average governor, drawing only 43 percent approval — though it divides sharply along partisan lines. More than 8 in 10 Republicans approve of the president’s handling of the crisis, and 9 in 10 Democrats disapprove. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.This month, Missouri allowed concerts to resume for the first time since the state’s stay-at-home order started at the beginning of April. Yes, concerts, where people usually pack together, breathing the same air. Apparently, the Missouri government believes it will be safe if people attending stand 6 feet apart.  It’s not just concerts: Under Gov. Mike Parson’s direction, all businesses in the state can resume operations, provided that employees and customers keep some distance between themselves. (The exception: St. Louis will remain in lockdown.) Meanwhile, the number of daily new positive cases is still trending upward in Missouri. What’s happening in Missouri is beginning to happen in many parts of the country even though most states still fail, as this New York Times interactive shows, to meet the White House’s criteria for doing so: having a downward trajectory of cases over a two-week span, along with increased testing capacity. It’s understandable that states want to open up. The pandemic has resulted in a painful and scary economic downturn; unemployment has spiked to 14.7 percent. There’s an emotional toll to social distancing, too: How many people haven’t seen their families in months, are severely lonely, or are desperate for physical contact? But is the public health situation really all that different than when lockdowns began in March? According to epidemiologists, no. Although the situation varies from place to place, now, in general, doesn’t appear to be the best time for Americans to return to close proximity to one another. There are four main reasons:  Epidemiologists’ predictions for what will happen next are grim. “If we open up, and do exactly what we were doing in March, we’re going to see a huge increase in cases,” Eleanor Murray, an assistant professor of epidemiology at the Boston University School of Public Health, says. “We’ll go back to that same exponential trajectory.” If states “prematurely open up, my concern is that we start to see little spikes that turn into outbreaks,” said Dr. Tony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, at a Tuesday hearing before the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions (HELP) Committee. That, in turn, will further strain and potentially overwhelm the capacity of a health care system that’s already been dealt brutal financial and psychological blows from the first wave. It’s possible, based on new projections from Columbia University, that states opening up will lead to an increase of 10,000 new cases or more each day by June. It might not come to pass. But the risk is there. “What we’re going to see is an unfortunate natural experiment going on,” Jeffrey Shaman, a Columbia University infectious disease modeler, says. “For the states that are loosening the restrictions and reopening, we’re going to see if they’re able to do it without having the virus blow up in their face. ... basically, they’re playing Russian roulette.” It’s true case counts are decreasing in some places — most notably in New York, the hardest-hit state in the country; New Jersey; and Connecticut. But overall, “cases have increased and reached a plateau,” says Stephen Kissler, who designs mathematical models of disease outbreaks at Harvard. “That’s hiding a lot of changes. ... And so really, we’re in this phase of sort of trying to play whack-a-mole with the pandemic, and that’s going to continue for some time.” Easing restrictions during a plateau means releasing people into an environment where “there are more people around with infection now than ever before,” Murray says. “Instead of starting from one or two cases in each city [as might have been the case in March], we’re going to be starting from hundreds of cases or thousands of active cases in each city.” On March 20, there were around 5,000 confirmed daily new cases of Covid-19 in the US (though, the real number was likely much higher). Since early April, there have been at least 20,000 to 30,000 new cases in the US reported every day as the virus replicates in more and more humans. Cases continued their slight drift downward, but it's important to remember that outside NY-NJ-CT, cases are *not* falling. pic.twitter.com/LB17L585rx “People keep talking about the second wave and we’re not through the first wave,” Tara Smith, a Kent State epidemiologist, says. Cases “haven’t gone down significantly anywhere except, maybe, New York City.” Yet the White House’s plan for opening things back up requires a “downward trajectory of documented cases within a 14-day period.” The country’s not anywhere close to that nationally, or locally in most places.  It is possible the rate of new cases is slowly starting to subside. But even so, case counts are still very high.  Another way of looking at falling covid19 positivity rate across the country. Daily tests are rising, positive cases remaining largely flat, and the positivity rate declining. We're testing more to find same number of cases, suggesting that density of epidemic may be declining. pic.twitter.com/maMYuiG2n8 Infectious disease modelers Teresa Yamana, Sen Pei, and Jeffrey Shaman at Columbia University recently ran three projections that are helpful in thinking through what could happen in the coming weeks. In one scenario, there’s no change: States don’t open up, and lockdowns are kept in place. Nationally, cases and deaths decrease from the current plateau. In a second scenario, there’s a 10 percent increase in the contact rate in all the counties and cities in states that are opening up. That means, on average, Americans see 10 percent more people than they have been during lockdown. Cases would then jump to 43,353 cases per day at the end of June, up from about 28,000 cases per day in early May, Yamana, Pei, and Shaman find.  The third scenario is similar to the second, but there’s an additional 10 percent increase in the contact rate each week after opening, “meaning that people start to say, okay, things are all right, [and] they get more and more complacent,” Shaman says. And then, according to the model, new cases jump to 63,330 cases per day.  
    Related
   In the second and third scenarios, death counts might actually decrease across the country in May. But a new wave of death would be brewing, and the toll would rebound by June, increasing throughout that month. These projections are merely best guesses as to what could happen. It’s hard to know what people will actually do — will they increase their contacts by 10 percent or more? They might not. But who wants to be in a position to find out?  Another important reason this isn’t going away: Even though there have been more than a million confirmed cases in the US, overall, few people in the country have been infected. “It’s not like we’re well on our way to accruing some sort of population-level immunity,” says Natalie Dean, a biostatistician at the University of Florida.  There have been some serological studies trying to assess how many people in a given area have antibodies (molecules the body creates in response to an infection) for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19.  These studies “haven’t been always of the best quality,” Dean says (more on that here), “but in the end, pretty consistently they’re telling us we’re still in the single digits.” That is, still under 10 percent of the US has been infected. This picture looks different in harder-hit areas. In New York City, it’s possible as much as 21.1 percent of the population has gotten the infection, according to a serological survey conducted by the state.  
    Related
   That sounds like a large percentage, and it is, but it’s not close to the level needed for herd immunity — when there are enough people with immunity that the contagion starts to naturally die out. “Around 60 percent [immune] roughly is when you might start to see changes,” says Caitlin Rivers, an epidemiologist at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. “And we do not want to get there, just to be clear.”  It would take a long time to get there, too: One recent study in Science found it would take until 2022 if the US wanted to achieve herd immunity in a manner that would also prevent hospitals from being overwhelmed. And any path to herd immunity would involve many, many people dying. Even if one city, or one community within one city, achieves herd immunity, it’s still not enough. The US is a huge, sprawling nation. A pocket of herd immunity in Queens, New York, doesn’t help end an outbreak in Nebraska.  “My own estimate would be in the US that we probably have 10 to 20 million people who have been infected thus far,” Shaman says. “That’s not a huge amount.” There are 328 million people in the country, most of whom are still vulnerable.  A quick review of the basic reproduction number, or R0, for this coronavirus: Without interventions in place, each infected person can infect, on average, two or three others. That’s a recipe for exponential growth. “If it were left to its own devices, given its nature, and given how efficiently it transmits person to person, we would expect 50 to 70 percent of the world’s population to be infected within the span of one to two years,” Shaman says.  It has not been left to its own devices. Countries all over the world have been trying to contain it with good hygiene, quarantine, and social distancing. Still, this virus is a sneaky little bastard — it spreads silently and survives on some surfaces. It takes an average of five days for a person to show symptoms after being infected, but it can take up to 14 (most flu symptoms show themselves after one to four days). During that time, some people can spread the virus to others before they know they are sick.  This incubation period is enough to lure some communities into a false sense of security. Cases could go down, and any change in policy will not show up in infection rates (provided people are being tested) for a few weeks.  “It could be really terrible if we try to pretend that everything’s back to normal,” if initial social distancing gets cases down and people start to feel complacent, Sarah Cobey, a scientist who studies epidemics and immunity at the University of Chicago, says. The virus can kill between 0.5 and 1 percent of the people it infects. That figure, too, is both big and small. It’s big enough to cause a million deaths or more in the US if precautions aren’t taken. Lockdowns were always a blunt measure.  “We had to go that route because we didn’t have other tools in place,” Murray says. The outbreak was too widespread, and America’s capacities were too low, to aggressively test for the virus and trace the contacts of those it touched. “What we should have been doing while we were in lockdown was building up that capacity. ... I think what we’re seeing right now is that people are getting sick of lockdown, but [do we] have those other tools really ready to go?” The US does not. As of May 1, a Harvard analysis found more than half of states are not doing enough Covid-19 testing to safely reopen. Without testing, no one can know where the virus is and whom it may spread to. Testing is crucial to shift lockdowns into a smarter, more focused strategy: identifying all new cases, putting them in isolation, and then figuring out who may have been in contact with those people and putting them in quarantine.  “Experts say the US needs 500,000 tests a day, on the low end, to tens of millions, on the high end, to fully control the coronavirus outbreak,” Vox’s German Lopez reports. “Based on the COVID Tracking Project, the US has averaged about 260,000 tests a day — a little more than half the minimum — over the first week of May.” Also lagging: programs to train and deploy contact tracers, to make sure one case of Covid-19 doesn’t turn into thousands.  Testing isn’t only needed to diagnose the sick; it’s needed for surveillance, and to answer important scientific questions. It seems clear that in confined indoor spaces with lots of people — like in meatpacking plants, dormitories, nursing homes, office buildings, or homeless shelters — the virus thrives. But what about in a small barbershop, where both the customers and the barber are wearing masks? It’s not without risk, but the risk is hard to quantify. So is the risk of transmission among children, and from children to adults.  As states open up, they’re essentially creating experiments to see which policies lead to new cases and which don’t. Hopefully, scientists and local health departments will have the right studies in place to track the outcomes. “But what I’m really afraid of is that a lot of areas aren’t set up even to learn from their own mistakes and successes,” Cobey says. This work takes not just Covid-19 diagnostic tests but also after-infection tests to see if a person has developed antibodies to the coronavirus. “I am really fearful that by June 1 or June 15, after we’ve seen a couple weeks to a month of this [state openings], that our cases are going to be climbing — and even worse, that we might not see them because ... we are maxed out with our testing capacity,” Smith says. The first sign the openings have backfired might come when hospitals start seeing many severely ill people again — which would mean a significant new wave is already underway.  Potential for chaos abounds: An area can ease restrictions and, due to sheer luck (or seasonal factors mixed with luck), might not see an increase in cases. It could brag about its success. Then another area could adopt the same policies and be doomed.  There’s a lot of uncertainty in the future. But some approaches offer more control than others. Lifting social distancing restrictions now invites a new wave of infections. “We get to choose when the second wave happens,” Cobey says. Why choose now?  This is just the health case for not rushing to reopen. There’s also an economic one. If the US creates a situation where more people get sick in the next few weeks, leading to case spikes, is that really going to save restaurants and small businesses — or just set them up for an even longer period of decline? On the other hand: Will people go out and patronize businesses again even if they are allowed?  Yes, the country can pursue a dual goal of protecting lives and protecting the economy. But opening too quickly may tip the balance too far in the direction of death and health system strain, without really helping the economy.  “We need to very clearly state our goals, and we need to be serious about the fact that opening up our economy does come at the cost of a certain number of Covid illnesses, which come with Covid deaths,” Kissler says. “There’s no good way about it.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   President Trump likes to refer to the coronavirus as the “Chinese virus,” and in so doing he’s popularizing an image of the pandemic as a foreign invasion. He’s not the only one.  Although we are (hopefully) not using a racist term to refer to this virus, many of us have unwittingly bought into a particular paradigm for understanding pandemics. Call it the paradigm of invasion: the idea that we’re being attacked by an onslaught of foreign pathogens that come from animals, and we’re just passive victims. But what if we, the humans, are the ones staging the onslaught? What if the real story of modern pandemics is not about how animals and their germs are invading our human realm but about how we’re invading theirs? That’s the argument of Sonia Shah, author of the 2017 book Pandemic. She says the paradigm of invasion — or “microbial xenophobia,” as she calls it — often fails to explain why a microbe that’s existed for ages suddenly turns into a pandemic-causing pathogen. After studying outbreaks ranging from cholera to West Nile virus to Ebola, she’s found that human activities play a huge, and hugely underrecognized, role. Our environmental and social policies — like cutting down forests or failing to address a housing crisis — make it much likelier that a previously harmless microbe will cause a devastating outbreak. Shah is not alone in advocating for a paradigm shift in how we understand pandemics. The One Health movement, an interdisciplinary way of thinking espoused by some global public health authorities, emphasizes the connections between people, animals, plants, and their shared environment. It’s pushing for this change, too. I talked to Shah about how this approach can help us better understand the true origins of pandemics. A transcript of our conversation, edited for length and clarity, follows. The reigning narrative in a lot of people’s minds is that “exotic” animals are to blame for the coronavirus crisis — that they’re dirty and infested with tons of pathogens that just can’t wait to kill us. What’s wrong with this narrative? First of all, we all have lots of microbes inside of us. Humans give animals microbes that turn into pathogens all the time, so we are also the source of disease for other species. But we don’t talk about that. Species everywhere are full of microbes, but if they stay in the bodies in which they’ve evolved, they don’t cause disease. Ebola doesn’t cause disease in bats. Neither does coronavirus. They cause disease in our bodies because they’re new to us — they’re exploiting a new habitat. So why are they exploiting that new habitat, namely us humans? It’s because we are building roads between wild animals and human bodies. We’re using up a lot of land — for our cities, our mines, our farms — and while doing that, we’re destroying wildlife habitat. That’s why 150 species are going extinct every day. And the species that are remaining have to squeeze into these tiny fragments of wildlife habitat that we leave for them.  When you cut down the forest where bats live, they don’t just go away; they come roost in the trees in your backyard or farm. That means it’s easier to have casual contact with their excretions.  If a little kid goes outside and plays near a tree where bats roost, they might pick up a piece of fruit that has some bat poop or bat saliva on it and put that in their mouth, and then you’ve created an opportunity for the microbes that live in the bat’s body to enter into a human body. We know that with Ebola, there was a single spillover event — the first case was a 2-year-old child in West Africa who was playing near a tree where bats live.  These are accidents waiting to happen. Now we have this amazing flight network, so even if pathogens emerge in a place where there aren’t a lot of transmission opportunities, they can easily get to somewhere where there are. We’re also urbanizing in an ad hoc fashion, so we have a lot of places where people are being exposed to each other’s waste. There’s not a lot of infrastructure in many of the places that are rapidly urbanizing. All these factors combine to increase the risk that a microbe will spill over into human bodies and then start to spread.  What strikes me is that when you talk about the origins of pandemics, you talk on this macro level — like our environmental and social policies — rather than on the micro level. What kind of explanatory power does this approach give you, in terms of explaining the origins of previous outbreaks?   We often look at an outbreak as a foreign problem — like Ebola and SARS and Zika are coming from outside and encroaching upon us. That’s the traditional narrative: the germ invading from outside. I call it microbial xenophobia. But these are things that are happening right here in the United States. So for example, West Nile virus is a virus of migratory birds from Africa. They’ve been landing in North America for hundreds of years, but we never had West Nile virus here until 1999. Well, why is that?  It turns out that when you have a diversity of bird species in your domestic flock, you don’t get a lot of West Nile virus because birds like woodpeckers and rails are really bad carriers. So as long as you have a lot of those diverse bird species around, even if you have an introduction of West Nile virus from a migratory bird, you’re not going to get a lot of virus overall.  But what happened over the last 20 years or so is that we lost a lot of that avian biodiversity. Woodpeckers and rails became rare in a lot of environments. Instead, we have a lot of birds like crows and robins, which are generalist species that can live in any kind of degraded environment, and they’re really good carriers of West Nile virus.  So the fewer woodpeckers and rails you have around, and the more robins and crows you have around, the more West Nile virus you have around. And the more likely it becomes that a mosquito is going to bite an infected bird and then bite a human. Since tick-borne diseases are a huge problem in the US, I’m curious: Is there a similar story to be told about Lyme disease? Yes, it’s a very similar story with Lyme. When we had intact forests over the northeast, we had a diversity of woodland species that lived in those intact forests — like opossums and chipmunks — that helped control the tick population. But over the past 50 years or so, suburbs have expanded into the forest and broken it up into little patchwork quilts, so opossums and chipmunks have become [relatively] rare. Instead, we have a lot of white-footed mice and deer, and it turns out that white-footed mice don’t control tick populations well. A typical mouse destroys about 50 ticks a week, compared to a typical opossum that will destroy hundreds and hundreds of ticks a week just by grooming.  So the fewer opossums you have around and the more white-footed mice you have around, the more ticks you have around. And the more likely it becomes that you’re going to have outbreaks of tick-borne disease like Lyme. I think that really helps make the case that our interaction with the environment — for example, deforestation — has major impacts on human health. Social policies can also  affect the risk of an outbreak, right? Right, so, when dengue broke out in South Florida in 2009, it was immediately considered an invasion from some foreign place. We coated the environment with insecticide and staged a military-style assault on these mosquitoes. But it turns out the mosquitoes that carry dengue have been in South Florida for a long time. That wasn’t new.  What was new was the foreclosure crisis. It had shuttered all these houses. The epicenter of the dengue crisis was also the epicenter of the mortgage crisis. And of course in South Florida people have a lot of swimming pools. So with all these homes closed, these swimming pools were vacant. Lo and behold, it starts to rain and these empty pools fill up with water and it creates these little pockets around the garden that mosquitoes can breed in. And then we have this “unprecedented” outbreak of dengue. Nobody thought to address the housing crisis as a possible driver of the outbreak. It sounds like what you’re advocating for is a more holistic approach, a systems-thinking approach. How much of an outlier are you in that?  There’s a whole movement in global health called One Health. It’s the idea that human health is connected to the health of our animals — pets, livestock, wildlife — and our ecosystems and other societies. All these things are connected and we have to look at these broader drivers because that’s going to get to the root of the issue. Otherwise, we’re constantly just mopping up problems that are going to keep erupting again and again.  It occurs to me that this also has implications for how we do science. Given that so many of our modern pathogens cross disciplinary boundaries, do we need more doctors working with veterinarians, more biomedical experts collaborating with social scientists, and so on? Absolutely. We have siloed everyone and you can see how that’s impacted the way we responded to some of the zoonotic pathogens. With West Nile Virus, veterinarians at the Bronx Zoo noticed, “Oh, all these birds are getting sick with something.” But they didn’t tell the doctors, so the doctors just said, “Oh, all these people are getting sick with something! What’s happening?” We’ve blinded ourselves to the crossovers by making it so these groups don’t talk to each other. Part of the One Health idea is that we need to be multidisciplinary and bring all these experts together.  The fact that the coronavirus likely came from a wild-animal market in China makes me wonder about factory farms in countries like the US. It’s not the same, but animals in these farms are also packed very close together. Should the coronavirus crisis prompt us to revise how we think about meat production here, too? That’s absolutely part of it. When I was writing my book, I asked my sources what keeps them awake at night. They usually had two answers: highly drug-resistant forms of bacterial pathogens and virulent avian influenza. Both those things are driven by the crowding in factory farms.  These are ticking time bombs, and they’re still going to be there when we’re done cleaning up the mess we’ve gotten ourselves in with this current virus. In your book, you write about paradigm shifts, and one line that jumped out at me was: “Modern biomedicine’s fundamental approach to solving complex problems is to reduce them to their smallest and simplest components.” Do you think this reductionist approach is failing us now? The reductionist approach in biomedicine comes from a good place. Modern germ theory really made a big difference. Before we had germ theory, people thought cholera, malaria, and so on were caused by miasmas floating in the air or an imbalance of humors in your body. Germ theory helped us in a lot of ways, so it makes sense that that’s the paradigm.  But we’ve lost the bigger picture, the connections between social and political health and environmental health. So what we’re seeing right now is an intense amount of reductionism.  Moving forward, what we have to see is that pandemics, climate disasters, all of these are related to our huge footprint on the planet. We’ve been using up a lot of natural resources and now the bill is coming due. We’re going to lurch from disaster to disaster to disaster until we start to really change the fundamental relationship between us and nature. Sign up for the Future Perfect newsletter and we’ll send you a roundup of ideas and solutions for tackling the world’s biggest challenges — and how to get better at doing good. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. Future Perfect is funded in part by individual contributions, grants, and sponsorships. Learn more here.  The US has put most of its immigration process on hold due to the coronavirus pandemic and has for weeks been turning away all asylum seekers at the southern border. It closed its consulates abroad as well as most immigration courts and has temporarily stopped issuing green cards. But authorities have continued to charter deportation flights. President Donald Trump declared the spread of the coronavirus a national emergency on March 12. An independent analysis from the Center for Economic and Policy Research found that between March 15 and April 24, Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) sent 21 flights to Guatemala, 18 to Honduras, 12 to El Salvador, three to Haiti and the Dominican Republican, and one to Jamaica. Flights have continued since then, with some to Guatemala taking place last week. (ICE did not respond to requests for the total number of flights it has chartered.) All of these countries have fragile health care systems and minimal social safety nets that would be overwhelmed by the kind of outbreaks the US has seen in hot spots like New York. Nevertheless, the Trump administration has put some immigrants who later tested positive for Covid-19, the illness caused by the coronavirus, on these deportation flights — effectively exporting the virus. The US has recently instituted testing of all deportees, but not before they had deported hundreds of Covid-positive immigrants who may have been asymptomatic or developed symptoms after they were placed on the plane. In Guatemala, these deportees account for roughly 19 percent of the country’s total coronavirus cases. Advocates have been urging the Trump administration to halt deportations during the pandemic to avoid spreading coronavirus in Central America and the Caribbean.  “Honduras, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Haiti have very limited capacity for testing, surveillance, and treatment and a limited supply of medical equipment such as ventilators,” Sergio Martín, general coordinator for the nonprofit Doctors Without Borders in Mexico, said in a statement. “A major outbreak of Covid-19 could be catastrophic.”   Several countries in Central American and the Caribbean have reported positive cases of coronavirus among immigrants deported by the US: more than 200 cases in Guatemala, at least two cases in Mexico and at least three cases in Haiti.  It’s unsurprising that so many deportees have tested positive for coronavirus given the number of detainees in ICE custody who have also tested positive for the virus. Reuters reported that, as of early May, more than 700 immigrants of the 1,400 that had been tested for coronavirus in ICE custody had tested positive.  Guatemala’s health minister Hugo Monroy has consequently called the US the “Wuhan of the Americas,” and the Guatemalan government has twice suspended deportation flights from the US. It was only after public pressure from organizations including Refugees International and Democratic lawmakers that the US started testing deportees in late April.  Senators Bob Menendez and Dick Durbin had called on the Trump administration to mandate Covid-19 testing for all deportees so that those who test positive can receive proper medical treatment and be quarantined. “Forcibly returning individuals infected with COVID-19 does not comport with the humanitarian and public health standards our nation must uphold in a time of pandemic,” they wrote in a letter to the administration. “Continuing to deport COVID-19-positive individuals to countries that do not have the capacity to control its spread undermines the United States’ ability to defend against re-introduction of the virus once the epidemic is brought under control in the United States.”  Haiti has started sending all deportees to mandatory quarantine in one of two Port-au-Prince hotels for two weeks upon their arrival amid fears that they could carry the virus, but it’s proved to be an imperfect system given that one deportee who had tested positive recently escaped.  The poorest country in the Americas, Haiti still lacks testing capacity and has only 100 ventilators, which many Covid-19 patients need to help them breathe, for its entire population of 11 million citizens. A severe outbreak of the virus could therefore wreak havoc on the island nation, which is still recovering from a series of natural disasters, including a 2010 earthquake that left it in ruins.  The Trump administration has pursued a series of so-called Asylum Cooperative Agreements with Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador that allow it to send migrants back to those countries if they passed through them on their way to the US. Only the agreement with Guatemala has gone into effect so far, but the administration could also implement the agreement with Honduras at its discretion.  The deals resemble “safe third country agreements” — a rarely used diplomatic tool that requires migrants to seek asylum in the countries they pass through by deeming those countries capable of offering them protection — although the Trump administration has been reluctant to use that term, perhaps because the countries it’s dealing with cannot be considered safe. Until recently, the US had this kind of agreement with just one country: Canada.  The administration has paused deportations to Guatemala under the agreement for now while both countries focus on combating the pandemic. A DHS spokesperson said that there are similarly “no imminent plans to begin transfers to Honduras” under a similar agreement.  “[W]hen international travel conditions improve we will resume discussions about implementing these agreements,” they said.  But while the US isn’t planning to immediately send asylum seekers to Honduras under the agreement, that could change at any time.  The Department of Homeland Security published the text of the US agreement with Honduras on April 30. It doesn’t specify who will be sent to Honduras, but US officials have stated publicly that Honduras will accept asylum seekers from Guatemala, El Salvador, Mexico, Nicaragua, and Brazil. Honduras produces high numbers of people seeking asylum: In 2017, the most recent year for which data is available, the US granted asylum to 2,048 migrants from Honduras, compared with 1,048 from Mexico, 3,471 from El Salvador, and 2,954 from Guatemala. Honduras remains a hotbed of gang violence, largely perpetrated by the international criminal gang MS-13, which formed in Los Angeles and was transplanted to Central America following mass deportations of in the 1990s unauthorized immigrants with criminal histories. The gangs facilitate drug trafficking, extort local residents, and force teenage boys to join. The country also has the fifth-highest homicide rate worldwide, according to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, as well as rampant government corruption and high rates of violence against women and LGBTQ individuals. The Trump administration has brought asylum processing at the southern border to a halt with the stated purpose of limiting the spread of the coronavirus. But the administration hasn’t decided to pause deportations for the same reason.  Amid the pandemic, the Trump administration has closed the US-Mexico border, implemented an expulsion order to swiftly turn away migrants at the border, and postponed all immigration court hearings for migrants who are waiting in Mexico for a decision on their asylum applications in the US. Those measures, coupled with the restrictions on asylum seekers that were already in place, have brought the asylum system to a virtual standstill.  Since February 2016, the Trump administration’s border policies have forced migrants to wait in Mexico for months at a time. US Customs and Border Protection officials have been limiting the number of asylum seekers they process at ports of entry each day, making migrants wait in Mexico for their turn. Even after migrants are processed, they are quickly sent back to Mexico under the Trump administration’s “Remain in Mexico” policy, officially known as the Migrant Protection Protocols (MPP).  More than 60,000 migrants have been sent back to await their asylum hearings. Thousands of them have been living for months in makeshift encampments, where they rely on volunteers for basic necessities, are targeted by criminal gangs, and have little means to deal with a major public health crisis. Due to the pandemic, they will be forced to wait even longer: At least some of their hearings have been postponed until May 2021.  Invoking federal law allowing immigration officials to turn away people who might pose a risk of spreading communicable diseases, US Customs and Border Protection has also implemented new emergency protocols to quickly send migrants back to Mexico. Migrants from Mexico, Guatemala, El Salvador, and Honduras are processed in the field rather than inside US Border Patrol stations, and, without so much as a medical exam, are sent back to Mexico in an average of 96 minutes, the Texas Tribune reported. Some 14,416 migrants were sent back back to Mexico under the new system in April, CBP reported.  With all of these restrictions taken together, migrants have been effectively barred from accessing asylum — a critical protection for those who have fled violence and persecution — on account of the pandemic. But while the Trump administration has deemed asylum processing to pose too great a risk of spreading the virus, it hasn’t said the same of deportations, despite actual evidence that they have contributed to outbreaks in other countries.  “Any measure that contributes to regionally spreading the disease or putting people at risk must be stopped immediately,” Martín said. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.As President Donald Trump spoke at the Rose Garden on Monday about coronavirus testing, a banner behind him made a bold claim: “AMERICA LEADS THE WORLD IN TESTING.” That claim, however, is very misleading. It’s true that the US leads the world in total number of tests, in large part because it’s a big country and has the most confirmed Covid-19 cases and deaths globally. But when controlling for population, America is behind several countries in terms of Covid-19 testing: As of May 9, the US testing rate is roughly 26 per 1,000 people, according to Our World in Data; in comparison, Denmark’s rate is 53, Italy’s is 42, New Zealand’s is 39, Germany’s is 33 (as of May 3), and Canada’s is 28. Testing is crucial to controlling the coronavirus pandemic. When paired with contact tracing, testing lets officials track the scale of an outbreak, isolate the sick, quarantine those with whom the sick came in contact, and deploy community-wide efforts as necessary. Aggressive testing and tracing is how other countries, including South Korea and Germany, got their outbreaks under control, allowing them to start reopening in the past couple of weeks (though even they have scaled back their reopenings after new spikes in Covid-19 cases). “The whole point of this social distancing is to buy us time to build up capacity to do the types of public health interventions we know work,” Natalie Dean, a biostatistics professor at the University of Florida, told me. “If we’re not using this time to scale up testing to the level that we need it to be … we don’t have an exit strategy. And then when we lift things, we’re no better equipped than we were before.” There’s no widely accepted standard for this, but experts generally agree that the US needs to be doing much more testing. Some have called for conducting as little as 500,000 tests a day, while others have called for up to tens of millions. Nationwide, the US is not hitting the proposed minimum. Based on data from the Covid Tracking Project, America averaged roughly 276,000 tests a day during the week of May 3. That’s up from an average of 150,000 a day in the first half of April, but only a little more than half of the bare minimum experts recommend. At the state level, the Times estimated that the daily minimum of 500,000 tests amounts to about 152 tests per 100,000 people. Only two states, Rhode Island and North Dakota, met this standard as of May 7. Again, this is the proposed minimum; some experts argue the US needs multiple times that number of tests. Still, there are some signs of things getting a bit better. Not only has the number of daily new tests nationwide increased in recent weeks, but states have also seen an improvement in another important metric: the positive rate. This standard measures what percent of people test positive for the coronavirus among all tests done. If the positive rate is high, it’s likely not enough people are being tested, since it suggests that only people with a high chance of infection are getting tested, potentially missing a lot of people without significant symptoms. Experts recommend a positive rate no higher than 10 percent — and preferably much lower. In recent weeks, the nationwide positive rate has fallen below 10 percent — hitting 9 percent the week of May 3, based on Covid Tracking Project data. Most states have seen their positive rates fall below that threshold, too. It’s a sign that states are now getting enough testing capacity to match their outbreaks. As promising as that might be, experts caution that improvements in the positive rate have to be matched with adequate numbers of tests and sustained decreases in Covid-19 cases to safely reopen parts of the economy. Testing also has to be paired with contact tracing — which might require hiring 100,000-plus “disease detectives” — to truly control outbreaks. When all those other factors are taken into account, the US is still playing catch-up to other countries. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Correction: This article originally misstated the day, because time has become incomprehensible.The US health system is enduring a shock during the coronavirus pandemic — and the aftershocks will continue to be felt long after the virus itself has been contained. Hospitals nationwide have canceled elective surgeries en masse. Visits to primary care doctors and specialists have dropped off precipitously. Now the US economy is experiencing levels of unemployment not seen since the Great Depression and millions of people have lost their employer-sponsored health insurance. I posed a simple question to a few different experts who study population health: Have we ever seen disruption to medical care like this before? “I don’t recall there ever being a disruption to the health system like we’re seeing,” Cheryl Damberg, the director of the RAND Center of Excellence on Health System Performance, told me. “We’ve had recessions where people have lost insurance and there is more uncompensated care, but nothing like canceling surgeries and declines in ambulatory visits.” Others concurred. “I do not believe there has ever been a similar hiatus,” Mark Cullen, director of Stanford University’s Center for Population Health Science, told me, “and the short answer is that yes, it will take some time before we will know the total health impact, or even to effectively estimate some” It is, unfortunately, an unplanned natural experiment. Rifat Atun, a professor studying global health systems at Harvard University, gave me a useful way of understanding the sprawling effects that a major trauma like the coronavirus pandemic will likely have on Americans’ health. You can put them, for starters, into four broad categories.  1.3 million cases. Nearly 80,000 people dead (at a minimum). Tens of thousands of people hospitalized — we aren’t even sure how many. At least 86,000, according to a tracking project at the University of Minnesota. It may be easy to become numb to them, but those numbers we have been tracking for weeks are the first and most direct impact of the coronavirus. We should also be bracing ourselves for second, third, fourth waves of the outbreak. The virus itself won’t be fully neutralized until there is a vaccine or treatment. And those acute effects could, somewhat paradoxically, linger with us for a long time. Just because people have recovered from Covid-19 doesn’t mean their health has gone back to normal. As Lois Parshley wrote for Vox recently, the long-term health consequences of this disease are just starting to come into focus: Because Covid-19 is a new disease, there are no studies about its long-term trajectory for those with more severe symptoms; even the earliest patients to recover in China were only infected a few months ago. But doctors say the novel coronavirus can attach to human cells in many parts of the body and penetrate many major organs, including the heart, kidneys, brain, and even blood vessels. “The difficulty is sorting out long-term consequences,” says Joseph Brennan, a cardiologist at the Yale School of Medicine. While some patients may fully recover, he and other experts worry others will suffer long-term damage, including lung scarring, heart damage, and neurological and mental health effects. Parshley ticks through some of the potential long-term complications: lung scarring, strokes, embolisms, blood clotting, heart damage, mental health, and more. The point is, people will be living with this disease and the damage it did to their body for years — and so will our health system. All those canceled surgeries, delayed doctor appointments, and the rest will also have a lasting effect on people’s health. “One of the key concerns that practitioners in particular are having is related to the backlog that is piling up,” Ellen Nolte, professor of health services and systems research at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, told me, “and the impacts this will have on medium- and long-term outcomes, in particular for people with chronic conditions.” As I reported recently, visits to primary care doctors and other outpatient specialists have fallen off steeply during the Covid-19 pandemic. Here it is, in one chart: Ateev Mehrotra, a professor at Harvard Medical School who led the study above, told me “our real concern is those patients who might have deferred a visit and they’re going to have a flare-up of their chronic illness.” In the worst-case scenario, a patient could die because they weren’t able to have a routine check-up. Dania Palanker, an assistant research professor for the Center on Health Insurance Reforms at Georgetown’s Health Policy Institute, said she worries about people recently diagnosed with diabetes or heart disease who won’t be able to get that critical first appointment with a new doctor. “You can’t delay those appointments for a few months.” And if people do delay care — whether because their surgery was canceled, their doctor’s office was closed, or they chose on their own to skip treatment to avoid potential exposure to Covid-19 — their health outcomes are probably going to be worse. There is also a risk that the decline we’ve seen in medical utilization will lead rural hospitals to close or primary care practices to consolidate, which in turn restricts access and drives up costs. That is another factor that could lead to less timely medical care for Americans in the future, which would in turn lead to more adverse health outcomes. And there is one other obvious thing could lead to people postponing medical care: a loss of income and/or health insurance. More staggering numbers: 33 million people have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold and the unemployment rate is nearly 15 percent. Experts project that as many as 7 million people will be left uninsured as a result of the economic crisis precipitated by Covid-19. Economic downturns can have countervailing effects on people’s health. We know that losses in income and health insurance can have a negative impact. Atun has actually studied this question himself, looking specifically at cancer-related mortality. He and a team of researchers found that in the 2008-2010 recession, there were an estimated 260,000 excess cancer-related deaths in that time, including 40,000 from treatable cancers, in OECD countries. Those consequences were felt most in countries without universal health coverage — of which, of course, the United States is one. And now millions of Americans have lost the health insurance they did have.  On the other hand, there is some research suggesting that overall mortality actually falls during economic downturns. But the reasons are not well understood and, for people who actually experience joblessness or other financial trouble, there still appears to be higher rates of acute heart problems and overall mortality, according to a 2011 summary of the available research. Excess mortality is a complicated soup of many different variables, some of which hurt health and some of which may help it (if, for example, people smoke less and exercise more during a recession). This is one of the reasons why it will take us so long to understand the full impact of Covid-19. “But I think the negative effects far outweigh what these positive effects might be,” Atun told me. If there is one place where the research on economic turbulence and health outcomes converges, it’s that behavioral and psychological well-being is harmed during an economic crisis. This is perhaps the most speculative category, so I will keep it short. But Atun pointed out that the various social distancing measures we’ve taken to clamp down on Covid-19 will have an effect on our collective mental health, as will the economic crisis and the simple, painful reality of 100,000 or more people dying of the virus in just a few short months. There is a medical toll to all that mental pain, though it will again take a long time to reveal itself. And that is the point. It will take years for the full impact of the coronavirus to be understood. “The effects will be longer-lasting than the immediate figures that we see,” Atun said. Or as Cullen put it: “Bottom line is this will be a beast to sort out.” This story appears in VoxCare, a newsletter from Vox on the latest twists and turns in America’s health care debate. Sign up to get VoxCare in your inbox along with more health care stats and news.  Get our newsletter in your inbox once a week. Are you interested in more discussions around health care policy? Join our Facebook community for conversation and updates.Some of America’s leaders and parts of the public seem to believe that the US has turned the corner on the coronavirus pandemic. The White House has talked about winding down its Covid-19 task force. Most states are pushing to relax social distancing measures, with President Donald Trump’s encouragement. Americans are growing weary of staying at home — and they’re going out more than before. But it’s worth emphasizing: This pandemic is not over. The coronavirus is still circulating nationwide, the country is not yet hitting the benchmarks that experts have called for, and there’s a real risk that rushing to reopen will lead to an explosion in Covid-19 cases and deaths, since the majority of the population still lacks immunity. On a national level, the past few weeks of trends have been positive. Although daily reports of new Covid-19 cases have hovered between 20,000 and 30,000 since March, there has been a sustained decline — so far — since late April and early May. But this national trend masks the state-by-state variation. Most notably, the New York City area suffered a big Covid-19 outbreak earlier than much of the US, and its epidemic is now receding. It’s possible that a plateau or drop in nationwide cases could be caused by the New York City area getting better even as the rest of the country gets worse or, at the very least, doesn’t improve. Indeed, the data supports that possibility. Daily new coronavirus cases in the three states in the tri-state area, which encompasses Connecticut, New Jersey, and New York, have been falling over the past few weeks. But in the rest of the US, the best anyone can say is that confirmed cases have fallen in recent days, though they’re still up from two weeks prior, based on data compiled by the New York Times. Some of the upward trend in Covid-19 cases outside Connecticut, New Jersey, and New York in recent weeks is likely due to increased testing. With more tests, officials are likely to find more cases, all else being equal. Still, the numbers suggest it’s too early to declare victory. Experts generally recommend two weeks of sustained decreases in Covid-19 cases before social distancing measures can be relaxed. At the very best, states outside the New York City area have started to see a decline only recently — in the last few days, not over two full weeks. Experts also caution that more work is necessary before social distancing measures can safely end — starting with even more aggressive testing and tracing measures across the country. Without that, moves to relax social distancing risk further outbreaks that could kill up to hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of Americans. The White House’s guidelines and experts’ proposals lay out standards that states have to meet to safely reopen their economies. Typically, they recommend decreases in new cases for at least 14 days, and enough coronavirus testing to diagnose the sick and their contacts. Most states don’t meet both criteria. Based on data compiled by the New York Times, only 14 states as of May 11 have seen daily new Covid-19 cases decrease recently, much less fall for at least two weeks. Nine states have seen their daily new cases actually increase, while cases have held steady in the remaining 27. Again, an increase in cases could be partly attributed to more testing. But even if states are testing more than in weeks prior, there’s evidence they’re still not testing enough to safely reopen. Testing is crucial to controlling the coronavirus pandemic. When paired with contact tracing, testing lets officials track the scale of an outbreak, isolate the sick, quarantine those with whom the sick came in contact, and deploy community-wide efforts as necessary. Aggressive testing and tracing is how other countries, including South Korea and Germany, got their outbreaks under control, allowing them to start reopening in the past couple of weeks (though even they have scaled back their reopenings after new spikes in Covid-19 cases). “The whole point of this social distancing is to buy us time to build up capacity to do the types of public health interventions we know work,” Natalie Dean, a biostatistics professor at the University of Florida, told me. “If we’re not using this time to scale up testing to the level that we need it to be … we don’t have an exit strategy. And then when we lift things, we’re no better equipped than we were before.” There’s no widely accepted standard for this, but experts generally agree that the US needs to be doing much more testing. Some have called for conducting as little as 500,000 tests a day, while others have called for up to tens of millions. Nationwide, the US is not hitting the proposed minimum. Based on data from the Covid Tracking Project, America averaged roughly 276,000 tests a day during the week of May 3. That’s up from an average of 150,000 a day in the first half of April, but only a little more than half of the bare minimum experts recommend. At the state level, the Times estimated that the daily minimum of 500,000 tests amounts to about 152 tests per 100,000 people. Only two states, Rhode Island and North Dakota, met this standard as of May 7. Again, this is the proposed minimum; some experts argue the US needs multiple times that number of tests. Still, there are some signs of things getting a bit better. Not only has the number of daily new tests nationwide increased in recent weeks, but states have also seen an improvement in another important metric: the positive rate. This standard measures what percent of people test positive for the coronavirus among all tests done. If the positive rate is high, it’s likely not enough people are being tested, since it suggests that only people with a high chance of infection are getting tested, potentially missing a lot of people without significant symptoms. Experts recommend a positive rate no higher than 10 percent — and preferably much lower. In recent weeks, the nationwide positive rate has fallen below 10 percent — hitting 9 percent the week of May 3, based on Covid Tracking Project data. Most states have seen their positive rates fall below that threshold, too. It’s a sign that states are now getting enough testing capacity to match their outbreaks. As promising as that might be, experts caution that improvements in the positive rate have to be matched with adequate numbers of tests and sustained decreases in Covid-19 cases to safely reopen. Testing also has to be paired with contact tracing — which might require hiring 100,000-plus “disease detectives” — to truly control outbreaks. When taking all of those fronts into account, America just isn’t there yet — making it clear that the coronavirus pandemic is still very much with us, and the country shouldn’t rush to reopen. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.With the coronavirus continuing to ravage the country both in human and economic terms and his poll numbers sagging, President Donald Trump spent his event-free Mother’s Day posting up a storm — sending the sort of public statements that would have been cause for national concern in any previous era. When the smoked cleared, the 126 tweets or retweets Trump posted ending up being one of his most prolific posting days in history, falling just 16 short of the single-day posting record he set during his impeachment trial in January. Although the American public has become somewhat numb to Trump’s Twitter diatribes, the quantity was notable — and so was the lack of quality.  The president amplified a number of accounts that have promoted the QAnon conspiracy theory about Democrats being involved in a pedophilia cult, retweeted accounts without avatars and with few followers that he somehow found on the fringes of the internet, and desperately tried to change the topic from the coronavirus by working to settle old scores with his perceived foes in politics and the media.  The meltdown continued into Monday morning: The account Trump is retweeting here promotes the QAnon conspiracy theory about Democrats being involved in a pedophilia cult right in its bio! https://t.co/Rr2hHliNTd In an episode encapsulating his Twitter recklessness, Trump at one point on Sunday obliviously retweeted a post he may have misread that criticizes Attorney General Bill Barr’s Department of Justice as “corrupt.” The account that posted that tweet described the situation as “perplexing” and joked, “My notifications are filled with flying monkeys and a bunch of Qanons welcoming me to the Twilight Zone.” Trump is so dense he retweeted a reply he misread that (accurately!) describes Bill Barr’s DOJ as “corrupt.” Unbelievable, and the account he retweeted is baffled by it. pic.twitter.com/i6e0pyIfbf Trump has a history of unhinged social media behavior during times of crisis, and the current coronavirus situation is no exception. More than three years into his presidency, it’s not exactly news that he’s posting bad tweets. But there are a number of notable themes deserving of attention that have emerged from Trump’s latest Twitter binge. With the positive economic message he planned to make a centerpiece of his reelection campaign in ruins because of the coronavirus, Trump has spent the last week trying to change the topic by working to demonize former President Obama, claiming his predecessor is the mastermind behind the Russia investigation that nearly ended his presidency. (Fox News has helped with this effort.) As I’ve explained elsewhere, Trump actually has nobody to blame but himself for the Russia investigation, and the notion that the FBI tried to throw the 2016 election to Hillary Clinton by publicizing her emails in the closing weeks of the campaign is absurd on its face.  Trump, however, isn’t about to let the facts get in the way of his narrative. He appeared to suggest on Sunday that investigations of the Obama administration could be coming. From Sunday through late Monday morning, Trump posted seven tweets or retweets about “OBAMAGATE,” which he proclaimed “makes Watergate look small time!” Because it was OBAMAGATE, and he and Sleepy Joe led the charge. The most corrupt administration in U.S. history! https://t.co/PTzFvvITh3 All of this comes on the heels of the Yahoo News publication of leaked audio from a call last Friday in which Obama can be heard criticizing Trump’s handling of the coronavirus as “an absolute chaotic disaster,” while warning that Attorney General Barr’s unusual move to drop the case against former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn reflects how “our basic understanding of rule of law is at risk.”  Inadvertently or not, Trump’s tweets on Sunday and Monday proved Obama’s point. As the US coronavirus death toll surged past 80,000, with new cases not yet showing a discernible downward trajectory, Trump tried to defend his handling of the crisis with a mix of whataboutism and trying to pin blame elsewhere. On Sunday, Trump compared his administration’s handling of the coronavirus favorably with Obama’s handling of the 2009-10 H1N1 flu outbreak — ignoring that the coronavirus has already resulted in more than 65,000 more deaths than H1N1 in a much shorter period of time. We are getting great marks for the handling of the CoronaVirus pandemic, especially the very early BAN of people from China, the infectious source, entering the USA. Compare that to the Obama/Sleepy Joe disaster known as H1N1 Swine Flu. Poor marks, bad polls - didn’t have a clue! Trump insisted, without citing evidence, that he’s getting “great marks” and “great credit” for his handling of the coronavirus. In reality, whatever bump Trump got from a “rally around the flag” effect in the early days of the crisis has come and gone, and recent polls (including ones conducted by his own campaign) have shown him trailing Joe Biden. The president also lashed out at the media. He responded to a 60 Minutes segment critical of his administration’s move to cut funding for a coronavirus researcher who has been working with Chinese researchers on possible Covid-19 treatments and vaccines by accusing CBS of “doing everything within their power ... to defend China and the horrible Virus pandemic that was inflicted on the USA and the rest of the World” — ignoring that he too defended China’s handling of the coronavirus right up until the point when finding a scapegoat became important to him.   ‍♂️ pic.twitter.com/9tUJQH6jyh But Trump’s most vitriolic attack on the news media was saved for NBC. On Sunday, Meet the Press apologized for airing an out-of-context clip of Barr defending his move to drop the case against Flynn. It really wasn’t that big of a deal, but because host Chuck Todd offered commentary that was critical of Barr’s move to drop the case, Trump used it as an opportunity to post a string of tweets demanding he be fired. Sleepy Eyes Chuck Todd should be FIRED by “Concast” (NBC) for this fraud. He knew exactly what he was doing. Public Airwaves = Fake News! @AjitPaiFCC  @FCC https://t.co/fLTDhjMXo4 @FCC  THIS IS A DISGRACE, EVEN WORSE THAN @NBC USUALLY IS, WHICH IS REALLY BAD. SLEEPY EYES MUST BE FIRED! https://t.co/NWy7WTxH8e Notably, in an affront to the ideals of small government conservatism and free speech, Trump tagged FCC Chairman Ajit Pai in one of his tweets demanding Todd’s firing, suggesting he thinks the government might take some sort of action against NBC if it doesn’t do his bidding.  In any previous era, the president using his platform to call for a private company to fire employees he doesn’t like would be a major scandal. So would the president promoting a business he still owns and profits from, as Trump did on Sunday morning. So great to see our Country starting to open up again! https://t.co/ceXFk4iWBX In the Trump era, however, these are just a few of the dozens of ill-conceived public statements the president made on a given morning. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.The anti-social distancing and anti-stay-at-home order rallies that have taken place in state capitals across the country haven’t yet changed public views on state-level shutdown orders meant to slow the novel coronavirus pandemic. Recent national polling indicates that Americans largely oppose efforts to reopen private businesses and may even support stricter shutdown protocols.  But the rallies have attracted a host of fringe actors and attendees, including anti-vaccination activists and believers in conspiracy theories like QAnon, as well as armed members of militia groups. Many protests aimed at a specific policy or entity (no matter their politics) attract a host of groups with their own interests, or people more interested in self-promotion. The militia members, though, are different. They aren’t just showing up to the protests. In at least one case, they were invited by organizers: In Michigan on April 30, militia members were expressly invited by organizers of the “American Patriot Rally” to provide “security.”  The response to their presence came fast and furious, even from supporters of the shutdown protests more generally. In a tweet praising the overall protest, Michigan Republican state Senate Majority Leader Mike Shirkey said of the armed members of the protests (including militia members): “They do not represent the Senate Republicans. At best, those so-called protestors are a bunch of jackasses.”  Fox News host Sean Hannity said of the “show of force” in Michigan that while “everyone has the right to protest, protect themselves and try to get the country open,” “This, with the militia look here, and these long guns, uh ... no. Show of force is dangerous. That puts our police at risk. And by the way, your message will never be heard, whoever you people are.”  Echoing Sean Hannity, Fox & Friends scolds reopen protestors in Michigan who brought long guns and confederate & nazi flags to their rallies, saying "it puts our police in danger" and "squelches your message." pic.twitter.com/MgKw7kb5hr The militia movement in America is broad, with groups varying widely in their purported goals. Michigan alone has dozens of militia groups with hundreds of members, with varying political and cultural objectives.  “Different groups have different aims,” said Jared Yates Sexton, author of The People Are Going to Rise Like the Waters Upon Your Shore: A Story of American Rage. “Some are only interested in protecting themselves and their families from societal collapse, others are looking to battle the New World Order, some are explicitly interested in creating a white ethnostate for white Americans, others are angling for that second civil war that would start with a race war.”  But he argues that militia groups are using anti-shutdown order protests as cover — some for recruiting more people to their cause, but others looking to bring down the state and local government entirely.  Militia groups are “always searching for moments of cultural and political vulnerability” to exploit, Sexton said. And in the midst of a pandemic, they may have found it.  While militia groups differ widely, they also have important similarities, particularly regarding their perceived role. (Private militias are very different from state militias. Under federal law, 22 states and Puerto Rico have state-level militias regulated by the National Guard.) Private militias are “armed paramilitary groups who take on extralegal law enforcement roles,” said Nicole Hemmer, associate research scholar at Columbia University. “They often have uniforms or insignias, and some engage in training exercises modeled after military exercises. That sense of having law enforcement responsibilities generally separates them from other fringe groups.”  Hemmer added that private militias tend to lean to the right, but not always: “In the modern movement, [militias are] primarily but not exclusively right-wing — Redneck Revolt and the Socialist Rifle Association are two anti-racist militias present at the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville in 2017.” And the political views of even conservative-leaning militia groups can be complex — back in 2016, one right-leaning militia in Michigan took part in protests aimed at the state government’s handling of the Flint water crisis. But in general, Hemmer told me, private militia groups staunchly oppose regulations on guns and believe that “individuals and groups have inherent law enforcement powers deriving both from common law and the Second Amendment.” And in response to what they view as the excessive power of the federal government, many militia members “believe that armed resistance to state power is necessary.” The militia movement has waxed and waned in prominence since the 1970s, but experts largely cite the disastrous 1992 Ruby Ridge standoff between federal authorities and a far-right activist as a launch point. In a 2016 interview with my colleague Libby Nelson, former Homeland Security analyst Daryl Johnson said: We had a lot of anti-government reaction to that event because of the government’s overzealous, heavy-handed tactics that were used that resulted in the death of civilians. And so in 1992, a group of people gathered together in Estes Park, Colorado, to discuss that standoff and what their response would be to another type of standoff. John Trochmann, out of Montana, was at this conference and introduced the idea of forming private citizen armies or militia groups. It wasn’t until the Waco standoff in 1993, in February, which culminated in the fire at the Branch Davidian compound, that we actually saw this idea that John Trochmann had introduced put into action. And the first two modern-day militias were the Michigan Militia and the Militia of Montana.  While militia membership dropped during the George W. Bush administration, Hemmer said, “with the election of Barack Obama, militias in the US surged. That’s when some of the more well-known militia groups, like the Oath Keepers and the Three Percenters, were born.”  The growth of these groups in the 1990s was fueled by fears of gun restrictions instigated by the passage of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act, and in the 2000s by the election of a Democratic (and black) president, she said.  And she said that militia groups have differing views on the presidency of Donald Trump. “Some militias do not support Donald Trump — they feel he wields too much power, and they oppose nationalism as a threat to individual rights,” Hemmer said. “Some militias do support Trump, which makes their opposition to the federal government tricky — which is, I suspect, the reason so much attention has been trained on statehouses.”  Private militias may have their own reasons for attending right-leaning political rallies and protests. “Militias often see right-leaning rallies and organizations as ways to build alliances and legitimization,” Hemmer told me. “They were present at some Tea Party rallies in places like Oklahoma and Michigan, and are commonly involved with pro-gun and anti-tax groups. They’ve been present at the lockdown protests, of course, and before that had been very visible at protests against new laws coming out of the Democratic state house in Virginia.”  For example, militia groups were present at the Unite the Right rally in 2017, causing then-Gov. Terry McAuliffe to say, “You saw the militia walking down the street. You would have thought they were an army. … [The militia members] had better equipment than our state police had.” (Three of the militias present at UTR have been banned from the city of Charlottesville.) Right-leaning militia groups have also “volunteered” to provide security in Ferguson, Missouri, in 2014, at pro-Trump rallies, and at the US-Mexico border: In March and April 2019, a spokesperson for [a militia group], Jim Benvie, regularly posted livestream videos on Facebook showing militia members chasing and capturing migrants while armed with assault rifles, and detaining them until they could be turned over to U.S. officials. In other posts, the United Constitutional Patriots described themselves as combatants in a “war” raging along the border due to migrants’ “invasion” of the country and actively sought to recruit people with military or law enforcement experience to join them. One such recruit, upon observing migrants while on “patrol” at the border, reportedly grabbed his AR-15 and asked his fellow militia member, “Why are we just apprehending them and not lining them up and shooting them?”  Even the use of private militia groups for “security” purposes by right-leaning organizations is not new. In 2017, the Oregon-based Multnomah County Republican Party passed a resolution stating that the party “may utilize volunteers from the Oregon Three Percenters, Oath Keepers, and other security groups.”  For militia members, serving as “security” at the anti-shutdown protests doesn’t just provide more visibility but also offers a useful networking opportunity — one that allows them to share their message by arguing that the coronavirus shutdowns prove their point about government overreach.  These protests were “a great opportunity for them because they see people who are fearful and angry and their anger is directed toward the government,” said Alex Friedfeld, a researcher from the Anti-Defamation League’s Center on Extremism. “That is something that they have always been advocating for, and this is a great opportunity for them to keep expanding.” He added that militias that are supportive of President Trump are using these protests to “have it both ways,” attacking state government officials while avoiding targeting the federal government, despite federal coronavirus efforts encouraging the same policies as the states. “The lockdown protest created this opportunity where they can kind of resolve that dissonance by shifting their focus away from the federal government and targeting instead state government officials, particularly if they’re Democratic.” He noted that some groups have targeted Republican governors as well — but not Trump, despite Trump and the federal government providing markedly similar coronavirus mitigation guidelines. But the presence and use of militia groups for security purposes raises major questions. As Hemmer told me, some militia groups “rely on the threat of political violence (and sometimes engage in political violence),” meaning that they may be more likely to attempt to foment unrest than stop it.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.The coronavirus outbreak first erupted in the United States in Washington state, and while New York has become the American epicenter of the pandemic, there are Covid-19 cases in all 50 states. The pathogen is spreading across the country, along with positive tests and death counts. Getting control over the outbreak depends on each state’s ability to engineer an effective response to slow the virus down and eventually contain it. What plans for physical distancing are put in the place — and how well are they followed? Can the state health system survive an influx of infected patients? “Each region has its own socio-cultural reasons that contribute to the rate of spread and its own approach to dealing with that rate of spread,” says Carl Bergstrom, a professor of biology at the University of Washington who has been modeling infectious disease outbreaks for 20 years. At first, the coronavirus was most concentrated in urban centers, primarily New York City and its surrounding suburbs. It could flourish in those places because they are densely packed with people, exposing them to a stealthy virus that takes several days for symptoms to show up. Metro centers all over the US — Detroit, New Orleans, Miami, and many more — have continued to see increases in coronavirus cases. At the same time, the US is still almost certainly undertesting in other parts of the country. To give one example, Connecticut has done about twice as many tests per capita as Texas. Yet both states have roughly the same number of positive test results, despite the latter testing far fewer people per capita. Such a high positive test rate suggests that the real number of cases may be much larger than the official count. As of May 11, New York has the most confirmed cases (about 335,000) and it has also conducted the second most tests per million people (about 60,000), having been recently surpassed by Rhode Island. Here’s how states, territories, and Washington, DC, compare based on the number of confirmed cases and deaths, and the number of people tested, according to data from the COVID Tracking Project. Using the latest available Census Bureau numbers, we also calculated the number of tests per million people in a population, to give a better sense of a state’s efforts in tracking the disease.  (Note: We have updated the chart to display “tests conducted” instead of “people tested” because some states are reporting a raw count of the number of tests performed, which may include multiple tests for the same person.) State health systems have different capacities to handle the surge of Covid-19 cases. Some started the crisis with higher uninsured rates, particularly in the South, because they have refused to expand Medicaid through the Affordable Care Act. Now, millions of workers are newly unemployed as the coronavirus economic crisis sets in, suddenly uninsured during a public health emergency. Some states have younger and healthier populations; others are older. Certain states have more hospital beds per capita than their neighbors, and funding for public health differs considerably among states. “One thing that always strikes me about the American system is effectively there are, like, 51 American systems,” Ellen Nolte, professor of health services and systems research at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, told Vox last year. New York, Washington, and California were forced early on to take measures to curtail the Covid-19 outbreak, and some states quickly followed their lead. Others were reluctant to impose strict distancing guidelines, worried about the imposition on daily life and especially businesses.  New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo moved to expand hospital capacity in his state; he also waived out-of-pocket costs for health insurance, and the state put out a call for retired doctors to volunteer their services to avert a hospital staffing shortfall. New York set up “containment zones” to contain local hot spots, where all the area schools were closed, and religious gatherings and other large gatherings were halted. The state has also radically reorganized its hospitals into effectively one statewide system, in the hopes of better managing staff, supplies, and patients. However, New York, like many other states, initially hesitated to put out “stay at home” guidance, before instituting that policy on March 22. Washington Gov. Jay Inslee quickly ordered the state’s schools to close until the last week of April after the Everett nursing home outbreak. He also appeared uneasy about issuing a statewide “stay at home” order, though he’s since done so. California Gov. Gavin Newsom was the first governor to issue such an order (after several major metropolitan areas in his state had taken that step), and he helped convince some of the big tech companies in his state to donate much-needed protective masks for medical staff. Other governors adopted more lax attitudes toward the crisis, at least initially. Oklahoma Gov. Kevin Stitt tweeted out (and then deleted) a picture of him and his family eating at a restaurant even though other states were starting to shut down nonessential businesses. Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis at first shrugged off calls to issue a stay-at-home order after pictures of college-age beachgoers in his state stirred up fears they would become vectors for spreading a virus that is generally milder for young people. On April 1, he changed his mind and finally issued a statewide stay-at-home order. By late April, more than 40 states had issued stay-at-home orders, but some have now begun to relax those social distancing measures. Georgia, South Carolina, and Tennessee have initiated a phased reopening plan, as Vox’s Katelyn Burns reported. Florida is doing the same. Other states, such as Washington, are expected to be more cautious as they unwind restrictions that public health experts credit with stemming the spread of Covid-19. Hospitals are relying on states to increase the health system’s capacity of hospital beds, ICUs, and ventilators, as well as the personnel to staff them. States, in turn, will need support from the federal government, as their tax revenue takes a hit in the economic downturn. The stimulus bill passed by Congress provides money to hospitals as well as funding for states, although experts say much more is needed. The relationship between the states and the White House has been a fickle one in the crisis. President Donald Trump has insinuated states should treat his administration kindly in order to win more federal support. Governors have contradicted Trump over his speculation in mid-March that Americans could return to normal life soon; he has somewhat backed off such claims. And many states say that they are still not getting enough supplies from the federal government to make up for expected shortfalls. States are depending on federal aid to increase testing capacity, too, so they can actually trace the outbreak. New York so far is testing people at the highest rate of any state, while there are other states with a growing number of cases (like Texas and Georgia) where the testing rates still remain low. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.       Top Trump administration economic advisers are arguing there is a dire need to reopen the economy quickly to reduce unemployment rates — which they say may be above 20 percent — and to ensure the coronavirus pandemic doesn’t lead to any “permanent economic damage.” However, their arguments come as public health experts warn that reopening nonessential businesses will surely lead to more Covid-19 cases and deaths.  The Bureau of Labor Statistics reported Friday that the US lost 20.5 million jobs in April. This puts the US unemployment rate at 14.7 percent, a figure worse than any on record since the 1930s. The report, however, represents an undercount, as it doesn’t include the 7 million jobs lost in the final two weeks of the month.  This means the true unemployment rate “could be” around 25 percent, Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin told Fox News’s Chris Wallace Sunday morning. Such a figure would mean unemployment is higher than it was at the height of the Great Depression.  Kevin Hassett, President Donald Trump’s senior economic adviser, gave a slightly more optimistic estimate on CNN’s State of the Union Sunday, saying he believes the unemployment rate will probably be “close to 20 percent” in the next report.  Larry Kudlow, director of the Trump administration’s National Economic Council, argued Sunday on ABC’s This Week that buried within the month’s dismal unemployment numbers “is a glimmer of hope.”  “Eighty percent of it was furloughs and temporary layoffs,” Kudlow said. “That, by the way, doesn’t assure that you’ll go back to a job, but it suggests strongly that the cord between the worker and the business is still intact.” “Inside the numbers is a glimmer of hope,” Kudlow says, adding that “80% of it was furloughs and temporary layoffs.”That "doesn’t assure that you’ll go back to a job," but suggests "the cord between the worker and the business is still intact,” he adds. https://t.co/NX6cyzXxZl pic.twitter.com/GQSb3cAxyC Whether businesses remain intact enough for workers to return to remains to be seen. Many economists have said they believe economic recovery efforts will be slow, but all three White House officials disagreed Sunday. They indicated they expect the economy to bounce back in the second half of the year as states loosen restrictions and people return to work and regular consumption.  Without a massive increase in testing and contract tracing, states will only be able to keep nonessential businesses open if their leaders — and citizens — are willing to take on the public health risks of doing so. But Mnuchin argued the real danger lies in staying shuttered. “I think there’s a considerable risk of not reopening,” Mnuchin told Wallace. “You’re talking about what would be permanent economic damage to the American public.” At least 30 states have already begun to shoulder reopening certain segments of their economies. But as Vox’s Matthew Yglesias and Christina Animashaun have explained, it isn’t clear people have the money to engage with these reopened businesses — while it is becoming increasingly clear that lasting damage has already been done: When people don’t have money, they don’t buy new cars or new appliances. They don’t remodel kitchens or buy restaurant meals. When incomes drop, state and local tax revenue drops, forcing layoffs and furloughs of teachers and firefighters who in turn need to cut back on their spending. In normal times, the Federal Reserve would try to counteract this by cutting interest rates to a low level and hoping to spark a boom in investment. But the Fed already cut rates all the way down to zero back in March. Essentially, Americans are in a bind. Stay-at-home guidelines are contributing to record unemployment. But as public health experts have been warning for weeks, reopening too soon is likely to cause another spike in cases, which could overwhelm the health care system, drive the country deeper into recession, and kill many more people.  Epidemiologists have been sounding the alarm that reopening the economy too soon could lead to another wave of cases — in many states, before they’ve recovered from their first wave.  Indeed, 30 states have already reopened their economies — at least partially — and five more are planning to do the same shortly. In Missouri, concert venues and movie theaters are open, as long as people follow social distancing. Customers can dine, if spaced apart, in Georgia restaurants, and some Montana school children have resumed in-person learning.  Most of the states that are reopening haven’t met the criteria outlined by the Trump administration to begin that process. Though it’s ultimately up to state governors to decide when to reengage, the White House’s coronavirus task force recommends states only begin relaxing restrictions on industries when there’s been a downward trajectory of coronavirus cases or positive tests as a percent of total tests for 14 days, there’s a robust testing program in place, and hospitals have a demonstrated capacity to treat all patients. Of the 30 states that are reopening, most actually have more new cases or a higher percentage of positive tests than two weeks ago, and have recently seen an increase in daily average cases, the New York Times reported Thursday. Even states with a downward trajectory haven’t necessarily quashed their outbreaks. One of the reasons states may be eager to reopen is that it’s clear what the economic impact has been, and because it’s not always clear what will happen next. Epidemiological models aren’t meant to tell the future, said Jeffrey Shaman, director of the Climate and Health Program at Columbia University, on NBC’s Meet the Press Sunday. Rather, they’re meant to outline what may happen depending on a number of factors. This uncertainty has led to a number of models being incorrect, including — as Vox’s Kelsey Piper has explained — the widely used model created by the University of Washington’s Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME), which has been heavily revised following public criticism.  A large part of what adds uncertainty to these models is that they depend on variables based on human behavior, which is hard to predict. For instance, if modelers want to project how many more people will be infected by the coronavirus once stay-at-home restrictions are loosened, they have to guess how much the economy will bounce back. And guessing that requires, for example, assumptions about to what degree bars and restaurants will function normally, and how likely they are to see the sort of traffic they did before the pandemic, as well as how many customers may choose to stay home altogether out of caution.  That’s why it’s “very difficult” to predict exactly what will happen, Shaman said.  “That said, in a lot of the states that are loosening restrictions, they are barely hanging on,” he added. “In some of them, they already have growth of the virus taking place. One would imagine that any loosening of restrictions there is only going to accelerate the growth of the virus.” WATCH: Dr. Jeffrey Shaman says "we are going to see a growth in cases" over the next couple of weeks due to loosening restrictions. #MTP @JeffreyShaman: "Any changes we do to social distancing ... we are not going to realize until we are already in some period of growth." pic.twitter.com/6NcfTnwjYg Both Shaman and Christopher Murray, director of the IHME, said Sunday that the true effects of reopening will become clear in the next week or two, when those who have been newly exposed begin to show symptoms. Unfortunately, by the time the newly infected are symptomatic, they could have already been spreading the coronavirus to others for some time.  “The big question mark is, will people’s own behavior [to protect themselves in public] be enough to counteract the effects of rising mobility?” Murray said on CBS’s Face the Nation. Georgia, Montana, North and South Dakota, and Minnesota have seen the greatest increases in mobility in recent days, he said, but there are another 10 states with a 10 to 15 percent increase in movement that could become hotspots as well. “We really are going to have to wait and see. Our suspicion is that there will be, about 10 days from now in these places that have had these big increases in mobility, we are expecting to see a jump in cases.” And that jump in cases could severely limit the economic recovery the White House advisers believe is coming, leading to — if not “permanent” damage — certainly a long and painful period of high unemployment.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.The federal government turned down an offer that would have allowed the United States to significantly ramp up domestic mask production in the earliest stages of the coronavirus pandemic, according to a report by the Washington Post. The decision later forced the Trump administration to turn to expensive, untested third-party distributors and to use the Defense Production Act to compel companies to increase output.  It’s unclear exactly why top officials turned down the offer, but the decision to do so continues to have consequences for the many frontline workers who still lack the necessary equipment to protect themselves on the job.  The Post reports Mike Bowen, owner of the largest surgical face mask producer in the US — Prestige Ameritech in Texas — contacted top officials in the Department of Health and Human Services on January 22, the day after the first US coronavirus cases were identified. His pitch: Provide the funds needed to dust off four dormant manufacturing lines, and his firm would produce 1.7 million N95 masks every week. According to Bowen, he’d been raising the alarm for years that the US was too dependent on foreign countries (where nearly 90 percent of masks used in the country come from) for production, and argued his manufacturing lines offered both a way around that, and to ensure the US would have the masks it needed.  Rick Bright — the former director of HHS’s Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (who was ousted in April, and later filed a whistleblower complaint alleging he was demoted for fighting for science-based preparations “over political expediency”) — pushed top HHS officials to accept Bowen’s offer, to no avail. Prestige Ameritech later exported a million masks to China.  Officials gave the Post a variety of reasons why the Trump administration did not restart Prestige Ameritech’s lines. Some officials claimed it was because HHS didn’t have enough money at the time to pay for increased production; another blamed the lethargic pace of government contracts. White House economic adviser Peter Navarro, on the other hand, said that “the company was just extremely difficult to work and communicate with.”  “This was in sharp contrast to groups like the National Council of Textile Organizations and companies like Honeywell and Parkdale Mills, which have helped America very rapidly build up cost effective domestic mask capacity measuring in the hundreds of millions,” Navarro told the Post.  The federal government went on to spend more than $600 million on contracts including mask production. Honeywell and 3M were given contracts worth more than $170 million to produce protective gear. And a tactical training company with no history of producing medical equipment was given $55 million to make N95 masks for $5.50 each — a price around seven to nine times greater than other suppliers, including Bowen’s company. Prestige Ameritech was eventually given a $9.5 million contract in early April to produce N95 masks for 79 cents each.  Bowen’s manufacturing lines, which could be making more than 7 million masks every month, remain unused. Revelations of Bowen’s offer come as US health care workers, grocery store employees, and other frontline workers have struggled for two months to secure the personal protection equipment (PPE) — including masks, gloves, face shields, and more — necessary to stay safe on the job.  As health care providers and employers have desperately sought to buy PPE at skyrocketing costs, it’s become more and more clear that no country, including the US, was prepared for a pandemic of this magnitude. The surge in demand couldn’t quickly be met by stores in the US’s Strategic National Stockpile, and companies that traditionally make equipment were inundated with requests from around the globe.  Vox’s German Lopez explained the issue this way:  The problem is about both supply and demand. Prior to the coronavirus outbreak, China made half the world’s face masks. When the outbreak took off there, China started to use its supply and hoard what remained. This problem has only spread since, as more and more countries hoard whatever medical supplies they can get — with some, like Germany, even banning most PPE exports. So as demand increased due to Covid-19 — not just from health care workers but from a general public increasingly scared of infection — there was less supply to go around. Health care workers were forced to use disposable equipment multiple times, making them more vulnerable to infection and threatening hospitals’ ability to care for an influx of patients when they need it most. Workers in grocery stores, big box stores, and delivery services have also been put in harm’s way, having to show up to work and interact regularly with the public, oftentimes without adequate protection, as Vox’s Emily Stewart has explained.  A survey conducted by the University of California Berkeley and UC San Francisco between March 7 and April 9 found that only 19 percent of essential workers at companies such as Walmart, McDonald’s, Costco, Amazon, UPS, and Walgreens were given masks, while 56 percent said their employer made gloves available. In the weeks since the survey was taken, companies may have implemented more protective rules, though guidelines often vary by state.  Despite clear delays in preparing to protect frontline workers from the virus, there are still ways the country can catch up. As Vox’s Matthew Yglesias has argued, the government could use the Defense Production Act (DPA) to issue loans and purchase guarantees to companies, helping them expand production while giving them a measure of comfort in hiring more workers at an uncertain economic moment.  The DPA could also be used to loosen restrictions on regulation and inspection to speed up production without liability in the face of the emergency. In the meantime, after years of poor preparation, the rejection of Prestige Ameritech’s offer, and weeks of delivery and acquisition delays, many frontline workers must continue to make do with inadequate — and even dangerous — levels of PPE. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Three top US health officials will self-quarantine for two weeks after coming in contact with people at the White House who tested positive for the coronavirus. Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and member of the federal coronavirus task force, said Saturday he will be entering a “modified quarantine” after a “low risk” contact with a White House aide who tested positive for the virus.  Fauci told CNN he was not in close contact with the person who tested positive, but as a precaution will work remotely and wear a mask for the next 14 days. Fauci said he does plan to go to the White House or Capitol Hill — wearing a mask and socially distancing — if asked to. He will get tested every day, and may also go into his office at the National Institutes of Health, where he says he’d be the only person around.  Dr. Robert Redfield, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and Dr. Stephen Hahn, commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, will also be in self-quarantine for the next two weeks. Politico reported that Hahn came in contact with Vice President Mike Pence’s press secretary, Katie Miller, who tested positive for the virus on Friday. Redfield was also exposed to someone at the White House, though officials have not said who.  Fauci, Redfield, and Hahn were all slated to testify at a Senate hearing on the virus Tuesday. Redfield and Hahn will now testify via video, while Fauci is expected to attend in person while wearing a mask.  None of the top health officials have tested positive, but their exposure is the latest indication in recent days that even the White House — despite its rigorous testing standards — may not be safe from the virus.  Fauci, Redfield, and Hahn aren’t alone in having had contact with infected people: Trump and other top officials may have had multiple brushes with the coronavirus recently.  The first of two recent scares came Thursday, when a military valet to the president tested positive. Valets are often quite close to the president and his family, providing food and accompanying them on travel, though Trump told CNN he had “very little contact” with the man before he tested positive.  The next day, Pence’s spokesperson Miller tested positive. Miller regularly attends meetings of the White House task force, which includes Fauci, Redfield, and Hahn, as well as a number of other top officials such as Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar and Dr. Deborah Birx, the task force coordinator. She’s also married to Stephen Miller, senior adviser to Trump.  Trump, Pence, and multiple top aides are now tested for the virus every day — as are any guests who come in contact with the president or vice president. Other officials who don’t have regular contact with the president himself, like those who only interact with White House aides, are tested less often.  Neither Trump nor Pence wears a mask regularly or during public appearances — Trump appeared maskless at a plant manufacturing N95 masks in Arizona this week, and Pence recently apologized after not wearing a mask at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota. Both have argued they do not need to wear masks because all those they come into contact with have been tested — tests, however, are not always accurate. Concerns that even the White House testing regime has not kept US leaders from exposure have led some to worry about communities without the sort of testing capabilities that caught Miller’s infection, which are likely to find themselves in a dangerous situation as states begin to reopen nonessential businesses.  “In the span of hours, the coronavirus task force was likely exposed, the vice president was definitely exposed, and a top health official can’t come into the office,” one senior administration official told Politico. “It’s a textbook case of why we can’t rush to re-open.” White House Chief of Staff Mark Meadows said Friday the administration had added safety measures in the West Wing in the two days prior. “I can tell you this is probably the safest place that you can come to,” he said.  But not every business has the means to institute similar safety protocols, and when one of the seemingly most secure places in the country is still vulnerable to infection, it doesn’t bode well for businesses eager to reopen their doors.  As Juliette Kayyem, a former assistant secretary of homeland security under President Barack Obama, told the New York Times: “Whether it’s contained [at the White House] or not, we will know soon enough. But the fact that a place — secured, with access to the best means to mitigate harm — is not able to stop the virus has the potential of undermining confidence in any capacity to defeat it.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Former President Barack Obama leveled stinging criticism against President Donald Trump in a private call to former members of his administration Friday, saying Trump’s response to the coronavirus pandemic is “an absolute chaotic disaster,” and that the Justice Department’s choice to drop charges against former national security adviser Michael Flynn undermines the rule of law.  The remarks, first reported by Yahoo News, are a rarity from Obama, who — in public at least — has been reserved in his assessments of his successor since leaving office.  The call, with the Obama Alumni Association, was intended to urge former staffers to get involved with former Vice President Joe Biden’s presidential campaign. And it reportedly featured Obama speaking about the importance of electing Biden as political divisions have deepened both nationally and internationally, while making the case for Biden as someone who could bridge those divides. “It’s part of the reason why the response to this global crisis has been so anemic and spotty,” Obama reportedly said. “It would have been bad even with the best of governments. It has been an absolute chaotic disaster when that mindset — of ‘what’s in it for me’ and ‘to heck with everybody else’ — when that mindset is operationalized in our government.” The former president also expressed concern over the Justice Department’s decision to drop charges against former White House national security adviser Michael Flynn, who pleaded guilty to lying to the FBI.  “That’s the kind of stuff where you begin to get worried that basic — not just institutional norms — but our basic understanding of rule of law is at risk,” he said. “And when you start moving in those directions, it can accelerate pretty quickly as we’ve seen in other places.” Trump has defended Flynn, as Vox’s Jen Kirby has explained, calling him an “innocent man” (despite his guilty plea) and an “even greater warrior.” And prior to the case being dropped, Attorney General Bill Barr got involved in it, assigning an outside prosecutor to review the matter as Trump and his allies made the argument that there was a conspiracy against Flynn. Obama has said previously he planned to take a more public role in the 2020 race once Democrats settled on a nominee. His comments about Trump were made in private, but do appear to represent him beginning to make good on that promise, by mobilizing talent from his administration.  Obama’s own endorsement of Biden came last month, after the final leg of a heated primary contest came to a close. Thus far, he has not been able to appear at any in-person events with Biden, as the coronavirus pandemic has kept most of the public indoors. According to the New York Times, Obama has told friends he’s worried Trump will be able to leverage his public platform for campaigning while Biden is taken off the trail due to the virus.  And Trump has, in fact, used press conferences to both attack Biden and blame the Obama administration for current testing failures (despite the coronavirus not existing during Obama’s tenure). In late April, Trump pilloried Biden over the Obama administration’s response to the swine flu, saying Biden “didn’t even know the name,” and claiming that due to his predecessor the US had “broken tests. We had tests that were obsolete. We had tests that didn’t take care of people.” .@Acosta: You say you had "broken tests" from Obama -- the coronavirus is a new virus, so how could the tests be broken?TRUMP: "We have broken tests. We had tests that were obsolete. We had tests that didn't take care of people." (None of this makes sense.) pic.twitter.com/r7oobJNFU2 As Vox’s Aaron Rupar has written, Trump has made this claim “again and again and again.” It is not true, but it is a means by which the president can attempt to blame an old enemy for his administration’s failures.   Obama has not responded publicly to these claims, but his comments Friday suggest that he is willing to highlight the flaws of his successor, particularly in support of his party’s presidential nominee.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Top White House officials suppressed guidelines from public health experts on reopening the economy for weeks, and only ordered the approval of parts of that guidance after media reports exposed the delay, according to a report from the Associated Press.  Public health experts at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) spent weeks preparing detailed guidance to help schools, child care centers, religious groups, bars and restaurants, public transit officials, and others plan for a return to normalcy. The CDC’s work featured phased reopening plans, steps for ensuring each phase was completed successfully, and flow charts to help local officials decide how and when to reopen.  But the Trump administration quashed the guidance on April 30, saying CDC Director Robert Redfield had not approved it. Redfield reiterated his reasoning this Saturday, saying in a statement, “The re-opening guidance shared prematurely was in draft form and had not been vetted through the interagency review process,” and arguing more work needed to be done on it to ensure “clear guidance is presented to the American people.” Internal emails reviewed by the AP reportedly appear to show the director signing off on the plan, however.  The document was meant to help nonessential businesses as states begin to relax coronavirus pandemic-related restrictions. At the moment, there is no national standard for reopening beyond general suggestions from the White House that recommend taking a phased approach. This has led to a patchwork of rules. And apparently, the Trump administration believes this to be the best way to reopen.  The CDC guidance was held back in part because it was deemed “overly prescriptive,” one White House official told CNN, arguing “guidance in rural Tennessee shouldn’t be the same guidance for urban New York City.” This official also said some in the administration took issue with the fact that the CDC recommendations didn’t fit into the phase-based framework of the White House’s guidelines. Overall, the report raises further questions about the role of the CDC in the Trump administration’s response to the coronavirus pandemic. The organization typically leads the response to public health crises, but appears to have been sidelined for much of the pandemic. Redfield and other leaders from the CDC have been largely absent from the Trump administration’s public-facing coronavirus response, with members of the White House coronavirus task force providing details at press briefings rather than CDC officials. That’s led public health experts to express concern that federal decisions on how to combat the virus are being made with a focus less on public health, and more on the president’s interest in reopening the nation’s economy.  Indeed, Trump and many Republicans are pushing for a speedier reopening as unemployment has skyrocketed to the worst rates since the Great Depression. Many states are heeding that call and doing so, even as they fail to meet testing and case thresholds health experts say are necessary for public safety — all of which makes guidance like the CDC’s sorely needed. The CDC’s reopening report still hasn’t been officially released by the administration, although some elements of it have reportedly been “fast-tracked” for release. Regardless of why that is, all signs point to businesses and other groups having urgent need of it, as 30 states have already reopened their economies at least partially — and five more are planning to shortly.  Most of those states haven’t met the criteria outlined by the Trump administration to begin the process of reopening. Though it’s ultimately up to state governors to decide when to reengage, the White House task force recommends states only begin relaxing restrictions on industries when there’s been a downward trajectory of coronavirus cases or positive tests as a percent of total tests for 14 days, there’s a robust testing program in place, and hospitals have a demonstrated capacity to treat all patients.  Of the 30 states that are reopening, most actually have more new cases or a higher percentage of positive tests than two weeks ago and have recently seen an increase in daily average cases, the New York Times reported Thursday. Even states with a downward trajectory haven’t necessarily quashed their outbreaks. Public health experts say widespread testing and robust contact tracing are crucial to making sure the country can identify and squash viral spikes once restrictions are loosened. Even with those protections, reopening the economy before the health care system has had a chance to prepare could be disastrous.  Only around 1 in 10 people have been infected by the coronavirus even in the most hard hit regions of the US, former CDC director Dr. Tom Frieden told TIME, which means many Americans remain vulnerable to the disease. “So not only could COVID-19 come roaring back, but it could get five times or close to 10 times worse than it is now,” he said. Eager to get the economy — once one of his biggest campaign advantages — back on track, Trump and his administration are looking to shift focus to businesses. But the White House has not — yet, at least — said in detail how these businesses might reopen safely. The CDC guidelines do just this, recommending, for instance, that businesses allow employees to work in shifts in order to limit the people gathered in workspaces at any given time. Without these federal guidelines, states have been left to develop their own best practices, with some having greater success at doing so than others. Those states that have created poor reopening frameworks are now at danger — and their residents are at greater risk of infection.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.California has become the first state to commit to automatically mailing all registered voters a ballot for the November election, a significant move as states consider how to protect both voting rights and public health during the coronavirus pandemic.  California Gov. Gavin Newsom signed an executive order on Friday requiring election officials to send mail-in ballots to every registered voter ahead of the general election, acknowledging that attempting traditional voting on a mass scale will likely still be too dangerous come November.  “Elections and the right to vote are foundational to our democracy,” Newsom said in a statement. “No Californian should be forced to risk their health in order to exercise their right to vote.” Most Californians already live in counties that have opted-in to send all voters a ballot under a 2016 law, but the edict temporarily expands the practice statewide. In-person voting will still be available at consolidated voting centers, which voting rights advocates say are crucial to serve people with disabilities, people experiencing homelessness, and people with limited English proficiency. Newsom’s order comes amid rising concern from experts and election officials over the need to safely conduct the November presidential election — a need made even more urgent after disastrous primary elections in Wisconsin in April, during which social distancing was difficult and thousands of voters had to interact with high-touch surfaces. State officials believe up to 52 people may have become infected with the coronavirus at polling sites.  Fear that Covid-19 might spread during elections — and that concerns over the virus might depress voter turnout — have led to a national push to make voting more accessible, with some Democratic lawmakers offering proposals for nationwide voting by mail. Other national leaders have called on states to institute expanded vote-by-mail policies; former Secretary of State and past presidential candidate Hillary Clinton tweeted on Friday that other states should follow California’s lead.  But Republicans and the Trump administration have pushed back on expanding mail-in voting, arguing it poses a risk for voter fraud. Trump spokesperson Tim Murtaugh wrote on Twitter Friday that California’s order is a “thinly-veiled political tactic” put in place to “undermine election security.”  Researchers, however, have found that voter fraud is actually incredibly rare. And polls have found that despite negative messaging about voting by mail from the president and his allies, mail-in ballots are overwhelmingly popular: For instance, an April Reuters/Ipsos poll found that three-quarters of the American public, including most Republicans, support automatic mail-in ballots for the presidential election as the pandemic continues.  Five states — Colorado, Hawaii, Oregon, Washington, and Utah — already mail out ballots to all registered voters for every election, and 34 other states provide access to mail-in ballots for anyone who wants one. As the coronavirus continues to pose a public health risk, other states are looking to follow their lead.  In addition to California, New York and Kentucky recently launched programs intended to improve access to mail-in ballots by sending absentee ballot applications to all voters. New York’s ballots include prepaid postage so voters can return their ballot for free, and Kentucky allows absentee ballot requests to be made online.  Ohio was the first state to cancel in-person voting, switching to a mail-in election for the 2020 primary, and counties in other states have made plans to send absentee ballot applications to all registered voters — including Palm Beach County in Florida, where Trump is registered to vote. But as local election officials have sounded the alarm that there may not be enough time for every state to fully transition to mail-in voting — particularly given that some states do not have the funds to pay for such an endeavor — other voting rights advocates have pushed for the federal government to make national changes. For instance, Sens. Ron Wyden (D-OR) and Amy Klobuchar (D-MN) introduced a bill that would expand early and mail-in voting, as well as require states to have contingency voting plans for emergencies. Wyden also introduced a bill early last year that would allow all eligible voters to vote by mail, though it has not moved through Congress.  The CARES Act, passed in late March, included $400 million to help states run elections during the pandemic, but some states have raised concerns that they may not be able to access the money because of restrictions, such as a requirement that states match 20 percent of any elections-related funding they receive. And the Brennan Center for Justice, a nonpartisan public policy institute at New York University Law School, estimated the funding would cover just a fraction of what’s needed to safely conduct elections this year. To address these concerns, Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi has called for up to $4 billion to be set aside for voting by mail as lawmakers put together a fourth coronavirus-related stimulus package. But as Trump and other leading Republicans decry efforts to expand voting access — citing voter fraud and, in one instance, baldly noting it would hurt Republicans’ electoral chances — that proposal may fail to become a reality. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.The United States has endured over 78,000 coronavirus deaths as of May 8, more than three times as many as the second hardest-hit country, the United Kingdom. Unlike most comparable countries, the trajectory of the per-day death toll has not yet meaningfully bent down here, nor has the number of new cases diagnosed each day.  By contrast, Germany and Japan combined have had just over 9,000 confirmed Covid-related deaths. Though Japan didn’t get off to a great start, the number of new cases per day has been hovering around 200 there. In Germany, it’s around 1,000. In either case, the new case numbers are far below the nearly 15,000 identified in the US on Thursday. Put succinctly, while both countries continue to grapple with the virus and life is far from normal for people there, the pandemic has been somewhat brought under control to an extent Americans can only dream of. Here, by contrast, things aren’t really improving — and there’s no indication the US government is capable of meeting the challenge. In fact, it’s quite the opposite. And yet, to hear President Donald Trump tell it, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe are enamored by his fantastic response to the novel coronavirus, and they’re following his lead. They’ve even told him as much on the phone. “I spoke with Angela Merkel today, I spoke with Prime Minister Abe of Japan; I spoke with many of the leaders over the last four or five days. And so many of them, almost all of them — I would say all of them, not everyone would want to admit it — but they all view us as the world leader, and they’re following us,” Trump told House Republicans during an on-camera meeting Friday. "All of them, not everyone would want to admit it, but they all view us as the world leader, and they're following us" -- Trump claims that the US coronavirus response is the toast of world leaders (the US has well over 2 times more deaths than the second hardest-hit country) pic.twitter.com/3bW3Olt8Qj Trump went on to talk up how US ventilator and testing capacity have expanded over the past month or so. But what he doesn’t seem to grasp is that because countries like Germany and Japan had more success containing the initial outbreaks of coronavirus, they haven’t needed ventilators as badly. And while Trump is in the habit of boasting about how the US has conducted so many more tests than other countries, the reality is that countries where the virus didn’t spin as out of control as it did here haven’t had to play catchup like the US has. In short, Germany and Japan have little need for American help and certainly would not be interested in following the path the US is on. Trump, however, is trying to turn that reality on its head. Trump’s bizarre comments about Germany and Japan came moments after he talked about the rising US death toll as if it were something he’s powerless to do anything about. He favorably compared the current state of affairs with a scenario in which the federal government literally did nothing and left as many as 2.2 million Americans to die. “So many people have died. That’s the one thing we can’t do anything about, unfortunately,” he said. “What I can say is if we did it the different way — if we went ‘herd,’ if we just said ‘let’s wing it’ — we would’ve been talking about numbers that would’ve been unsustainable.” TRUMP: "So many people have died. That's the one thing we can't do anything about, unfortunately. What I can say is if we did it the different way -- if we went 'herd,' if we just said 'let's wing it' -- we would've been talking about numbers that would've been unsustainable." pic.twitter.com/4HZpqLdMJT Implicit in Trump’s comment is the idea that 2,000 Americans dying a day from the coronavirus is “sustainable.” Instead of trying to reduce that number by urging people to stay home and continue social distancing to slow the spread, Trump is doing the opposite by calling for states to reopen businesses. Models predict that states following his guidance will ultimately result in tens of thousands of preventable deaths, but at this point, the president’s paramount concern is trying to transform the coronavirus into an economic success story.  What Friday’s comments laid bare is that to the extent Trump has a plan to deal with the coronavirus, it’s a combination of passing the buck to the states, blind faith, and changing the topic whenever possible.  Trump insisted during Friday’s event that “this is going to go away, at some point.” Pressed to provide evidence, he said, “I just rely on what doctors say.”  TRUMP: This is going to go away.REPORTER: But what evidence have you seen that coronavirus will go away without a vaccine?TRUMP: I just rely on what doctors say. (No doctor that I'm aware of has said this will happen) pic.twitter.com/UC7qvDyypH But no serious doctor believes the coronavirus will simply disappear on its own. The top infectious disease experts in Trump’s own government have even said so publicly. That comment wasn’t the only indication Trump is struggling to comprehend the coronavirus problem. He responded to news that Katie Miller, press secretary for Mike Pence, tested positive for the coronavirus by framing it as an argument against frequent testing. “Katie, she tested very good for a long period of time, and then all of the sudden today she tested positive,” Trump said. “This is why the whole concept of tests aren’t necessarily great.” TRUMP: “Katie, she tested very good for a long period of time, and then all of the sudden she tested positive ... this is why the whole concept of tests aren't necessarily great ... today, I guess, for some reason, she tested positive."   pic.twitter.com/xNFEJn3W9s But the Miller news is actually an argument for more testing, not less, as the whole idea is to identify and quarantine asymptomatic carriers (as she claims to be) before they come into contact with other people and unwittingly spread the virus.  It’s also an argument for wearing masks. But even when he had an event with elderly World War II veterans at high risk of dying from Covid-19 on Friday, Trump refused to wear one.  The news moves fast. To stay updated, follow Aaron Rupar on Twitter, and read more of Vox’s policy and politics coverage. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. America fell behind in its battle against the novel coronavirus before it ever came to the United States. We have talked about how the US health system made us less prepared for a pandemic than other rich countries with universal health care. But the US had another important structural disadvantage: we are markedly less healthy than our economic peers. Considering what we know about how Covid-19 affects people with chronic conditions — particularly people with cardiovascular diseases, as well as diabetes — Americans were especially vulnerable to this particular pathogen. One chart tells the tale, looking at how likely Americans are to die prematurely from a few key conditions (heart disease, cancer, diabetes, chronic respiratory disease). The US outpaces all the European countries on the list, along with Canada, Japan, and South Korea. “Disease burden due to cardiovascular disease, chronic respiratory disease, and diabetes is similarly higher in the US than in comparable countries,” Cynthia Cox, director of the Peterson-KFF Health System Tracker, told me. “Those are certainly factors that make the US more prone to a problematic outbreak.” This is something the US had control over. But, as we covered in our international health care series earlier this year, America’s failure to deliver universal coverage paired with the high out-of-pocket costs Americans are forced to pay for their medical care has led to worse health outcomes here than patients experience in our peer countries. And only in America will there be an enormous spike in the uninsured rate because of the coronavirus-driven economic recession. But these problems have been with us a long time and they have made us more vulnerable in the coronavirus pandemic. On the other hand, Cox pointed out, the US did have one important structural advantage — though it’s not really anything we can take credit for. America’s population is meaningfully younger than that of rich European countries. Covid-19 is hardest on the elderly, and simply having an older population can make a country more vulnerable to the disease. When it all shakes out, the US has a middling case fatality rate (a metric that is also dependent on how widespread testing is, though, at this point, the testing situation here is more “stubbornly mediocre” than “dangerously bad”) compared to other countries.  But going by our age demographics, it’s not an impressive performance. Some of the hardest-hit countries in deaths per capita — Italy, Spain, and France, for starters — also have proportionally more older people than the US does. On the other hand, Germany has a larger elderly population, relatively, but they are also healthier than the US. And they benefited from a stronger public health response to the Covid-19 threat. Every country’s coronavirus experience is dependent on different factors. Some of them are within a country’s control (the strength of its health system and the resulting well-being of its population) and some are not as much (long-standing demographic trends). What we know for the US is that our coronavirus response has been hindered by variables which we had the power to influence, had we acted before the virus ever came here. But this is a virus that more severely affects older people, of which we have fewer than our peer countries — and it’s less dangerous for younger people, unlike deadly pathogens of the past. It is, in a way, a grim warning for us. A big reason the coronavirus pandemic hasn’t been worse so far — and it’s all relative, considering more than 75,000 Americans have already lost their lives — is a little bit of luck. Get our newsletter in your inbox once a week. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  The Trump administration’s decision to abandon efforts to suppress the coronavirus and even sideline its own task force’s guidelines in favor of a quick lift of restrictions on economic activity naturally prompted the question: Why? After all, models from both the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation that the White House had previously relied on for guidance say that moving to reopen now will likely lead to a substantial increase in the death toll.  The answer, according to a May 4 Washington Post report by William Wan, Lenny Bernstein, Laurie McGinley, and Josh Dawsey, is that the president prefers a different model, one that paints a rosier picture. Referred to in the original Post report as the “cubic model,” it was attributed to former Council of Economic Advisers Chair Kevin Hassett, and the Post reported that “people with knowledge of that model say it shows deaths dropping precipitously in May — and essentially going to zero by May 15.” This report and follow-up reporting and controversies unleashed a cavalcade of online snark and jokes, but the core revelation is deadly serious: There simply is no theoretical or empirical basis for the belief that restrictions can be broadly lifted in May 2020 without a significant increase in loss of life.  Depending on whom you ask, the “cubic model” is either risible nonsense or not a forecast at all (or both). And while it’s hardly unheard of for political decision-makers to embark on a course of action that contradicts expert advice, an unusual hallmark of the way Trump conducts his administration is the way he often demands reasonably well-qualified people to humiliate themselves on his behalf.  Nate Silver, a professional builder of quantitative models, immediately (and, as it turns out, presciently) guessed/joked that the story of Hassett’s model was that he plugged some numbers into an Excel file and then had the computer draw lines until he got an optimistic forecast. I would bet $538 that the White House's "cubic model" is literally just an MS-EXCEL trendline with a third-degree (cubic) polynomial. https://t.co/TvrHm25dB6 My level of competency with quantitative analysis is exactly high enough that I can do this kind of “modeling” and understand why it’s a bad idea, but not high enough to make a good model of anything. To understand what happened here and why it’s absurd just takes a little explanation of Excel functions, and you need to look at some charts.  To start, you download the US daily death data from the Covid Tracking Project and put it into Excel, where you can make a scatterplot of deaths by day. One built-in Excel function lets you add a trend line to a scatterplot to see whether on the whole your data series is going up or down. The way this works is that the computer, being good at math and without knowing anything about your data, calculates a line that minimizes the average distance between the lines and the points. It looks like this. You can also, if you want, tell Excel to project this line into the future and you get this chart: That gives you a “what if this trend continues into the future at its current rate of growth” hypothetical scenario to explore. The mere fact that you can draw a straight line like this is not a forecast or a reason to believe that the linear trend will continue. By monkeying around in Excel, for example, you can reach the conclusion that if we continue on this linear growth path, more than 10,000 Americans will be dying per day by Election Day 2020. That’s not a prediction, but it is a confirmation that a purely self-interested president should try to do something to alter the trajectory of the death toll.  But you also don’t need to draw a straight line. There is theoretical reason to believe that infectious disease outbreaks exhibit an exponential growth pattern, for example, so it might be better to have Excel draw a best-fit curve that features a parabola rather than a straight line.  This chart shows both the best linear fit and the best parabolic fit, and they look extremely similar. That turns out to be an example where messing around in Excel (“exploratory data visualization” is the fancy term for it) actually tells you something informative about the data. The death toll is not currently exhibiting the kind of strong exponential growth the country saw between March 20 and April 10. That’s good news, and we actually learned something from drawing these lines. A real social scientist would make fun of me for doing this in Excel rather than using more professional-grade software like Stata or R, but it’s close enough.  The problem is that while the similarity between the linear and parabolic curves tells us the good news that the growth no longer appears to be exponential, it doesn’t tell us that it’s safe to stop worrying about public health.  Fortunately, modern computers are powerful, and Excel can draw all kinds of lines. For example, what if instead of a quadratic function, I asked it to draw a cubic function — in other words, a function where X^3 shows up in the math?  Why would a virus exhibit a cubic growth pattern? I have no idea. But it turns out that if you draw a cubic best-fit curve through the data, you see deaths dropping to zero in mid-May. Great news! Now, I am not a virologist or a math wizard, but it’s obvious looking at this chart that one property of cubic functions is that after peaking they decline rapidly to less than zero. And we know that this is not how the novel coronavirus or any other virus works.  You can draw lines through any kind of data, but to make models that provide meaningful information, your modeling choices need to make some kind of sense. It is not at all obvious to me what the best way to model the future course of the pandemic is, but it’s clearly not to use this cubic function. As far as I can tell, the only appeal of doing it that way is it happens to provide an optimistic forecast, though naturally the relevant players have angrily denied this is the case  While economics Twitter was having a field day with this cubic model idea, the Council on Economic Advisers’ Twitter account was arguing that “curve fitting can improve data visualization” and that IHME forecasts have been fairly reliable. To better visualize observed data, we also continually update a curve-fitting exercise to summarize COVID-19's observed trajectory. Particularly with irregular data, curve fitting can improve data visualization. As shown, IHME's mortality curves have matched the data fairly well. pic.twitter.com/NtJcOdA98R Hassett himself explained this in a similar way to the New York Times’s Jim Tankersley, who reported that “deaths vary by the day, particularly on weekends. To smooth out the volatility, Mr. Hassett said he had employed ‘just a canned function in Excel, a cubic polynomial.’” Both Hassett and the CEA, in other words, argue that this is not a forecast at all, just a way of taking messy data and smoothing it out to display the underlying trend better. One obvious problem with this is that the Post’s original sources seemed pretty clear that it was a forecast. After all, if it’s not a forecast, then what about it makes Trump think the bleak CDC forecast is wrong? Second, if it’s not a forecast, then why does the CEA chart show the red line projecting into the future? Last but by no means least, if what you want to do is smooth out noisy data to eliminate day-of-the-week effects, Excel has a handy function that will generate a seven-day moving average. It looks like this: There’s just no plausible way to cut the data that says the epidemic is on the verge of tapering off in a week or two. What’s more, while the Hassett “model” is certainly more optimistic than its rivals, if you think about it for 10 minutes, you’ll see that it doesn’t support the president’s policy approach anyway. We are facing a classic bad political situation where the president has decided what policy he wants to adopt but has also decided he doesn’t want to explicitly choose a course of action that could get tons of people killed, so he’s tuning out expert analysis.  The White House has, for example, shelved the official CDC guidelines for safely lifting restrictions. That’s because those guidelines say it is only safe for a handful of states to lift restrictions, but Trump’s policy is that they all should.  There is a case to be made for a decision to reopen, but it involves more people getting infected and more people dying. Consequently, Trump has taken to musing about how increasing testing levels might be a mistake because it makes the country “look bad,” while Axios reports that he is on the verge of beginning to publicly claim the official death counts are overstated.  The “cubic model” is of a piece with these tactics, a hope that the basic realities can be wished away or obscured — just where we started when Trump was promising the United States would soon go from 15 cases down to zero and hesitating to allow Covid-19 patients off a cruise ship because it would make the numbers look worse. After all, if it were genuinely true that death numbers were about to begin plunging and new fatalities would be all but eliminated by mid-May, it would make very little sense to lift restrictions this week. The US could just wait 10 days, achieve total victory, and then open up under uncontroversial circumstances.  The projection validates an early reopening only in the sense of muddying the waters about the actual consequences, rather than validating the decision itself. And since it doesn’t make sense as a matter of logic, it doesn’t matter that it doesn’t make sense mathematically or epidemiologically, either.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Hillary Clinton wore a black breathing mask imprinted with the word “VOTE” in Twitter and Instagram posts this weekend, posing in what appeared as a homespun effort to pitch “the must-have accessory for spring.” The posts bear an unassuming hashtag: #MaskingForAFriend. But behind this hashtag and those fun posts — as well as similar ones by celebrities like Arnold Schwarzenegger — are a group of tech billionaires trying to answer a weighty, almost existential question: How can we make sure a devastating pandemic never happens again? That’s one of the main focuses for a group formed by major tech philanthropists including Bill Gates and Eric Schmidt, who are behind a new push to cajole overseas governments to more fully fund international institutions like the World Health Organization (WHO). The group, called the Pandemic Action Network, is behind the #MaskingForAFriend campaign that seeks to change personal behavior. But its more important ambition is to change government behavior. This initiative is one of the more forward-looking attempts from philanthropy to shape what the world looks like after the crisis, and one of the few focused on political advocacy. The push is small for now, with just $1.5 million in initial cash from Schmidt Futures, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, and other backers. But the Pandemic Action Network aims to lead a pressure campaign that shapes the policy debate, a debate that will be at the fore of the next wave of pandemic response efforts.  No makeup? No pantsuit? No problem. ⁣ ⁣ I’ve got the must-have accessory for spring.⁣ ⁣ I’m wearing a mask (and voting!) for my country, my community, and my grandchildren. #MaskingForAFriend A post shared by  Hillary Clinton (@hillaryclinton) on May 2, 2020 at 7:57am PDT Gabrielle Fitzgerald, who led program advocacy at the Gates Foundation for a decade and then a $100 million push by billionaire Paul Allen to combat Ebola, can recall many times when international institutions issued reports sounding the alarm — then languished with inadequate follow-up — or made bold promises that they wouldn’t meet. For instance, after the Ebola crisis, the WHO in 2015 set out to raise a $100 million contingency fund for emergency response but has only raised about $46 million to date. Filling that funding gap is one of the things that Fitzgerald, now the Pandemic Action Network’s co-founder, would have pushed for. Other causes that Fitzgerald’s new group might take up include pressuring foreign governments to fund the Gates-founded Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, which develops vaccines, along with possible companion efforts in the future that seek to develop therapeutics. They may also look domestically, advocating, for instance, for more US resources in America’s Strategic National Stockpile. “There’s a lot of talk of ‘this can’t happen again.’ But right now, all of the focus is on the response,” Fitzgerald said. “At some point very soon, we need to start looking ahead beyond the immediate crisis and start thinking about what mechanisms need to be put in place to make sure it doesn’t happen.” Despite the death toll posed by a global pandemic, the wealthy have largely under-funded work meant to gird the world for a deadly outbreak. This research area, sometimes called “biosecurity,” has been a priority for just a few major philanthropies, like Gates and the Open Philanthropy Project, funded by Facebook co-founder Dustin Moskovitz. Moskovitz has said he is thinking about the world after the coronavirus, too, and that he worries an “engineered pandemic” in the future could be even worse than the coronavirus. “We don’t think it’s too early to start thinking about how to prevent something like this — or worse — from happening again,” Moskovitz tweeted last week. “Reducing the likelihood of such an outcome is one of the most critical projects philanthropy and government can undertake, which is why even today, in the midst of COVID-19, our biosecurity program has a lot of its energy focused on looking ahead.” The hope and expectation is that more donors will join Moskovitz in spending big on pandemic preparedness work once we’re through this. But that’s not the only uphill battle for the Pandemic Action Network. It doesn’t only need philanthropists to prioritize pandemics, but also to prioritize advocacy efforts, which some philanthropists remain uncomfortable with. Some don’t see the upside in getting too political. Others worry it could endanger their tax-exempt status if it is seen as formal lobbying.  And so a bunch of rich people funding their own pandemic preparedness programs out of their own pocket? That’s not the world Fitzgerald is pushing for.   “If you want large-scale, system-wide policy change that’s going to be able to affect more than what you can afford to fund yourself, advocacy is a really good investment,” she said. “This is definitely an example of something that no one funder can do alone, even the biggest governments.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  Whenever a “code purple” is announced at the Walmart Sam Carroll works at in Oklahoma City, it’s a covert signal for employees to wash or sanitize their hands that customers aren’t supposed to pick up on. “But when the customers see us clean our hands, they usually put their hands out and I give them a little bit,” Carroll says. “I even joke with them, I say, ‘That’ll be $10.’” Carroll, 57, like millions of essential workers across the country, finds himself on the front lines of the coronavirus crisis. Walmart has been taking measures to protect him, but he thinks they could be doing more.  Walmart made masks mandatory for associates on April 17 and provides workers a new one every time they come in. But just 19 percent of essential workers across the country said the same of their workplaces, according to a new survey from the Shift Project out of the University of California Berkeley and UC San Francisco.  
    Related
   The report examines how essential food, grocery, retail, and delivery workers are being protected by their employers. Researchers surveyed 8,000 workers from nearly 50 big service-sector companies such as Walmart, McDonald’s, Costco, Amazon, UPS, and Walgreens between March 7 and April 9 to find out what sort of health and safety measures are being taken in their workplaces. They asked them whether cleaning has increased, whether they’re being provided gloves and masks, and whether they’re being required to wear them. About two-thirds of employees said cleaning in their workplaces had improved, but in terms of providing protective equipment such as masks and gloves, companies have a long way to go. And while some companies might have improved their sanitation and PPE regimes since the survey was taken, essential workers say there are still big gaps. Carroll, for instance, is the main provider for his family, including his wife and three sons, and as they depend on him to protect them, he is depending on Walmart to protect him. His store has hired a third-party cleaning company, but he feels they could do more. “They haven’t done a real thorough cleaning in the store,” he says. The store has always had gloves because they need them for people who work with meat in the deli, but they’re not required. Carroll, who is also a member of workers’ rights organization United for Respect, doesn’t have much use for them — after a while, you wind up poking a hole in them or tearing them. The global pandemic has placed a new focus on how workers are treated, especially as millions of people who work in low-paid service jobs have suddenly been deemed vital to the American economy. And while some of the conversation has centered around how much they’re paid, at the very basic level, it’s also important to talk about how they’re protected. Going to work during a global pandemic, they’re at high risk of getting sick. “There’s been a lot of attention to the lack of personal protective equipment in health care settings, but if we think about grocery stores and pharmacies and how much traffic is going through there, it’s really important to think about the essential workers who are continuing to staff these places,” said Kristen Harknett, an assistant professor at UCSF and one of the researchers behind the project. “We can’t hold onto the illusion that these jobs aren’t important, because they’re designated as essential.” Most workers say they’ve seen new cleaning procedures at their jobs, which makes sense — cleaning your surroundings and washing your hands have been some of the most prominent and earliest pieces of advice from experts when it comes to combating the coronavirus.  Overall, 65 percent of workers surveyed said their workplaces had started requiring additional cleaning, 56 percent said gloves had been made available, and only 19 percent said masks had been made available. Just because equipment is available doesn’t mean it is required: Just 18 percent of workers said they were required to wear gloves and only 7 percent were required to wear masks. And it varies. Three-quarters of drugstore and pharmacy workers and two-thirds of big-box superstore workers say they’ve seen changes in cleaning, but less than half of warehouse workers and a quarter of delivery workers say the same. About one-third of workers at restaurants, fast food stores, and coffee shops said cleaning policies hadn’t changed. To be sure, a lot of food-handling companies have pretty strict guidelines around cleanliness already. More than half of workers in those types of establishments said they had access to gloves, and they were likeliest to say gloves were required. The researchers also note that only around half of warehouse and fulfillment center workers had access to gloves, which is notable, given that so many people are ordering online to stay safe. Within industries, different companies are caring for their workers and customers at varying levels. For example, three-quarters of McDonald’s employees reported new cleaning procedures; less than half of Burger King employees did. “Among big-box stores and warehouse and fulfillment centers, Costco and Home Depot stand out and Walmart, Amazon, and UPS lag in terms of cleaning, gloves, and masks,” the report reads. “In grocery, larger shares of workers at Aldi report cleaning, gloves, and masks, while workers at Publix and Safeway report the fewest new protective measures. In pharmacy, CVS workers report less new cleaning, but more access to and requirements to use PPE.” Costco workers have also reported poor working conditions and concerns about their health.  Kory Lundberg, a spokesperson for Walmart, told me that the company has continued to “evolve on this as the situation has gone on.” He noted that the retailer has implemented health screenings and temperature checks for employees before they start their shifts, installed plexiglass at checkout lanes and in other areas, and provides hand sanitizer to workers and customers. It has also put in place an emergency leave policy that is currently set to last through May. “We continue to look and work with public health officials and understand what are the steps we can take to help keep people safe,” he said.  But for many workers, their employers’ efforts aren’t good enough. Some workers have been speaking out about the conditions they’re working under, including at Amazon, which has seen a rise in employee activism in recent years. Workers are worried the company isn’t doing enough to protect them and in March began petitioning for it to take additional steps and staging walkouts in protest of their conditions. Hibaq Mohamad, who works at an Amazon fulfillment center in Shakopee, Minnesota, told me she’s worried about the lag time on getting gloves and masks and doesn’t think the company is doing enough to clean. “It’s scary,” she said. In a statement to Vox, Amazon spokesperson Rachael Lighty said ensuring the health and safety of its employees is the company’s “top concern.” She highlighted that it has implemented more than 150 “process updates” and expects to spend more than $800 million on coronavirus-related safety measures in the first half of the year.  “Our focus remains on protecting associates in our operations network with extensive measures including distributing face masks, disinfectant wipes, hand sanitizer, implementing temperature checks, operating with strict social distancing protocols, and recognizing their contributions with additional pay and leading benefits,” Lighty said. “We encourage anyone interested in the facts to compare our overall pay and benefits, as well as our speed in managing this crisis, to other retailers and major employers across the country.” On Monday, Amazon said that a worker at its fulfillment facility in Staten Island had died of Covid-19, and on Tuesday, it confirmed an employee in Illinois had died. The first known coronavirus death of an Amazon worker happened on March 31. As Vox’s Anna North recently noted, at least 18 Walmart employees had died as of April 18, and workers at Trader Joe’s, Safeway, and Kroger stores have died as well. The Shift Project’s survey was conducted from early March to early April as the gravity of the pandemic was beginning to take hold in the United States. Companies may have tightened protective guidelines since then, but they’ve been slow to act. At the start of April, the New York Times reported that Home Depot employees said they had been told not to wear masks, and Walgreens workers had been discouraged from wearing them.  Some companies’ efforts to better protect their employees and their customers have encountered pushback from the public. One Oklahoma city reversed its mask requirement rule for shoppers after workers reported they were being threatened by customers, and a Family Dollar worker in Michigan was fatally shot after trying to enforce the store’s mask policy.  The way these service workers are being treated now is emblematic of the way they’ve always been treated, said Danny Schneider, an assistant professor at UC Berkeley and one of the researchers behind the project. “We really have a large part of the labor force that was laboring under crummy job conditions for a long time, with low wages and unstable, unpredictable, and insufficient work hours,” Schneider said.  Prior to the coronavirus outbreak, there was a sense around many jobs now deemed “essential” that they were somehow less important. They were low-skilled and low-paid. But now, that illusion is over, or at least it should be. “We can now plainly see how difficult and important these jobs are,” Schneider said. “But it’s more of the same.” On a policy level, there are things the government can do to make sure essential workers are protected and compensated. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has put out coronavirus guidelines for workplaces, and workers who feel their workplace is unsafe can report it, though how effective that will be is unclear. Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-MA) and Rep. Ro Khanna (D-CA) have pushed for an essential worker “bill of rights” in Congress that would include health and safety protection, universal paid leave, and child care support. Some Democrats and Republicans have put forth plans for essential worker hazard pay. Schneider said that people can also ask employers to do better. “The data that we show, employer by employer, shows that some employers are doing better,” he said. It doesn’t have to be an inevitable race to the bottom, and everyone can do better.  Carroll, the Walmart worker, has been with the company for 11 years and makes $11.96 an hour. He collected a one-time bonus the company offered workers in March — $300 for full-time employees, $150 for part-time. Walmart said it also moved up a quarterly payment to April that would usually be made in May. I asked him what more he would want for the retailer to do. “I would ask for hazard pay. I would ask them to back pay that hazard pay from when it started until now,” he said. I asked him how much he thinks would be adequate. “I would like it at least to be at $14 or $15 an hour,” he said, then qualified his response, chuckling with a bit of discomfort. “That sounds a little greedy, though.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Unlike many Americans who are worried about contracting or spreading the coronavirus, President Donald Trump has yet to be seen in public wearing a mask. He even went without one during his visit on Tuesday to a Honeywell facility in Arizona that otherwise requires them. The White House’s (flawed) rationale for this is that Trump doesn’t have to because he and everyone he comes into contact with is tested for the virus. In this respect, the White House is operating with one safer standard for officials, and another less-safe standard for the “warriors” Trump is now urging to go back to work in the teeth of a pandemic. This disparity was put on stark display on Wednesday.  “The notion that everyone needs to be tested is simply nonsensical,” press secretary Kayleigh McEnany said during Wednesday’s press briefing, in response to a question from NBC’s Peter Alexander about why all Americans can’t get tested like the president before they go back to work.  Those comments came hours after Trump appeared in the Oval Office with a group of nurses who weren’t wearing masks or social distancing — basic safety precautions they said weren’t necessary because they had all been tested for the coronavirus before meeting with the president. Here's a nurse who met with Trump on Wednesday discussing how everyone who meets with the president gets tested for coronavirus, followed hours later by Press Secretary Kayleigh McEnany saying applying that same standard of testing to the American public is "nonsensical" pic.twitter.com/Eb1nIuFDkU McEnany didn’t argue that more testing wouldn’t be a good thing. Her argument was that testing on the scale Alexander suggested would be impractical because “if we tested every single American in this country at this moment, we’d have to test them an hour later and an hour later after that, because at any moment you could theoretically contract this virus.” While testing all 328 million Americans every hour is obviously more than can be asked for, some experts do think that everyone needs to get tested on a regular basis in order for some sense of normalcy to be restored. My colleague German Lopez has detailed perhaps the most aggressive and prominent of these proposals: Paul Romer, a Nobel Prize-winning economist, has projected that the US needs more than 20 million tests each day, effectively letting the country test each person in the country every two weeks. He estimated that would cost $100 billion — which may sound like a lot, but it pales in comparison to the cost of keeping the economy shut down. Coincidentally, news that broke on Thursday about one of Trump’s personal valets testing positive for the coronavirus serves as a good example of how testing can help stop the spread. CNN reported that since the valet had been in direct contact with Trump, following the positive test, both Trump and Vice President Mike Pence were administered coronavirus tests that came back negative.  Testing of that sort helps trace the virus’s spread. But because of inadequate capacity, it continues to be extremely difficult for people who don’t have symptoms to get tested, even though they play a key role in spreading the coronavirus. 
    Related
   Not only is the US nowhere near conducting the 20 million tests a day that Romer recommends, but it’s nowhere near conducting the 500,000 or so that experts who are more modest about testing think is necessary to safely reopen businesses. Right now, on a good day, the US is conducting about half that, or 250,000 tests, according to information gathered by the Covid Tracking Project. Trump is not interested in engaging with this problem. He’s regularly contradicted public health experts in his own government by insisting, falsely, that states already have more than enough testing capacity to reopen businesses and schools. But the reality is there hasn’t even been enough tests for all 100 US senators to be proactively screened or for professional sports franchises to procure them.  Instead of deploying the almost unlimited resources of the federal government in the hope of solving the problem, however, Trump has largely delegated the testing problem to cash-strapped states, while telling brazen lies about how US testing stacks up compared to other countries. He even alluded to self-interested motives for resisting demands to expand the country’s testing capacity on Wednesday, telling reporters that “if we did very little testing, we wouldn’t have the most cases. So, in a way, by doing all of this testing, we make ourselves look bad.” Trump has political reasons for wanting to keep the known number of coronavirus cases in the country as low as possible, but it seems a very different set of rules apply to him.  It makes sense — even if it’s not 100 percent foolproof — that the White House is screening people who come in contact with the president. In addition to keeping the president healthy, it allows him to not wear a mask and in that way project a sense of normalcy to Americans, many of whom aren’t leaving their homes these days without one.  But Trump is only able to do that because the White House has testing abilities that the rest of the country doesn’t. To use the military metaphors Trump is accustomed to, the general is sending his “warriors” into battle without the intelligence needed to know where the “invisible enemy” is hiding. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Despite Congress’s approval of more than $720 billion to help small businesses during the pandemic, many businesses and nonprofits have been completely shut out of receiving this support.  A new bill from Sen. Kamala Harris (D-CA) and Rep. Ayanna Pressley (D-MA) aims to help fix this disparity: The Saving Our Street Act, which was shared exclusively with Vox, would allocate grants of up to $250,000 to businesses that have fewer than 10 employees. The specific targeting of these “micro-businesses” is intended to ensure that smaller entities aren’t excluded from much-needed stimulus: As NPR reports, recent Small Business Administration data shows that the average loan size has been smaller in the second wave of funding, but larger loans still took up 16 percent of funds, while going to just 0.35 percent of recipients.  Despite the progress in the second round of funding, inequities remain. With millions of companies competing for bites of a too-small pie, the design of the program — which is open to businesses with 500 employees or fewer, as well as large hotel and restaurant chains — still means smaller businesses have missed out.  Because larger companies had more resources to apply for these loans quickly — and many banks prioritized their applications — smaller firms have been less likely to get approval before funds are depleted. As a result, chains including Shake Shack were able to obtain loans in the first round of funding, which they’ve since returned, while smaller mom-and-pop businesses were left in limbo.  The SOS Act seeks to prevent this dynamic from playing out again. It also designates the majority of its grants — 75 percent — to business and nonprofit owners from underrepresented groups, which were less likely to benefit from existing loan options as well. As defined by the legislation, these underrepresented groups include people of color, women, and veterans, among others.  “For the millions of micro ... and minority-owned businesses left out of the Paycheck Protection Program or shuffled to the back of the line, the Saving Our Street Act provides a critical lifeline,” says Amanda Ballantyne, the executive director of Main Street Alliance, an advocacy group for small businesses that supports the bill.  As is the case with many Democratic stimulus proposals, a major outstanding question is whether this legislation can pick up enough bipartisan support to advance in a divided Congress.  The legislation allocates $124.5 billion to a new grant program focused solely on microbusinesses. That means businesses with fewer than 10 employees, but entities located in lower-income neighborhoods that have as many as 20 employees could also be eligible.  To qualify, businesses must make less than $1 million in gross revenue per year, and nonprofits must bring in less than $500,000 in gross annual receipts. Publicly traded companies and hedge-fund-owned businesses are explicitly excluded.   These thresholds are intended to target the aid explicitly at a swath of neighborhood businesses that may need it, a Harris staffer tells Vox. According to Awesta Sarkash, the government affairs manager at advocacy group Small Business Majority, more than 80 percent of small businesses have fewer than 20 employees, and the average annual revenue of those with less than 10 employees is about $1 million or less.  The application for these grants would also differ from the existing Economic Injury Disaster Loan (EIDL) program and the PPP. Instead of applying through the SBA or banks, businesses would apply directly with the Treasury Department, which would work with the IRS to get the money out to them. (The IRS’s existing infrastructure — already used to dole out tax refunds and other federal benefits — could make it a more efficient body than SBA for distributing grants at this scale, Sarkash notes.) Businesses and nonprofits that qualify for the grants could obtain up to $250,000 each to cover costs including payroll, rent, and utilities.  As part of the application, businesses also need to demonstrate that they’ve experienced a 20 percent month-over-month gross revenue decline since February 15, 2020, and commit to maintaining health care benefits for their employees. Businesses aren’t able to use these grants to pay for salaries over $100,000, and they’d still be eligible for the grants if they’ve received a PPP or EIDL loan — as long as the money is used for a different purpose.  Importantly, too, the bill specifically designates 75 percent of the grant funds to underrepresented businesses. As CBS News reported, experts estimated that up to 90 percent of women and minority business owners were unable to secure PPP funding in the first round because of the way the program was set up. Many large banks like Bank of America, for example, would only take applications from existing clients, and people of color were less likely to have these established relationships.  The SOS Act also intends to offer more transparency than the programs that have already been established when it comes to collecting data on factors including gender and race of the small business and nonprofit owners who are participating in it.  So far, Congress has approved hundreds of billions of dollars to fund both PPP and EIDL, but it’s likely it won’t be enough.  Given the immense demand for both loan programs during the current economic downturn, there are thousands of small businesses that could still need the financial support once the funding for these efforts runs out again.  As Congress weighs another stimulus package, a third boost to small business funding could well be needed to address this shortage — something both parties have been able to get on board with in the past.  The appetite for more funding, however, may be waning. Although supporting small businesses has been a bipartisan priority up until this point, Republicans have begun to signal concerns about committing to another ambitious funding package due to worries about adding to the national debt.  Whether lawmakers can sort out their differences on this front will have a major effect on if the SOS Act — and other small business support — is able to move forward.  Correction, May 7: A previous version of this article misidentified the share of loans in the Paycheck Protection Program coming from large banks as the share going to large companies. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Testing is an essential part of resolving the Covid-19 coronavirus pandemic.  It’s essential to determining who has the virus, which can spread from people who may not exhibit any symptoms at all, sometimes for weeks. These unwitting spreaders are prolonging the pandemic, forcing the government to enact costly economic shutdowns. The way to relax these measures is to test people, sometimes repeatedly, and isolate the infected.  But since there still aren’t enough tests in the US to go around, who should be tested?  Current guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) put hospitalized patients with symptoms; health care workers and first responders with symptoms; and nursing home residents and prisoners at the top of the list — and people who don’t have any Covid-19 symptoms much lower.  However, some researchers say the focus right now should be on finding people with the virus who don’t have symptoms because they are driving new infections. People who are starting to experience fever, shortness of breath, and a loss of smell, they say, should not be tested and should be treated as if they are already infected.  It’s a debate that exposes the tension between treating individual patients and protecting the public at large. But it’s not a hypothetical; these are decisions that have to be made now. Experts estimate we should be deploying upward of millions of tests per day. Yet the United States is barely getting above 220,000 daily tests. And it’s forcing many health districts into the unfamiliar territory of rationing tests, forcing them to confront the prickly question of who does or does not get swabbed. The number of tests and how they’re deployed will shape the trajectory of this pandemic.  There are several therapies for Covid-19 under investigation. Some, like remdesivir, are being used to treat patients under compassionate use guidelines or emergency use guidelines.  But right now, there isn’t a specific drug for Covid-19 for broad use, so a positive diagnostic test for the illness doesn’t change how most patients are treated. In other words, if you have symptoms, a diagnosis won’t affect how you’re treated by doctors. In addition, by the time an infected person has symptoms like fever and breathing difficulty, the virus is often quite far into its replication cycle and may be in decline, so a diagnostic test may not even pick up the disease. And at that point, many of the symptoms stem from the body’s immune response to the virus, like inflammation and fever, rather than the direct damage from the virus itself. France’s health minister Olivier Véran told the French broadcaster LCI on April 30 that testing people with symptoms wouldn’t have done much to control the pandemic.  “A test does not cure. A test doesn’t change the treatment. A test doesn’t change isolation [protocol],” he said. “If we had tested absolutely everyone, everyone with symptoms, we would have had more or less the same number of cases.” Since it doesn’t make a difference in how patients are treated, Paul Romer, an economist at New York University, argues that testing such patients doesn’t make sense. Romer co-authored an article for the Atlantic with bioethicist Ezekiel Emanuel laying out his case for not testing patients with symptoms.  “To safely reopen closed businesses and revive American social life, we need to perform many more tests — and focus them on the people most likely to spread Covid-19, not sick patients,” wrote Romer and Emanuel.  Romer explained that by the time a patient has symptoms of Covid-19, the diagnostic test doesn’t provide much more useful information. For instance, a patient may show up with a very low blood oxygen saturation, fever, and congested lungs, and may have been exposed to someone else with Covid-19.  “Suppose you run the test. If it comes back positive, you’re going to treat it like they’re positive. If it comes back negative, you’re probably going to say ‘it was a false negative and we gotta presume this person is positive’ and do the same thing,” Romer said. “So what’s the point of the test?”  
    Related
   The better approach, according to Romer, is to presume that people with symptoms have the virus and are infectious. And rather than testing again to confirm the virus is gone, hospitals should establish a standard isolation period after the last date symptoms are present. (The CDC recommends 10 days of precautions after symptoms first appear and three days after recovery.) Those saved tests can then be deployed to trace the contacts of the presumed infected, some of whom might not have symptoms and could be contagious. Those who test positive for Covid-19, even without symptoms, can then be directed to isolate themselves until the infection passes, limiting further spread of the disease. This pattern of repeated testing and isolation will eventually extinguish the pandemic.  Tests aren’t the only scarce resource in the Covid-19 pandemic; there also aren’t enough gowns, masks, beds, and health care personnel to go around.  That’s why some experts say we need to make sure critical resources, like personal protective equipment (PPE), are reserved for health workers dealing directly with the highly infectious virus. Some Covid-19 patients need to be treated for weeks, and everyone entering their room needs fresh protective gear every time they enter, so treating a single patient can consume a lot of scarce resources. “Right now, we’re sort of in the midst of shortages of so many different materials around the country, and one thing our institution is really trying to do is save on PPE,” said David Pride, an infectious disease specialist at UC San Diego Health. “And to do that we’ve had to do a protocol where we are testing every single person that gets admitted to our hospital system.” Pride added that another issue is that the isolation regulations around Covid-19 patients mean that they can’t see their families, which is a huge emotional burden. “If we can demonstrate through successive testing, meaning multiple rounds of testing, that they are not shedding the virus, they can come off of these precautions, which means that they can actually have their loved ones there,” he said.  Robert Atmar, an infectious disease physician at the Baylor College of Medicine, said that it’s also worth considering how the information from a test can be used for public health. “The main question is how the health department responds to a positive test,” Atmar said in an email. If no contacts are being traced, then it might make sense to presume infections in patients to save tests. But if everyone who is presumed infected is traced, then contact tracers will waste valuable time and resources following the footsteps of people who may not have been infected.  Christine Mitchell, the executive director at the Center for Bioethics at Harvard Medical School, noted that while finding asymptomatic spreaders is essential to slowing the pandemic, identifying the infected can help limit the spread inside hospitals. For instance, testing can help determine whether someone can share a room with another Covid-19 patient. If they were uninfected, this could expose them to the virus and add new complications. “I don’t know why it’s necessary to advocate not testing patients,” Mitchell said. “You do need to know these things to create a safe environment for patients as well as a safe environment for other patients.” Aside from whether to test patients who have symptoms for Covid-19, most experts do agree on who else should be ranked high for testing, namely health workers and first responders on the front lines of the pandemic. Doctors, nurses, and hospital staff face a greater risk of exposure to the virus, and because they are in a health setting, they run the risk of infecting others as they move from patient to patient. If they’re sidelined with an infection, they aren’t easily replaced, adding more strain on the health system as the number of caregivers declines. So it’s crucial to catch any infection in their ranks early, which may mean testing as frequently as every day.  Other workers in essential, high-exposure roles like grocery store clerks, aides in assisted care facilities, and delivery personnel should also be tested regularly.  Mitchell said another high priority should be testing people in situations where Covid-19 infections can run rampant. “Nursing homes, senior living facilities, prisons, immigrants in these big camps who are in very, very close quarters,” Mitchell said.  
    Related
   Another important category is people who could benefit from early detection and treatment, particularly those with preexisting health conditions, like high blood pressure or compromised immune systems.  Mitchell added that testing should not just center on diagnosing patients, but some resources should also be used to estimate the prevalence of the virus in the population. This information can be valuable for public health officials, providing population-level data that can help them interpret individual tests. Data can be gathered with diagnostic tests as well as serological tests for antibodies to the virus, which can identify people who were previously infected but don’t have an active infection. That protocol could mix random tests with contact traces.  “That’s easily justified under a ‘greater good’ rationale,” Mitchell said. “That would allow us to take a look overall at the country in a way that has some scientific support for choosing where to lighten up on physical distancing or being at home all the time.” But as long as testing capacity is limited, there will be people who want tests who can’t get them. Without a massive scale-up in testing capacity, more difficult decisions about allocating tests lie ahead.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Gov. Andrew Cuomo is leaning on tech billionaires to rebuild New York after the coronavirus — a reminder of how the mega-rich are consolidating their power and expanding their influence even as they offer to help respond to the pandemic. Cuomo has tapped Bill Gates’s foundation and former Google CEO Eric Schmidt to “reimagine” New York’s economy, health care system, and school system, the governor said in back-to-back briefings on Tuesday and Wednesday. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has been chosen to “revolutionize” online learning for the fall and was asked by Cuomo on Tuesday to develop a “blueprint” for how to do so. And on Wednesday, Cuomo invited Schmidt to appear at his closely watched daily news conference, where Schmidt said he would focus on telehealth, remote learning, and broadband access as the chair of a new commission focused on organizing New York’s economy more around technology. The appointments will undoubtedly give the two tech billionaires substantial influence in shaping what New York looks like a year from now. And amid a refreshed debate about the role of the ultra-wealthy in society, tapping the former Microsoft and Google CEOs will only increase the concerns raised about this plutocratic power, especially from voices in Cuomo’s own Democratic Party. Using the word “visionary” to describe Gates and Schmidt on separate occasions, Cuomo portrayed their involvement as acts of benevolence and repeatedly thanked them for their service. And yet the two initiatives are offering a way for private citizens to reshape how 20 million people in New York will live — none of whom voted for Schmidt or Gates (neither of whom technically live in New York). Details are scarce about exactly how much power these groups will have beyond issuing recommendations or whether their work will be public. But Gates could suddenly have the ability to recommend what types of things are taught to the state’s students in a “reimagined” system. Schmidt could encourage the state to significantly embrace remote health care services that could be controversial. While both have been successful business leaders, the concern would mirror the broader criticism of billionaire philanthropy: that this “help” offers a few wealthy people some undemocratic influence over American public policy. Gates has burnished his reputation during the coronavirus, emerging as a ubiquitous expert in the media and earning applause for his early (and unheeded) concerns about a possible pandemic. But for all his success in public health, Gates’s record has been viewed as far more mixed when it comes to education work, which is a second pillar of the Gates Foundation’s policy agenda. “When it comes to US education, though, we’re not yet seeing the kind of bottom-line impact we expected,” Gates candidly admitted in his annual letter earlier this year. “The fact that progress has been harder to achieve than we hoped is no reason to give up, though. Just the opposite.” That made the decision to tap Gates more controversial. A number of teachers unions, who have fought bitterly with Gates-funded forces, voiced outrage over the announcement. The exact scope of Gates’s work with Cuomo is unclear, beyond that the foundation would convene a group of experts to explore questions like how technology can be used for virtual learning in schools and colleges. Cuomo has appeared drawn to tech leaders like Gates and Schmidt for their willingness to think beyond a narrow response to a defined issue. Cuomo said he is seeking to use the current crisis as an opportunity to build a stronger school system. “His ideas and thoughts on technology and education he’s spoken about for many years,” Cuomo said of Gates. “But we now have a moment in history where we can actually incorporate and advance those ideas.”  Cuomo spoke similarly gushingly of Schmidt, calling him “the best mind in this country, if not on the globe” to incorporate technology into the economy of the future. “Let’s look at what we just went through. Let’s anticipate a future through that lens. And tell us how we can incorporate these lessons,” Cuomo said. That’s when Schmidt appeared via videoconference, pitching the same crisis-as-an-opportunity messaging. “We can take this terrible disaster and accelerate all of those in ways that will make things much, much better,” Schmidt said. “My own view is that these moments are a chance to revisit things that are not getting enough attention, and we have systems that need to be updated.” Unsurprisingly, those on the left aren’t taking kindly to the rollout of Cuomo’s kitchen cabinet. Here’s activist Zephyr Teachout, who ran against Cuomo for the Democratic nomination for governor in 2014. Cuomo is trying to take out the troubling democracy play-acting and go straight to rule by billionaires. Monday Gates.Tuesday Schmidt. Next up, Bezos to re-imagine the future of the economy, and Zuckerberg to re-imagine news. Friday maybe Blackrock just runs everything. https://t.co/jPIkA2Bnpx Then again, the criticism of Cuomo for his ties to Schmidt isn’t new. Cuomo consulted Schmidt back in 2014 over how to deploy technology in schools, which some watchdogs saw as a potential conflict of interest for Google’s then-current CEO. Schmidt is also a longtime Democratic powerbroker and major donor. And yet the public embrace of tech billionaires like Gates and Schmidt is particularly striking as the Democratic Party grows significantly more uncomfortable with these displays of affection toward Silicon Valley and its leaders. Cuomo has been increasingly speculated about as a future presidential candidate. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Nine prominent senators — all in the Democratic caucus — have penned a letter to President Donald Trump urging him to use wartime authorities to increase the amount of protective personal equipment (PPE) and testing supplies needed to confront the coronavirus. Led by Sen. Chris Van Hollen (D-MD) and joined by Sens. Angus King (I-ME), Gary Peters (D-MI), Kamala Harris (D-CA), Mazie Hirono (D-HI), Patrick Leahy (D-VT), Debbie Stabenow (D-MI), Mark Warner (D-VA), and Jack Reed (D-RI), the letter details how states have struggled to get what they need for their outbreak response. Medical professionals lack the masks, gowns, and other items necessary to stay safe as they treat patients. And labs don’t have the requisite materials like swabs or complete kits to test people for the virus. The lawmakers’ solution? Have Trump invoke Title III of the Defense Production Act (DPA), a Korean War-era law that gives the president greater powers over industry, to have the federal government provide loans and other financial incentives to firms so they can make what’s needed. “It is clear that these widespread shortages will not be fully resolved until the nation’s production capacity can be dramatically scaled up, and despite unprecedented global demand, private sector companies have been reticent to expand production capacity without support and direction from the federal government,” a letter draft obtained by Vox reads. Trump has used parts of the DPA before, most famously to boost the production of ventilators for hospitals. But, as the letter highlights, Trump has only used Title III twice: First on April 11 to increase the number of N95 masks, and then on April 29 to make more testing swabs.  In an interview after obtaining the letter, Van Hollen told me the focus on Title III as opposed to other parts of the DPA is because it “has been totally underutilized, and it can be a very effective tool.” That means millions of dollars in federal funding remain untapped to help businesses make products frontline medical workers and everyday citizens desperately need.  The CARES Act passed in March allotted $1 billion for the federal government to provide financial help to companies aim to make PPE and testing materials. The law also allows the government to provide loans or purchase technologies companies need to make the desired product. It’s no surprise, then, that Trump’s opponents in Congress have noticed the lethargy with which the Trump administration has addressed the shortfall. “This crisis requires faster, more coordinated action to limit loss of life in the near term and over the next year,” the senators wrote.  Warner, one of the letter’s signatories, is perplexed by the inaction. “I just cannot understand why the president hasn’t invoked the DPA to scale up testing and manufacturing of PPE,” he told me. “Considering how much this president likes centralized power, it’s a total head-scratcher.” It’s unclear — and rather unlikely — that this letter will spur Trump to act. What is clear, though, is that he and his administration still have a lot of work to do to help the country defeat the disease. “We should be putting the pedal to the metal here,” Van Hollen told me. “We really want to push this, because it’s a good fit for increasing supplies.” As Vox’s German Lopez noted last week, the US is woefully beneath the testing levels required to understand who has the coronavirus — and the main reason is the lack of testing equipment. All of the major plans [to end social distancing], including Trump’s, rely on much more testing to track and contain the coronavirus outbreak. On the low end, the plans call for 500,000 tests a day. On the high end, they call for tens of millions of tests. But despite recent improvements, the country still faces a major obstacle to scaling up testing: a supply shortage. Every test requires an extensive supply line to work correctly — one that ensures a sample is collected from a patient, then shipped to a lab, then tested at that lab, and then, finally, the result is reported back to the patient. Each of these steps requires a whole host of people and materials to function. And as much of the country considers opening back up, many businesses don’t have the proper equipment to protect their employees.  Last month, the Washington Post reported that the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) received around 3,000 complaints about unsafe working conditions. Protests have already started across the US in part because employees don’t have enough masks and gloves available to work safely. Trump has a responsibility to help the country get what it needs. Whether or not he listens to the advice of non-Republican lawmakers is a different story. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The United Kingdom’s digital contact tracing app is almost here, and even the organization behind it admits it’s still a work in progress that has the potential for “unintended consequences.” It also may be a troubling preview of how digital contact tracing during the coronavirus pandemic will play out in the United States as a disparate network of statewide contact tracing programs is starting to roll out.  In order for a contact tracing app to actually work, it has to have widespread adoption. So if an app doesn’t have the confidence of its intended users — due to privacy concerns, functionality issues, or even because of questions over its legality — people won’t use it. On the other hand, an app that preserves privacy too well won’t give public health authorities enough information about the virus’s spread for a proper response. The UK joins the US, France, Germany, Singapore, and many other countries in trying to strike the difficult balance between making an app that’s both usable and useful. Trials of the UK’s National Health Service (NHS) app have begun on the Isle of Wight, an island off the southern coast of England with a population of about 140,000 (who seem to have mixed feelings about being the UK’s contact tracing guinea pigs). Government workers were given access to the app on Tuesday, with the rest of the island’s population being able to use it on Thursday. The results of the pilot program will determine if and when the app is rolled out across the country. The app has been somewhat controversial due to the NHS’s decision not to use the Apple-Google exposure notification tool, which is set to be released in mid-May. Like many others, both the NHS contact tracing app and the Apple-Google tool rely on exchanging Bluetooth signals with nearby phones. But while the Apple-Google tool heavily restricts the amount of data exchanged, the NHS wanted more information and control than Apple-Google would allow, forcing it to go it alone. “An app that provides fantastic provable privacy but doesn’t help stop the spread of the disease isn’t a useful tool,” Ian Levy, technical director of the UK’s National Cyber Security Centre, which helped develop the app, said in a blog post. Primarily, the NHS wanted a centralized system, where the Bluetooth keys of both infected people and those they came in contact with are stored in a database kept by the NHS. The Apple-Google tool is decentralized, so only an infected person’s anonymized Bluetooth keys are uploaded to a server. Data about any matches with devices that came in proximity to the infected person stay on those devices’ phones without getting uploaded to a central server. This is more private, but it also means public health authorities get very little data. Some, like the NHS, say they need more data to study how the virus spreads, but some of this data, like postal code information, could be used to identify specific users, causing privacy concerns. Furthermore, the NHS hasn’t ruled out adding more identifying information to the app in the future, such as collecting location data. The NHS doesn’t have the best reputation when it comes to keeping patient data secure and private, making it harder for citizens to trust that it will be able to protect the data it gets from the app. Matthew Gould, who heads up the NHSX, the NHS’s tech and data arm, recently admitted that he was unable to give Parliament “a definitive list of exactly who would have access to the data,” which isn’t exactly reassuring. There are other issues with the NHS app beyond privacy concerns. Without the Apple-Google tool, Apple devices won’t be able to exchange keys if the app isn’t open, which could drain a device’s battery life. The Australian government encountered this problem with the recent release of its own centralized tracing app. The NHS app is also much likelier to generate false positives, as users can self-report symptoms, triggering warnings to their contacts even without confirmation that someone has the coronavirus. The UK is not the only country that thinks the Apple-Google tool has a little too much privacy while offering health authorities too little control. France similarly decided that a centralized system is more important than the technological advantages of the Apple-Google tool (the French app is set to begin testing next week). But other European countries, including Germany, Italy, and Switzerland, are backing the decentralized approach, though it’s not yet known if any of them are using the Apple-Google tool.  In the US, no individual states nor the federal government have yet committed to using the Apple-Google tool. Some states, such as Utah and North Dakota, are already using their own digital tracing systems and seeing limited success, given the North Dakota app’s reported 3 percent adoption rate. Several others, including Colorado and Louisiana, told Recode they have no plans to use the tool in any apps they develop. What remains to be seen — and what many experts have expressed significant doubts about — is if any of these digital contact tracing apps, centralized or not, will be widely used upon their release. Singapore’s experience, where only a fifth of the population downloaded its TraceTogether app, doesn’t bode well. One commonly cited report suggests a minimum adoption rate of 60 percent of the population for a contact tracing app to be effective.  When participation is voluntary and opt-in, the onus is on health authorities to make their apps as palatable as possible to the general public. For many, that will include those apps giving minimal data about their contacts and health status. A centralized database doesn’t do that, and that might be one obstacle too many for this NHS app to do what the agency hopes. Open Sourced is made possible by Omidyar Network. All Open Sourced content is editorially independent and produced by our journalists. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  In a way, the coronavirus outbreak began at the same place where it will end: large gatherings that could spiral into “superspreading” events. Those events can be blamed for some of the early explosion in transmissions in cities that have become coronavirus hot spots. But now that they’ve been canceled, large gatherings will probably be among the last public activities to resume as states start to relax social distancing. Once arena concerts and in-person business conferences come back, we’ll know we’ve really beaten Covid-19. As we seek to explain why some places have been Covid-19 hot spots and others haven’t, it’s easy to overlook one factor: luck. One ill-advised event, attended by one or two people infected with the coronavirus, can lead to a sudden escalation in cases. People spread the coronavirus to two or more people on average, but the outlier cases can mean one person infecting a half dozen other people or even more. “In a newly introduced infection, a single superspreading event can do two (related) things: increase the number of cases by many-fold, moving ahead in the race for exponential spread, and also thereby make it more likely that at least some of those cases lead to many more cases rather than having all the local chains of transmission die out,” Mark Lipsitch, a Harvard epidemiologist, told me over email. Lipsitch and other experts I spoke with agreed superspreading events are most influential at the beginning of an outbreak. At a certain point, the virus is out in the community and more structural factors (density and demographics, for starters) take over. Still, it is difficult to ignore that two states with known superspreading scenarios — Massachusetts and Louisiana — are now dealing with two of the more widespread Covid-19 outbreaks in the country. Looking at the per-capita data, Massachusetts ranks third in confirmed cases and fourth in confirmed deaths; Louisiana sits at eighth in confirmed cases and fifth in deaths. To understand why, the easiest places to start are a Biogen conference in Boston and Mardi Gras in New Orleans. Early in the Massachusetts outbreak, an annual meeting of Biogen executives and employees could be almost entirely blamed for the known spread of Covid-19 within the state. About 175 senior employees met at a hotel in Boston in late February, when the coronavirus was barely a blip in the US. They were unaware, of course, that someone would bring the virus with them to the meeting. By March 12, there were 95 confirmed cases in Massachusetts — and 77 were linked to the Biogen meeting, according to a report from WBUR. After the company meeting, and even after employees started to fall ill, Biogen executives attended another health care conference in the city and met with investors, the New York Times reported. There are, again, structural factors here — large cities are simply more likely to host large events — but the Biogen example still shows the risk of an outbreak quickly accelerating from just a few large gatherings. “Major events with many cases are more likely to happen (and be detected) in densely settled areas; Biogen doesn’t have conferences in Belton, Texas,” Lipsitch said. “Once transmission is really going, a single event can’t contribute that much. But it is a reasonable hypothesis for early in the epidemic.” Likewise, experts have pinned some of the blame for Louisiana’s outbreak, which is worse than those of its neighbors in the South, on Mardi Gras. The annual street party was held in late February, before the mass canceling of large gatherings had really begun. From a CDC report looking to explain geographical variations in Covid-19’s spread: Because COVID-19 is primarily transmitted by respiratory droplets, population density might also play a significant role in the acceleration of transmission. Cumulative incidence in urban areas like NYC and DC exceeds the national average. Louisiana, which experienced a temporarily high population density because of an influx of visitors during Mardi Gras celebrations in mid-February, has a higher cumulative incidence and greater increase in cumulative incidence than other states in the South. Mardi Gras, which concluded on February 25, occurred at a time when cancelling mass gatherings (e.g., festivals, conferences, and sporting events) was not yet common in the United States. As Puja Nambiar, an infectious disease professor at the Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, put it, Mardi Gras had all the ingredients for rapid transmission: “high density, high contact, and exposure risk.” But once the virus arrived and started spreading, Louisiana’s structural disadvantages started to catalyze a wider outbreak. Many families in the state are intergenerational, and we know intra-household spread can explain much of the transmission we’ve seen even with social distancing. Louisiana also has a higher percentage of black residents with preexisting conditions, which increase one’s risk for developing a serious Covid-19 case or dying from it. Those socioeconomic factors also influence how a place fares with the virus. “If we knew Covid was making the rounds, maybe not having the parade would have helped,” Nambiar said. “But the rest of the challenges with health disparities were here way before Covid.” Sometimes, a superspreading event can put even a small town under siege. A funeral in Albany, Georgia, has been blamed for the surprise spike in Covid-19 cases and deaths in that city and its surrounding area. By late March, a county of only 90,000 people had 600 confirmed cases and 24 deaths, according to the New York Times, one of the highest per-capita tolls in the country. This is why large gatherings, especially those held indoors, are such a risk with the coronavirus still spreading. A recent Twitter thread from Muge Cevik, an infectious disease researcher at the University of St. Andrews, covered a lot of the relevant research. “High infection rates seen in household, friend & family gatherings, transport suggest that closed contacts in congregation is likely the key driver of productive transmission,” she wrote, adding that “while we have limited data, similar high risk transmission pattern could be seen in other crowded & connected indoor environments such as crowded office spaces, other workplace environment, packed restaurants/cafes, cramped apartment buildings etc.” Those transmission trends also explain Covid-19’s prevalence in prisons — including in Louisiana again​, where one women’s prison dormitory saw almost every inmate test positive for the virus. And this is why public health experts expect and hope the bans on large gatherings will be one of the last restrictions lifted as states and cities go through the process of relaxing social distancing. To do otherwise is to risk another explosion in coronavirus cases like we saw in the early days of the outbreak in Boston, New Orleans, and Albany, places still feeling the pain from their bad luck. In Washington state, which saw its own superspreading phenomenon in nursing homes, a ban on gatherings of more than 250 people was the first restriction put into place. “The reason they were the first thing put into place is statistically if you have a large group of people and you have Covid circulating, the chances you have somebody who is asymptomatic and they’ll pass it on are high,” said Hilary Godwin, dean of the University of Washington’s public health school. “It’s not like we’re gonna be ready to play baseball in front of a stadium. ... I would expect that to be one of the last things to be lifted.” This story appears in VoxCare, a newsletter from Vox on the latest twists and turns in America’s health care debate. Sign up to get VoxCare in your inbox along with more health care stats and news.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.The reports coming out of the United States in the coronavirus pandemic have the feel of dispatches from the fall of Rome — a society-wide crackup of what was, in theory, the most advanced and influential nation on the planet. Nurses have had to sew their own masks because the government failed to stockpile enough personal protective equipment (PPE). Health care workers who ran out of medical gowns turned to wearing ponchos donated by local baseball teams. They were the lucky ones — other nurses have donned garbage bags out of sheer desperation. In the chaotic fight against coronavirus, states have competed against one other and the federal government in bidding wars for PPE. Maryland’s Republican Gov. Larry Hogan is currently hiding thousands of coronavirus tests, purchased from South Korea, in an “undisclosed location” protected by the National Guard. Hogan is concerned that the federal government might seize them.  Amid the economy’s free fall, Floridians have been forced to swamp unemployment insurance offices in person because the state’s website doesn’t work. From New Jersey to Minnesota to Texas, cars have stretched out as far as the eye can see as people wait in lines at food banks. The president is trying to force meatpacking workers to their factories, in conditions known to facilitate coronavirus spread, to keep grocery store meat fridges fully stocked. In the American national consciousness, our country has always been the richest and most advanced in the world. We have the best of everything. We are the most “first world” of all the developed countries. But in the United States of America, in the year 2020, the only categories we seem to be leading the rest of the world in are the numbers of confirmed infections and deaths from coronavirus. The dystopian images and dismal numbers do not render America a “failed state,” as some might have it. The United States is far from alone in mishandling the pandemic — several advanced states, like Sweden and Japan, have botched their responses in one way or another.  But such comparisons have not made our failures any easier to stomach. For decades, Americans have been conditioned to think of America as not just any country. Our popular histories and media tell us a story of “American exceptionalism” — the notion that we are unique among, maybe even superior to, every other nation on the planet, the world’s rightful hegemon and steward. This ideal was never universally accepted, and always glossed over much that was ugly about our country, but the notion was widely shared.  Today, it is nearly impossible to maintain. Faced with perhaps the most significant global crisis since the end of the Cold War, America has proven itself to be depressingly ordinary, even substandard. This is especially obvious to foreign observers. Henrik Enderlein, president of the Hertie School graduate university in Berlin, told the New York Times that “we are all stunned” by the scenes coming out of America. An April 30 editorial in Le Monde, France’s paper of record, proclaimed this the end of the American era.  “The United States no longer exercises the role attributed to it in the 20th century, that of world leadership,” the editors wrote. “In this crisis, it has completely extracted itself from it.” China, whose botched early response and cover-up of the early Wuhan outbreak rank as perhaps the greatest errors of the entire pandemic, has manipulated America’s incompetence to make itself look good by comparison. Trump’s downplaying of the virus became fodder for a brutally effective propaganda video on Chinese state media.  What the US and the world are witnessing in real time is the collapse of what billions the world over believed to be true: that America is exceptionally insulated from the cruelties and failures that plague other countries, and exceptionally suited to lead the international order. The end of American exceptionalism has many contributors. But there’s one I’d like to focus on. For our nation to be exceptional, it needs to actually be a nation: a community that sees itself, at least in part, as having shared aims and self-conception. American nationhood has become subordinate to partisan identity, party routinely trumping country. This division, in particular the partisan gamesmanship that has defined the Trump administration and the national Republican response, has played a notable role in many of the country’s current policy failures. Throughout President Trump’s inept, even dangerous, handling of the coronavirus crisis, national Republican leaders have stood by him as they always have, even though the stakes now — a pandemic and economic misery not seen since the Great Depression — are as high as they’ve been in decades.   In confronting a crisis that’s touching both blue and red America, Republicans continue to think in terms of party and political interest. In the latest round of federal stimulus, Republican Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell blocked vital funding for financially distressed states, saying he’d prefer states go bankrupt. An email from his office later made his reasons clear: It described such assistance as a “Blue State Bailout.” (After coming under fire for his position, he has since said he’s “open” to such aid — with conditions.) Trump has said much the same. “It’s not fair to the Republicans, because all the states that need help, they’re run by Democrats in every case,” he told the New York Post in an early May interview. The other side of this partisan coin is the way Trump has used the powers of the federal government as his personal patronage system, working to benefit GOP governors and incumbent senators in the fight against coronavirus. After the federal government seized 500 ventilators requested by Colorado’s Democratic governor, Trump sent 100 back to the state — crediting them to Sen. Cory Gardner, a Republican up for reelection in 2020. And then there’s the right-wing media, which has advanced and amplified the Trump line, even at the expense of public health and safety. Fox News in particular downplayed the epidemic early, repeatedly hyped up small anti-social-distancing protests, and tried to sell its audience on hydroxychloroquine as a coronavirus treatment despite clearly insufficient evidence. All these messages were wrapped up in a culture-war frame that heaped opprobrium on Democrats and the media.  Each country’s coronavirus failures have stemmed from its particular problems — authoritarian instincts to cover up bad news; out-of-touch public health officials. America’s stem from our fundamentally cloven national identity.  When leaders from one of two major parties view themselves as partisans first, the country cannot live up to its claims to be exceptional. It seems crassly partisan to say that Republicans have done more damage to America’s shared national identity than Democrats have. And to be clear, the end of American exceptionalism isn’t solely the work of Republican Party elites.  Yet any honest reckoning with the collapse of American exceptionalism must include recognizing that there are core differences between the two political parties — and that these differences mean one party behaves in a more responsible way than the other. In their book Asymmetric Politics, political scientists David Hopkins and Matt Grossmann trace this distinction back to the basic makeup of each party’s political support: While the Democratic Party is a coalition of social groups, the GOP is primarily a vehicle for a single cohesive ideological movement. This difference has made the Democratic leadership more inclined toward cooperation and compromise, while Republican elected officials are pushed toward extremism and scorched-earth politics. In a healthy democracy, political disagreement is a matter of rivalry rather than existential struggle — allowing for divides that can be surmounted in times of national threat, sometimes even leading to unity governments where rival parties agree to share power.  But Republican antipathy toward Democrats has become an all-consuming hatred, its partisans viewing Democrats less as the loyal opposition than as internal enemies. “Republican politicians from Newt Gingrich to Donald Trump learned that, in a polarized society, treating rivals as enemies can be useful,” Harvard scholars Daniel Ziblatt and Steven Levitsky write in How Democracies Die. “Casting Democrats as not real Americans is a frontal assault on mutual toleration.”  This zero-sum vision — dominant, though not universally shared, among Republican leaders — is in tension with the very idea of American exceptionalism. It no longer makes sense to speak of an American “national character,” if it ever did, in a world where differences of ideology and identity take such categorical precedence over the things that bind the country together.  The country is locked in what I’ve termed a “cold civil war,” an all-consuming internal struggle playing out through its political institutions that is not in any way exceptional. It’s the sort of political warfare you see in severely polarized, failing democracies like Chile in the early 1970s or contemporary Poland. The coronavirus crisis is a vivid demonstration of how the idea of the nation has been supplanted by a “partyocracy”: a government run for the benefit of the members of one party rather than the citizenship as a whole.  “The contemporary Republican Party has been built to wage ideological and partisan conflict more than to manage the government or solve specific social problems,” Hopkins wrote in a recent post on his personal blog. “So perhaps it shouldn’t be shocking that an array of subjects, from what medical treatment might help COVID patients to how important it is to take measures protecting the lives of the elderly, have been drawn into the perpetual political wars.” In theory, this pandemic should be a catalyst for national unity — a crucible during which citizens come together to make shared sacrifices and beat back a common enemy. That’s the tone German Chancellor Angela Merkel has struck in her widely hailed public discussions of the virus, leading to a significant rise in her approval rating. In Canada, political scientists have documented nearly unprecedented levels of consensus among leaders from the most popular parties on the need for social distancing. In the US, it’s a different story. When former President George W. Bush issued a call for nonpartisan cooperation earlier this week, Trump dismissed it, blasting his Republican predecessor for (allegedly) being insufficiently loyal to the Trump cause.  The impact of asymmetric partisan warfare can be felt across the American coronavirus response, going well beyond the Bush incident, McConnell’s “Blue State Bailouts” gibe, or the president’s use of ventilators as patronage in Colorado. Trump’s public pronouncements have been muddled, often contradictory, but he has frequently questioned the need for social distancing measures. He’s working hard to deflect blame for economic pain onto the governors (frequently blue staters) who imposed state-level lockdowns and, more broadly, to turn the crisis into a partisan affair. In mid-April, he gave oxygen to the anti-social-distancing protests in states like Michigan, Virginia, and Minnesota, tweeting “LIBERATE” in all caps. In early May, he wrote that “the Democrats are just, as always, looking for trouble. They do nothing constructive, even in times of crisis.” The explanation for the president’s divisiveness is, as always, almost purely political. Trump has done a poor job managing the coronavirus outbreak: Many of the cardinal failures, like PPE shortages and insufficient testing, can be blamed on a sluggish and inefficient federal response. The Trump administration seems to be treating this as a political damage control problem, exploiting hyperpartisanship to cover for its substantive failures rather than working full-tilt to address them on a policy level. Trump believes in “owning the libs” as a matter of both political principle and strategy, convinced that turning everything into a war between Trumpists and liberals is a win for him in an election year — a strategy that McConnell and other leading national Republicans are all too happy to endorse. That’s especially true now that Trump’s pre-pandemic 2020 argument, that he delivered strong economic growth throughout his term, is no longer viable. “He is worried about the impact of soaring unemployment numbers and severe economic contraction on his 2020 reelection bid,” the Washington Post reported in late March. “He remains fixated on the plummeting stock market, is chafing at the idea of the country remaining closed until the summer and growing tired of talking only about the coronavirus.” Given this kind of signaling from the Republican Party’s leader, and no backlash from a national party that has bound up its fate with Trump, it’s no surprise that many Republicans at the state level adopted similarly irresponsible approaches. A recent working paper from five University of Washington researchers linked Republican governors’ reticence to impose distancing measures to the national political climate: The redder the state, the slower its governor was to act.  “All else equal, Republican governors and governors from states with more Trump supporters were slower to adopt social distancing policies,” the researchers write. “The most important predictors are political.”  Only eight states never issued stay-at-home orders, all of which have Republican governors. But five of those eight states — Arkansas, Nebraska, Oklahoma, Iowa, and South Dakota — saw mid-April increases in coronavirus cases well above the national norm. (So far, more populous Democratic-leaning states have done more testing and seen the most confirmed cases overall.) In late April and May, Republican-governed states pushed the envelope when it came to reopening; Georgia’s Brian Kemp has embraced a particularly aggressive timetable. 
    Related
   The result of the GOP’s partisan approach to coronavirus has been to fracture the country, embrace potentially harmful policies for political reasons at the national level, and create a patchwork of state-level responses that’s likely to facilitate wider virus spread. To say the American response is a failure is somewhat imprecise. It’s more accurate to say that there is no overarching American response — and that this disunity has been disastrous. Does deep and asymmetric polarization, a structural problem that no one really has a plan for resolving, mean the country is doomed? Will America not only decline on the world stage, but suffer beyond all reason as a result of this pandemic?   The smart money is, as always, on dysfunction. Yet during this awful time, there have been some encouraging signs that Americans could do better — that there might be a path out of the hyperpartisan dystopia. Early data during the pandemic showed that Republicans were generally taking coronavirus less seriously than Democrats. One study found that Republicans were considerably less likely than Democrats to change their personal behavior in response to the virus, seemingly for politically motivated reasons. “Partisanship is a more consistent predictor of behaviors, attitudes, and preferences than anything else that we measure,” the authors write. But as the crisis has unfolded, things have started to look a little different — and more promising.  Some Republican governors, like Maryland’s Hogan and Ohio’s Mike DeWine, have fully embraced social distancing and public health best practices — even when it’s been inconvenient for the national party. Hogan in particular has been somewhat critical of Trump’s response, calling his anti-distancing tweets “unhelpful.” In the past, Republicans clashing with Trump has signaled political doom for Trump’s enemy. But taking a strong line on social distancing seems to be helping these governors, not hurting them. In purple Ohio, DeWine boasts a roughly 75 percent approval rating — a significant improvement on his pre-virus numbers, and one of the highest bounces of any governor in the country. These numbers reflect a striking level of consensus on the coronavirus among ordinary Americans, even as Republican elites push a divisive message. An Associated Press poll, conducted April 16-20, found that a majority of both Democrats (62 percent) and Republicans (59 percent) believe “the restrictions to prevent the spread of coronavirus are about right.” Twenty-two percent of Republicans said they went too far, while 19 percent said they didn’t go far enough. A mid-April Morning Consult poll asked voters whether the country “should continue to social distance for as long as is needed to curb the spread of coronavirus, even if it means continued damage to the economy.” An astonishing 81 percent agreed that it should — as did 72 percent of Republicans. Another mid-April poll, from Yahoo News-YouGov, asked Americans how they felt about the anti-social-distancing protests promoted by President Trump and Fox News. Only 22 percent said they supported these protesters; 60 percent, by contrast, said they opposed them. Even a plurality of Republicans said they opposed them — 47 percent against, as compared to 36 percent in support.  A fourth poll, published in early May by the Washington Post, asked Americans if they think limits on “restaurants, stores, and other businesses” were appropriate, too restrictive, or not restrictive enough. Significant majorities of both Democrats (72 percent) and Republicans (62 percent) said they believe the current restrictions are appropriate. These consistent numbers may help explain why the anti-distancing protests have been so anemic and poorly attended.  “Most Americans can look around and see what’s happening. They see people dying and suffering. They know this is a real problem,” Theda Skocpol, a scholar of social movements at Harvard, told my colleague Sean Illing. “So no, I don’t think [the anti-distancing movement] is going to be the next Tea Party.” This represents a failure of the political division as practiced by Trump, McConnell, and Fox News. American citizens have not neatly split along partisan lines; the bulk of ordinary Republicans appears to be treating the crisis as a serious shared challenge rather than another front in the culture wars. It’s tough to be confident in why this seems to be true. But one theory is that, as Skocpol suggests, it’s one of those political crises so overwhelming that no one really escapes its touch.  In other Trump-era controversies, like Trump’s impeachment, the issue was abstract: Few American lives were directly and concretely affected by the president withholding military aid to Ukraine, hence the public’s responses fell along familiar partisan lines. But when you or someone you love falls deathly ill, or you’re worried about becoming ill yourself, it’s hard to credit a politician telling you that the social distancing cure is worse than the disease. Nor is the attempt to paint the outbreak as a blue-state problem likely to succeed. Though the outbreak hit large blue cities like Seattle and New York first, the virus is making its way around the country.  A late April analysis by the Kaiser Family Foundation found that the rate of increases in coronavirus cases and deaths was higher outside of cities than it was in them. A more fine-grained study by Brookings’s William Frey found that the disease is becoming an increasingly suburban and rural problem. “On March 29, four-fifths of high-prevalence county populations resided in the urban cores of large metropolitan areas,” Frey writes. “Among residents of counties which entered high-prevalence status between April 6 and April 12, for example, only 31% lived in urban core counties, while 45% lived in suburbs and 24% lived in small and nonmetropolitan areas.” It is still possible that the coronavirus crisis will end up like most every other crisis in recent history. Eventually, the public could end up defaulting to a partisan lens. “People who feel that the pandemic is going to ‘break the fever’ of the past couple decades — that it will finally drain public life of its malice, its addiction to remorseless conflict and conspiracy theory, its devil-take-the-hindmost nihilism — carry the burden of proof,” Politico’s John Harris writes.   The past few years have repeatedly vindicated such pessimism; we shouldn’t be surprised if 2020 ends up doing the same. But there are at least glimmers of an alternative reality: one where Americans, shocked by the country’s failures during the coronavirus, troubled by the truth they’re seeing on the ground, actually start acting like a country. Maybe, in that world, we can start to talk about American exceptionalism again. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Donald Trump’s interview on ABC Tuesday illustrated why the president rarely strays from the friendly confines of Fox News. While Fox News hosts are content to let Trump rant and rave with little regard for lies or coherency, World News Tonight host David Muir sent Trump into a tailspin with a question that he should’ve seen coming: Why didn’t he do more to prepare for the coronavirus that has killed more than 72,000 Americans and counting? It was as though Trump had never thought about it before. And it wasn’t the only moment in which the president was flummoxed. He had no plan for bringing the spread of the virus under control and offered little beyond his widely criticized idea that states should reopen their economies swiftly — even though none has met the White House coronavirus task force’s criteria for doing so. The interview took place during Trump’s at times surreal, mask-less trip to a Honeywell plant in Phoenix, Arizona, where masks are produced. It was one of his first public appearances away from the White House since he declared the coronavirus to be a national emergency in mid-March. The event foreshadows the White House policy ahead: There is no serious, coordinated plan to tackle the crisis. Instead, Trump seems likely to spend the summer trying to convince his supporters to ignore the data and believe that he turned the coronavirus crisis into an economic success story. That means opening up businesses, even though experts don’t believe that will help the economy. At the same time, it may lead to more Americans’ deaths.  Trump, gallingly, has decided to put his bogus campaign message before the health and safety and lives of Americans. As he said earlier Tuesday: “Will some people be badly affected? Yes.” During the interview with Muir, Trump tried to deflect questions about his administration’s failures with regard to obtaining personal protective equipment and deploying an effective coronavirus test by pinning blame on former President Barack Obama. This talking point is absurd, but he has largely gotten away with making it during press briefings.  It took Muir just one question to demonstrate that Trump has no defense beyond deflection. “What did you do when you became president to restock those cupboards that you say are bare?” he asked.  “Well, I’ll be honest, uh, I have a lot of things going on,” Trump began, in a sound bite tailor-made for an attack ad. “We had a lot of, uh, people, that refused to allow the country to be successful. They wasted a lot of time on ‘Russia, Russia, Russia’ — that turned out to be a total hoax. Then they did ‘Ukraine, Ukraine,’ and that was a total hoax. Then they impeached the president for absolutely no reason.” Watch: ICYMI: Trump's response to ABC asking him why he wasn't more prepared for the coronavirus was, "Well, I'll be honest, uh, I have a lot of things going on."Yes, that's a real quote. pic.twitter.com/7l9v3dgrOz While Trump may want you to believe the Russia investigation left him too preoccupied to prepare for a pandemic, he still did find time to disband the government’s pandemic preparedness team in 2018 — not to mention regularly vacation at properties he still owns and profits from, and live-tweet countless hours of cable news coverage.  Muir didn’t press these points and received criticism for not doing so. But remarkably, it didn’t even take a follow-up question to expose Trump. The same thing happened later, when Muir asked Trump about his infamous February 26 statement about the number of cases of coronavirus in the country, which then stood at 15, “within a couple of days is going to be down to close to zero.” (There are more than 1.2 million confirmed coronavirus cases in the country as of May 6.) Trump’s attempt to defend the comment didn’t make sense: So let me, let me — I said even, you would say, worse than that, I said “one person” one time. And it’s true. There was a time when we had one person in this country. We knew about it, we worked on it, but we have one person. It mushroomed. The 15 people mushroomed. Other people were coming in also from Europe. As Trump flailed, Muir interjected to note that “we’re over a million cases, though.” The president took the opportunity to stop trying to explain his past statements and start talking about how much testing the US is doing now — ignoring that it’s still far short of what experts say is needed to safely reopen businesses, and comes after the virus spread across the country largely undetected in February and March. As Trump rambled, he misspoke about which country he’s leading (“I banned people from coming into China”) and brandished a sheet of paper meant to demonstrate how great the US is in testing compared with other countries (never mind that the US has more than twice as many coronavirus deaths as the four countries he used for comparison combined). "I banned people from coming into China" -- while trying to defend his February comment that the coronavirus would go away on its own, Trump confuses which country he's president of and comes across as a parody of an incompetent leader pic.twitter.com/dn7JzILYSP None of that was reassuring. But the most terrifying part of the interview came at the beginning, when Trump said that American lives will have to be sacrificed for the sake of reopening the economy. Asked by Muir if “lives will be lost to reopen the country,” Trump didn’t try to deny it. “It’s possible there will be some, because you won’t be locked into an apartment or a house or whatever it is,” he said. “But at the same time, we’re going to practice social distancing. We’re gonna be washing hands, we’re gonna be doing a lot of the things that we’ve learned to do over the last period of time. And — we have to get our country back.” PART ONE: @DavidMuir has an exclusive interview with Pres. Trump in Phoenix, Arizona, asking about the risk of more lives lost to COVID-19 in the push to reopen, testing and the economy and his message to the families of the 70,000 Americans now dead. https://t.co/hzG1drfzIj pic.twitter.com/bivV4KSxJq That line of thinking was also a theme during remarks made at a roundtable event before the ABC interview.  “I’m viewing our great citizens of this country to a certain extent and to a large extent as warriors. They’re warriors. We can’t keep our country closed. We have to open our country,” Trump said. “Will some people be badly affected? Yes.” Trump on why businesses should reopen: "I'm viewing our great citizens of this country to a certain extent and to a large extent as warriors. They're warriors. We can't keep our country closed. We have to open our country ... Will some people be badly affected? Yes." pic.twitter.com/hNXws4bwtd By “badly affected,” Trump meant dead — and two new models indicate that tens of thousands of American lives could end in the coming months if the country continues down its current path and social distancing measures are relaxed too soon.  Characteristically, when Trump was asked about those models during a Q&A with reporters just before he boarded Air Force One for Arizona, he lied about them. He later falsely told Muir that “these models have been so wrong from day one” — overlooking that the 100,000 to 200,000 US death estimate offered in late March by the same government public health experts he’s now sidelining is, tragically, looking more and more correct. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Americans adopted a mantra early in the coronavirus pandemic that we need to “flatten the curve” — shorthand for agreeing to social distance as much as possible to save lives.   The goal is to slow the spread of the virus so hospitals and doctors don’t become overwhelmed with a surge in patients. The strategy saves lives through mitigation, reducing the harm the virus causes. It also makes it possible for patients to receive the best treatment available because there are fewer of them in the hospital at any one time.  The approach, though, still assumes that many people will still get sick and suffer — and that many people will die. Mitigation is important, but it is not suppression — a strategy designed to beat the virus into submission. The United States has not had a serious public debate about this distinction. It needs to.   The goal of suppression is to lower the number of new cases, not just draw out the time it takes for them to appear. Social distancing is one piece of a suppression strategy. But it’s not enough. Suppression requires not just social distancing but contact tracing and case isolation to keep pushing numbers lower and lower — eventually allowing society to return to a quasi-normal life, confident that it can quash new outbreaks. The US is debating how and when to reopen the economy. But first, it needs to figure out a public health response of suppression first. It’s time to move beyond “flatten the curve” to a new mantra: “Suppress the virus.”  In early March, when Seattle and the Bay Area had adopted strict social distancing policies but most of the country hadn’t, many public health officials were talking enthusiastically about mitigation. The goal, in their own words, was not so much to reduce the total share of the US population that got infected but to slow the pace at which infections occurred.  Here’s how Dylan Scott and Eliza Barclay reported it for Vox on March 10: The main uncertainty in the coronavirus outbreak in the United States now is how big it will get, and how fast. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Nancy Messonnier told reporters on March 9, “many people in the US will at some point, either this year or next, get exposed to this virus.” According to infectious disease epidemiologist Marc Lipsitch at Harvard, it’s “plausible” that 20 to 60 percent of adults will be infected with Covid-19 disease. So far, 80 percent of cases globally have been mild, but if the case fatality rate is around 1 percent (which several experts say it may be), a scenario is possible of tens or hundreds of thousands of deaths in the US alone.  Yet the speed at which the outbreak plays out matters hugely for its consequences. What epidemiologists fear most is the health care system becoming overwhelmed by a sudden explosion of illness that requires more people to be hospitalized than it can handle. In that scenario, more people will die because there won’t be enough hospital beds or ventilators to keep them alive.  A disastrous inundation of hospitals can likely be averted with protective measures we’re now seeing more of — closing schools, canceling mass gatherings, working from home, self-quarantine, self-isolation, avoiding crowds — to keep the virus from spreading fast.  This was illustrated with widely popular “flatten the curve” charts, depicting a massive campaign to prevent hospital resources from becoming overtaxed by a sudden surge in cases. Many media outlets developed versions of this chart, all adapted from earlier work by the CDC with reference to flu pandemics.  As Carl Bergstrom, a biologist at the University of Washington, tweeted, the power of this graphic is that it demonstrates how measures to reduce the spread of the virus can save many lives “even if you don’t reduce total cases.”  Deaths, after all, are a function of both the volume of cases and the case fatality rate. If the number of cases rises so high that the case fatality rate starts to spike — if a city runs out of ICU beds or ventilators or appropriately trained nurses — then many more people will die than if the curve gets flatter. 2. This single picture explains the concept of *flattening the epidemic curve* to non-specialists without requiring any additional text. Looking at the picture, you can see that even if you don't reduce total cases, slowing down the rate of an epidemic can be critical. Mitigation also might reduce the number of total cases. People are hopeful that a Covid-19 vaccine will be available sometime in 2021. If that happens, the right arm of the curve would essentially be truncated and reduce the total number of people who get sick.  But the power of curve-flattening as a concept is that it doesn’t rely on that. It shows that many lives can be saved even if 60 to 70 percent of the population gets sick before herd immunity halts further spread of the virus.  A natural complement to flattening the curve is trying to “raise the line” by increasing the health care system’s capacity to treat Covid-19 cases.  Raising the line is a multifaceted task — canceling or delaying elective procedures, training additional medical personnel, constructing improvised hospitals, boosting production of personal protective equipment, and manufacturing additional ventilators and moving them smartly around the country to where they’re needed.  You can think of it as working in two different ways. One is that even a flattened curve might still peak above health system capacity (this appears to have happened in Wuhan, China; Lombardy, Italy; and to an extent in New York City), in which case efforts to raise the line directly save lives.  The other is that the height of the line determines how much flattening needs to be achieved to save lives. A higher line means that not much flattening is needed, so social distancing measures can be less extreme without risking overwhelming the health system.  If the sole goal of American policy is to prevent hospitals from becoming overwhelmed, then in most of the country, things may be on track. Even as the United States has become the country with the highest number of confirmed Covid-19 cases, the rate of growth — as depicted by the bending of the line on a log scale chart — has clearly declined.  A few states — mostly in the urban Northeast — are using close to all of their ICU beds and need case volumes to fall further to maintain health system capacity. But much of the country, including major blue states like California and major red states like Texas, are well below the level at which they would run out of hospital capacity and send deaths skyrocketing.  California, for example, has been exporting ventilators to other states with greater needs. And even in New York, where hospital capacity was under pressure, emergency line-raising measures like ad hoc field hospitals and the dispatch of the USNS Comfort to the city turned out to be mostly unnecessary.  One reason for this is that in practice, the hospitalization rate for Covid-19 cases seems to be lower than modelers estimated five or six weeks ago, even though the fatality rate is roughly in line with expectations.  And again, the *fatality* rates have been roughly as bad as models feared/assumed. (Emphasis on roughly since there's some range of debate.) But hospitalization rates have been lower than most projections. In general, there has been some reluctance to talk about this. Unfortunately, what we’ve seen is that even when hospital systems aren’t overwhelmed and people are able to receive good care for Covid-19, many people still die. And if more people get sick, then more people will die. At the current levels of infection, the United States does not have major hospital capacity problems. And it’s plausible that measured reopening steps underway in many states are, if prudently implemented, compatible with the country more or less plateauing at the current rate of infection and avoiding the hospital breakdown nightmare scenario.  But more than 1,500 Americans are dying every day from Covid-19, and research into “excess deaths” makes it pretty clear that the true figure is likely over 2,000. Project that out to a year and the US death toll will land at around 800,000.  As Bergstrom and Natalie Dean, a biostatistician at the University of Florida, explained in a recent New York Times op-ed, allowing enough people to become infected to achieve herd immunity would likely result in a significant number of carryover infections and well over a million deaths.  A vaccine or a super-effective treatment drug might come along before that happens. But the widely cited 18-month vaccine timetable is already very optimistic. Barring some kind of unforeseen breakthrough, even a successful mitigation strategy could involve a death toll that’s dramatically higher than what anyone active in politics is contemplating. The alternative strategy is to not just flatten the curve but drive the number of cases down to zero. Hong Kong, by contrast, over the past three weeks has seen zero new cases on most days.  Under the circumstances, the island is steadily moving to reduce restrictions. As of May 1, a rule requiring restaurants to remain half-empty has been lifted, and now a slightly laxer policy is in place, allowing dine-in service as long as tables remain 1.5 meters apart. And not only are restaurants opening, people are clamoring to get out and eat. Not saying HK is getting back into the swing of things but it's a Wednesday night (admittedly ahead of a holiday) and I just got told it's a 90 minute wait for a table at a pizza restaurant. With the disease seemingly beaten back domestically, Hong Kong is now in a position to start switching emphasis to a strategy focused on border controls. With the pandemic still raging globally, the city can’t let its guard down entirely. And because Hong Kong is so small and dependent on international commerce, just opening up the domestic service economy can’t really save the city from serious economic problems.  But the city has a clearly articulated strategy that it calls “suppress and lift”: ease restrictions now when cases are at zero, but then clamp back down as necessary to push cases back down if they pop up.  Taiwan has also had no new cases for several days, and since April 6, all of Taiwan’s reported cases have stemmed from a single naval vessel’s goodwill mission to the island of Palau rather than community spread. New Zealand has not done quite this well, but the government believes it has successfully identified and isolated all of the country’s coronavirus cases and is lifting restrictions, on the claim that the virus has been “eliminated” in the country.  South Korea’s outbreak is now down to single-digit numbers of new cases per week, and a key test for the country is whether an anticipated surge of holiday travel this week to the island of Jeju (a major Korean tourist destination) will lead to a new wave, or if the peninsula can suppress spread of the disease. South Korean professional baseball also resumed this week, though without fans in the stands.  The United States, meanwhile, is moving to open up on the basis of a vaguely articulated assumption that settling for mitigation is good enough. One reason for the pressure to open up is that while widespread orders to shelter in place have clearly succeeded in slowing the spread of infection, they’re not bringing case volumes down quickly. Authorities fear the economic pain of prolonged shutdowns, and it seems like the mass public is growing impatient and starting to bend the rules.  But the reality is that the United States has not really tried the strategies that have made suppression successful. To accomplish that, America would need to invest in expanding the volume of tests, invest in more contact tracers, and create centralized quarantine facilities so that infected people aren’t simply sent home to infect the rest of their household.  Since the US didn't spend April doing that, trying to achieve suppression — along the lines of Taiwan, Hong Kong, Korea, and New Zealand — would necessarily involve more delay and more economic pain. But doing so would save potentially tens or hundreds of thousands of lives and almost certainly lead to a better economic outcome by allowing activity to truly restart.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Immigrant advocates are arguing in court that American citizens who are married to unauthorized immigrants should still be eligible for stimulus checks along with their children.  The $2 trillion Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act, gives most taxpayers up to $1,200 and $500 for each of their children under the age of 17. But even if they pay taxes, unauthorized immigrants are not eligible for the stimulus checks, which the government started sending out in April. Neither is anyone else in their household, including their spouses and children, even if their spouses and children are US citizens. Advocates from Georgetown Law and Villanova Law filed a class action lawsuit in Maryland federal court on Wednesday challenging the CARES Act on behalf of seven US citizen children of unauthorized immigrant taxpayers. They argued that it unfairly discriminates against these children based on their parents’ immigration status and denies them equal protection under the law in violation of the US Constitution’s due process clause.  Immigrant advocates at the Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund also filed a lawsuit last week arguing that the CARES Act is unconstitutional because it “discriminates against mixed-status couples.”  “The refusal to distribute this benefit to US citizen children undermines the CARES Act’s goals of providing assistance to Americans in need, frustrates the Act’s efforts to jumpstart the economy, and punishes citizen children for their parents’ status — punishment that is particularly nonsensical given that undocumented immigrants, collectively, pay billions of dollars each year in taxes,” Mary McCord, legal director of Georgetown Law’s Institute for Constitutional Advocacy and Protection, said in a statement.  The bill excludes those in households with people of mixed immigration status, where some tax filers or their children may use what’s called an Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN). The IRS issues ITINs to unauthorized immigrants so they can pay taxes, even though they don’t have a Social Security number. If anyone in the household uses an ITIN — either a spouse or a dependent child — that means no one in the household will qualify for the stimulus checks unless one spouse served in the military in 2019. If the law is allowed to stand, it could impact an estimated 16.7 million people who live in mixed-status households nationwide, including 8.2 million US-born or naturalized citizens. The exclusion for mixed-status households defies current practices: Many other federal programs are designed in such a way that US citizen children of unauthorized immigrants can access necessary benefits, including the child tax credit, food stamps, housing assistance, welfare benefits, and benefits from the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.  But there is a precedent for this kind of exclusion. Amid the global financial crisis in 2008, Congress handed out tax rebates to most American taxpayers, except for the spouses of immigrants who didn’t have Social Security numbers. Most of the families of the children named in Wednesday’s lawsuit have a combined income of no more than $30,000 and, absent financial support from the federal government, are struggling to stay afloat.  One parent, identified only as N.R. in the complaint, lost her job at a restaurant during the pandemic and her partner has also been unable to work because he contracted Covid-19. The family has no income and depends on community support as well as food from her child’s school system in order to survive.  Another parent, C.V., lost her job at a catering company and has had to pick up part-time work at a restaurant, but she fears that she won’t be able to pay rent and will be evicted along with her child. And H.G.T., who has three children, hasn’t been able to afford internet access, which has become necessary as her older children try to attend school online.  Mixed-status couples are also suffering from being denied stimulus checks. Sarah and her husband Juan, who asked to be identified only by their first names to protect their privacy, are one such couple living in Evansville, Indiana. She is a born-and-raised US citizen, but he came to the US 14 years ago from Honduras without authorization, seeking to earn enough money to support his parents and siblings back home. The couple married three years ago, and shortly thereafter, she started the process of sponsoring him for a green card. He’s still waiting for an interview at a consulate in Honduras, which has been postponed on account of the pandemic. But if all goes to plan, he will soon have permanent residency and be issued a Social Security number. In the meantime, however, Juan is still living in the US as an unauthorized immigrant, filing taxes under an ITIN. Neither he nor Sarah, therefore, are eligible for stimulus checks. Sarah is continuing to work from home during the pandemic, working in medical billing and making $45,000 a year. And Juan chose to take a month off from his job in painting and construction because they feared he would contract the virus at work, but he is now back on the job. She said that, together, they make a decent living, but they do have a lot of expenses, including his biweekly $120 remittances for his family in Honduras so they can buy food and pay their water and electric bills. Still, she’s angry that both she and her husband are being penalized during the pandemic. “While not receiving the stimulus hasn’t been a burden, it feels like a slap in the face as a US citizen that even I won’t get it,” she said. “I, personally, am not opposed to my tax dollars paying for undocumented immigrants receiving aid during this pandemic, but I can understand why our government wouldn’t do this. But me? A US citizen? I’m insulted and angry. I feel like my country does not care about me in the slightest.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   Kim Zambito, a 29-year-old funeral director in Brooklyn, is driving, always driving.  On April 18, a week after New York City’s Covid-19 daily death toll peaked at over 800, she did three house removals, put about six bodies in caskets, and moved at least a dozen more around the funeral home to prepare them for burial the next day. After dinner, Zambito retrieved three more bodies from Lutheran Hospital and brought them back to Sherman’s Flatbush Memorial Chapel, a busy Jewish firm where she works.  Amy Cunningham, another Brooklyn funeral director, is struggling to keep up with phone calls. She has her own boutique firm, Fitting Tribute, and is affiliated with Sherman’s and uses the chapels at Green-Wood cemetery, home to one of the city’s very busy crematoriums.  In contrast to the embalming, elaborate caskets, and formal viewings offered at legacy funeral homes, Fitting Tribute emphasizes green burial practices and home rituals. Cunningham gives families the opportunity to prepare the body of their loved one for burial or cremation and to create their own memorial service.  But the risk of spreading Covid-19 further has prevented families — and Cunningham — from being in casual contact with the dead, deeply altering her practice. There is no anointing of the body, no comforting embraces for the grieving. The entire industry is so busy, firms have begun sending families to their competitors. “I’m getting thanked for just staying on the line with people,” Cunningham told me. Some of the most memorable images of the pandemic are forklifts loading bodies into refrigerator trucks and mass graves on Hart Island, the city’s potter’s field near the Bronx, where the poor and unclaimed are buried. But talking to funeral directors like Zambito and Cunningham reveals that the forklifts and the mass graves are not chaos and crisis, but the death industry expertly managing the spike in fatalities with orderly and well-planned contingencies, and creativity. Despite limited resources and New York’s largest mass casualty event in more than 100 years, there are no bodies in the street. That’s because Zambito, Cunningham, and funeral directors all over the city have been racing to balance the needs of bereaved families with the overwhelmed resources of the funeral industry. Most have put aside competition, budget goals, and the more elaborate practices of their trade to manage as best they can the unprecedented challenges Covid-19 has brought them. “I think the public would feel comforted knowing there are people who care this much to ensure dignity in death remains intact,” says Zambito. Funeral directors’ care for the dead honors our longstanding social contract. “To treat a dead body as if it were ordinary organic matter,” writes Thomas Laqueur in The Work of the Dead, “is to erase it from culture and the human community.” Particularly in times of crisis, the work of funeral directors is to reassure people that society will remain intact.  Yet the death of more than 18,000 people in New York City and over 25,000 in the state from Covid-19 as of May 5 has also exposed the often-hidden industrialized nature of funeral home work. Forklifts, body bags, and refrigerators are now out in the open, for all to see, the reverence of funeral ceremony displaced by the pragmatism of corpse management. The disillusion reminds us of the conundrum of the dead: The body is both organic matter and sacred to our conceptions of self and society. “A Brooklyn hospital on Tuesday resumed its use of a forklift to move the dead bodies of coronavirus victims, just hours after the shocking practice was exposed on the front page of The Post,” the New York Post proclaimed on March 31.  “Shocking Photos Show What It Looks like When a Hospital Runs Out of Room for Coronavirus Corpses,” read a headline at Vice News about Sinai Grace Hospital in Detroit. Drone footage of mass graves on Hart Island appeared in multiple newspapers, including the New York Times. The New York Police Department later seized the drone, reinforcing the perception that the graves are disrespectful. Forklifts and other large equipment have long been a part of the behind-the-curtains work of morticians and funeral directors. Mechanized lifts make the work of moving bodies — into morgue refrigerators, into crematoriums — less laborious and dangerous. The unclaimed and indigent of New York have been buried in mass graves on Hart Island for a hundred years. Body bags are standard issue for hospitals and funeral homes.  Yet the media has fixated on these common tools and procedures to capitalize on people’s fear and romantic notions of death — it’s been generations since American families have handled their own loved ones’ corpses. Our contemporary understanding of death seldom includes decomposition.  “The media is acting like they’ve caught the government in a vile conspiracy,” Caitlin Doughty, a California mortician and bestselling author, recently said in a lively video installment on her YouTube channel, “Ask a Mortician,” “Refrigerated trucks are a good thing. They keep those extra bodies cool, safe, and distant from the population.” Cunningham explains the equipment comes into play when there are many bodies and little space to keep them. “It’s not a juicy scandal,” she said. “It’s orderly chaos, well labeled and dated.” Bodies have to be stacked in trucks out of necessity. Maybe, Doughty offers, the public outrage at forklifts is because many don’t understand how industrialized the funeral industry is. Maybe people are (rightly) made uncomfortable when they see how the city’s poor are buried, in plain boxes in mass graves on Hart Island. Or maybe, she suggests, public reaction to these images is caused by death’s emergence from our subconscious; the pandemic has made death a daily fact of conscious life. The epidemic has made clear that most of us don’t have a clear understanding of the work done by the people in the death trade. “Along with terror, suffering and death, a plague brings a macabre logistical problem: lots of corpses that need to be disposed of,” Jody Rosen recently wrote at the New York Times. We enter into the funeral directors’ realm once a loved one takes their last breath. If they unexpectedly die at home — 1,125 New Yorkers died outside a hospital in the first five days of April, per the New York City Fire Department, more than eight times the normal rate — the family will call 911, who will send the police. The police will contact the medical examiner’s office. At the peak of the virus in the city, it took nearly 24 hours for pickups to be arranged, Zambito told me, when it normally takes only a few hours. She’s since noticed a decline in wait times.  Once the NYPD has cleared the body for pickup, the family will try to find a funeral home to prepare the body for burial or cremation. But as the death toll has risen, funeral homes had a harder time meeting the demand for their services. Then, as cemeteries and crematoriums got busier, their services scheduled weeks in advance, funeral homes experienced the challenge of running out of space for incoming bodies. Many became unable to take new cases. On a podcast with Tanya Marsh, a professor at Wake Forest University who specializes in human remains and cemetery law, Cunningham said she was getting calls like, “Can you help us? We keep calling funeral homes and no one can help us?”  Usually funeral directors work with the medical examiner to track down the deceased’s doctor, who, in normal times, must sign the death certificate. But for the moment, the need for a doctor’s signature has been suspended in New York City.  Funeral homes are also no longer holding viewings or ceremonies in most of New York City. “That’s the last time they’re going to see that person,” Zambito said of families she met during home removals, “and it’s the saddest thing ever.” When families tell Cunningham that they would typically hold a wake, she reminds them, gently, firmly, that they will never see the body of their loved one again: “Now is your wake.”  Another departure from what most would deem a good death is the hospital deaths. To prevent the spread of coronavirus, city hospitals have ended visitations — which means if the ambulance takes you to the hospital and you do not survive, your family will never see your body again. Your body will perhaps be placed, by hospital staff, in one of the refrigerated trucks in back. The hospital will contact your family and your family will contact a funeral home, like Sherman’s. A funeral director will check eVital, the electronic service run by the medical examiner, to confirm that your paperwork is in order. Then they will go out to pick up your body. Bodies are often in white body bags, sometimes orange body bags, the two types the city was able to procure, unless hospitals have run out. When the body is brought back to the funeral home, it is organized in a holding area, labeled and kept cool as the wait for a scheduled burial or cremation begins.  When Zambito says she moved bodies, she means she retrieves from storage those that must be placed in cardboard boxes for cremation or in a casket for burial. But finding the bodies slated for removal can take a while; they’re clearly marked, but limited space has required stacking bodies on top of each other. “We wind up having to play Tetris, where we have to move all these other people to get to them,” she said. “It’s pretty awful, I’ll be honest.”  When Zambito says she casketed bodies, she means she placed them in their appropriate containers. For half a century, preparing a casketed body for a viewing has been an art: the facial features set, makeup applied, the body carefully dressed in clothes selected by the family. None of that can be done now when the dead threaten to share their disease. “We have to just put them in the casket and drape clothes over them,” Zambito told me. As the crematoriums and cemeteries got backed up in late March and early April — the former were scheduling cremations into late May and the latter were performing as many as 60 funerals a day — funeral homes found they were running out of room to store bodies. Funeral home chapels, no longer accessible to visitors because of physical distancing, became makeshift morgues.  Sherman’s installed a refrigerator in its front garden; it was immediately filled with bodies in cardboard boxes waiting for cremation. Briefly, some thought that embalming bodies would help preserve them longer, allowing crematories and cemeteries to catch up with the demand, but the sheer number of bodies became too much for funeral directors to embalm. The bodies came too fast. Within five days, Sherman’s staff began placing them wherever they could, including in the hallways. Casket selections also became depleted. Zambito told me that Sherman’s usually gets caskets from one company, but high demand now requires them to source them from wherever they can. “We’re getting caskets that were discontinued — close-out caskets,” she said.  There’s been a shortage of hearses, too, so the livery companies are sending limousines or SUVs. Drivers find they may have to wait hours once they reach the cemetery, the line of vehicles ahead of them snaking through the cemetery’s drives. Cunningham has been trying to convince families, particularly those without the extra funds for an expected funeral right now, to think of Hart Island as a spiritual place. “We can sanctify the grounds and make it okay to be there,” she told Marsh. “I can only anticipate that it will be made beautiful and visitable, historic.”  When I ask Zambito if she’s afraid of getting sick, she says no, but it’s clear she’s trying not to think about the possibility. When I ask again, “Are you willing to do this job regardless?” she answers, “Absolutely, yeah, yeah.” As with many hospital and nursing home workers, those in the funeral industry see the pandemic as a time to pitch in, not duck out. “So far, no one’s sick,” Cunningham said of her colleagues, “and I’m amazed that they want to work. ... Some of these guys are at such risk, but they’re totally committed to being a part of this effort.” As the number of deaths climbed, New York’s governor called in funeral directors and ambulances from out of state. In came 150 refrigerated trucks and out went bodies to mass graves on Hart Island. The industry has not been without its scandals. “We had bodies coming out of our ears,” Andrew T. Cleckley, owner of the Andrew T. Cleckley Funeral Home on Utica Avenue in Brooklyn, told the New York Times after police found at least 50 corpses in the back of two trucks outside the funeral home the last week of April. Neighbors had reported a pervasive smell and fluids running out of the trucks. Cleckley’s funeral director license was valid, but the space, which had been the address for five coordinating funeral homes for two years, was registered for “automobile retail,” and “the manufacture of machinery.” Industry associations were aghast. The New York Funeral Directors Association said  Cleckley was not a member. According to Time magazine, city health officials immediately issued guidance to all funeral homes. The Cleckley example highlights the challenges the pandemic has presented as well as the inadequacies of government responses to systemic shortfalls caused by Covid-19. Like recommending that all nurses wear face masks but not providing them, government officials are not doing enough to help overwhelmed social services, like funeral homes and the families who rely on them. Still, despite the casket shortages, the long hours of waiting, and the grim retrieval, the funeral industry carries on, shuffling bodies and delivering them to their final disposition. For now, the number of deaths is declining. Future outbreaks, the full depletion of personal protective equipment reserves, and the long grieving process the city faces loom ahead. Everyone is tired. “It’s hard because you end up working with each individual case and it’s so labor-intensive,” Cunningham told me. If you drive north of the city, west of the Hudson, and cross the Wallkill River, you’ll find a sleepy little cemetery called Rosendale Plains, which has been around since the late 1800s. The proprietor’s name is Floyd Craig; his son Brandon makes pine caskets. This is where Cunningham has been taking bodies. Because of the shortage of hearses, she loads the casket into the back of her Honda Pilot, where she’s got 78 inches behind the front seat. She slides in the casket on top of an Oriental rug and plays music — classical, or a playlist provided by families — appropriate to the task of hauling someone’s remains to their final resting place. “I make it a funeral,” she told me. It’s a reverential task, one that Cunningham, and every funeral director I’ve spoken to, takes seriously even as the customary rituals are upended for time and space. One of the benefits of Rosendale Plains is the uncommonly low price: A plot there costs $800, and the opening fee, the rate to dig a grave and close it, is only $800. (For comparison, a single plot in Green-Wood Cemetery can cost $12,000.)  The high national rate of unemployment weighs on her. When the body is laid to rest, Cunningham puts one of Brandon Craig’s empty pine caskets in the back of the Pilot and heads home. It will be an inexpensive alternative to a standard casket for one of her families. “That’s what I’ve decided will be my contribution,” Cunningham told me, referring to the solemn burials in Rosendale Plains, “one body at a time.” Ann Neumann is author of The Good Death: An Exploration of Dying in America and a contributing nonfiction editor at Guernica magazine. Laylah Amatullah Barrayn is an independent documentary photographer based in New York City. She is the co-author of MFON: Women Photographers of the African Diaspora.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.    President Donald Trump gave an interview to the New York Post Monday, in which he lavished praised upon himself, seemed to suggest the worst of the pandemic was behind the US, and projected a hope and optimism about the coronavirus that does not appear to be shared by the American public.  “The one thing that the pandemic has taught us is that I was right,” Trump said. “You know, I had people say, ‘No, no, it’s good. You keep — you do this and that.’ Now those people are really agreeing with me. And that includes medicine and other things, you know.” It would have been great if Trump had been right — if he were, the novel coronavirus would be under control; the president was adamant in February that “like a miracle, it will disappear.” The number of confirmed coronavirus cases would be in the double digits; and the number of deaths would be in the single digits. Perhaps a drug like hydroxychloroquine would have cleared any lingering disease, and the world would have a vaccine. And millions of people currently without work would be earning money to provide for themselves and their families.  Instead, the US death toll is approaching 70,000 as of May 5, and the president himself has revised his estimate of the number of people who will ultimately lose their lives, telling Fox News on Sunday, “We’re going to lose anywhere from 75, 80, to 100,000 people.” As Vox’s Aaron Rupar has explained, the daily number of new confirmed cases and Covid-19 related deaths has remained fairly steady for weeks, suggesting that the US’s style of social distancing can only reduce the spread of the disease so much. (Other countries, like Italy, more successfully contained their outbreaks with more aggressive shelter-in-place orders and measures such as contact tracing of the disease.) Deaths and infections in America will likely increase now that social distancing measures are being relaxed. Despite all this, Trump told the Post, “I think [Americans are] starting to feel good now. The country’s opening again. We saved millions of lives, I think.” It isn’t clear what’s making the president feel that Americans are “starting to feel good,” but it certainly isn’t polls. A Washington Post/University of Maryland April 28 to May 3 poll released Tuesday found that 63 percent of Americans are worried about contracting Covid-19 — and that 38 percent believe “the worst is yet to come” with respect to the pandemic (30 percent said we’re currently living through the worst period). The same poll, which surveyed 1,005 US adults by telephone and has a 3.5 percentage point margin of error, found that most Americans are uncomfortable with nonessential businesses reopening — for instance, 78 percent and 67 percent said they’d be uncomfortable going to a restaurant and a clothing store, respectively, should they be open. And 44 percent said they currently feel “uncomfortable” going to the grocery store.  Other recent polls found similar levels of anxiety about the pandemic; an Axios-Ipsos poll released Tuesday found most Americans expressing concern Covid-19 deaths are worse than has been reported, while an NPR/PBS NewsHour/Marist poll released last week found half of all Americans have lost work or wages due to the coronavirus.  In short, things are not going well. But Trump maintains the opposite is true, and has been increasingly speaking as if the coronavirus is an issue that the country has conquered and can now move past.  Sunday, he tweeted, “And then came a Plague, a great and powerful Plague, and the World was never to be the same again! But America rose from this death and destruction, always remembering its many lost souls, and the lost souls all over the World, and became greater than ever before!” Notably, all of that tweet is in the past tense. In his interview with the Post, Trump also seemed to suggest the problem was in the past, saying, “We did the right thing and now we’re bringing the country back.”  
    Related
   But the right thing wasn't done, and anti-coronavirus work still needs doing. Test kits are still in short supply and high demand — so much so that Maryland has the ones it smuggled in from South Korea housed at a secret location under armed guard. A national contract tracing system has yet to be established — something that is a particularly pressing need now that states are beginning to reopen.  Rather than address these needs in any substantive way, Trump has been dismissive and has adopted the sort of sunny outlook he had in the early days of the pandemic. He has certainly said, as he did during a Fox News town hall Sunday, that the death toll will be high, but he called death numbers in the 100,000 range a “successful” outcome. And he is also giving the American people statements like something else he told the Post Monday: “I think there’s a great optimism. I don’t know if you see it, but I think there’s a great optimism now.” Governors should let roads and highway construction begin before heavy traffic starts, which will be soon. Some Governors never stopped, which proved to be very smart. They built and fixed roads during long no traffic periods. Also, saved big dollars! Experts, meanwhile, are pessimistic. Internal CDC documents first reported on by the New York Times Monday show projections of a steep increase in daily deaths beginning May 14, and that 3,000 Americans will be dying per day by June 1. Daily new cases could reach 200,000 by that same date, the documents claim. Justin Lessler, the creator of the model and an associate professor at Johns Hopkins told the Washington Post the data was a preliminary analysis not yet ready for public release. But Lessler also said he believes 100,000 new cases per day by June 1 is possible, and that “There are reopening scenarios where it could get out of control very quickly.” Despite the fact that many states are reopening businesses, the pandemic is not over and the future does not look bright — particularly if reopening goes as poorly as is projected. Nevertheless, Trump continues to make unhelpful assertions, like telling the New York Post, “We’ll open it up and I think your fourth quarter is going to be very good.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. As President Trump pushes for businesses to reopen — even though the US coronavirus outbreak is not under control — his response to two new models indicating that cases and deaths will increase in the coming weeks is to mischaracterize them. The models are grim, with one projecting 135,000 Americans will die by early August, and the other estimating the US will see 3,000 daily deaths by June 1. Grilled about them on Tuesday by reporters ahead of his departure for a trip to Arizona, Trump dismissed them, falsely claiming they are based on “no mitigation,” as in, if we did nothing.  “We’re doing a lot of mitigation,” Trump said. “And, frankly, when the people report back [to work], they’re gonna be social distancing, and they’re gonna be washing their hands, and they’re gonna be doing the things that you’re supposed to do ... but that report is a no-mitigation report, and we are mitigating.” Trump lies and says models that show US coronavirus deaths increasing in coming weeks are based on "no mitigation," which is not the case. They are based on the relaxation of mitigation that he has been championing. pic.twitter.com/ijqmzGya73 But the fact is, the US is doing less mitigation than it was a few weeks ago. States are beginning to reopen nonessential businesses, and customers are beginning to patronize them. And the two new models — one based on government data put together by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and another by the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington (IHME) — take this into account. Both feature projections based on the relaxation of mitigation that Trump has championed by urging state governments to take steps to reopen businesses, even as none of them has met the White House coronavirus task force’s gating criteria for doing so. For instance, as the New York Times reports, the IHME’s new model, which estimates that the coronavirus will claim nearly 135,000 lives in the US by early August, states that its upward revision is based on “rising mobility in most US states as well as the easing of social distancing measures expected in 31 states by May 11, indicating that growing contacts among people will promote transmission of the coronavirus.” (The FEMA document shows that the daily US death toll will reach 3,000 by June 1, a near doubling of the roughly 1,500 lives being claimed per day by the coronavirus right now.) Trump’s comments indicate that he thinks workers being diligent about washing their hands and trying to keep distance from other people will be sufficient to slow the spread of the virus, but experts say that’s not the case. Stay-at-home orders and the shutdown of most businesses haven’t so far been sufficient to bend the trajectory of new cases down, they’ve merely gotten the country to a relative plateau in new cases and deaths. This suggests the number of new cases and deaths will likely get worse as things reopen. It is for these reasons that public health experts think it’s premature to relax stay-at-home orders. But later during his comments outside the White House on Tuesday, Trump indicated he thinks there’s no choice but to try to get the economy going again. Asked by a reporter if he’s concerned that deaths are projected to increase because states are relaxing social distancing guidelines too early, Trump responded that he isn’t because “the fact that we’re letting people go and go to their jobs — they have to do it.” “You know, if they held people any longer with the shutdowns, you’re going to lose people that way too, and you already have, I’m sure,” Trump said. “But between drug abuse, and, I mean, they say suicide — a lot of different things. Just so you know, there’s no great win one way or the other.” REPORTER: Are you concerned that deaths are projected to rise b/c states are relaxing guidelines too early?TRUMP: No ... the fact that we're letting people go & go to their jobs -- they have to do it ... between drug abuse, suicide -- there's no great win one way or the other pic.twitter.com/dPO92VNNvY While many would disagree with Trump’s insinuation that tens of thousands of lives are worth prematurely pretending the worst of the coronavirus is in the rearview mirror, Trump has self-interested motives for downplaying the new models: He faces a tough reelection fight, and the economic message he planned to make a centerpiece of his campaign has been suddenly flipped into a conversation about the possibility of 20 percent unemployment and massive quarterly declines in GDP.  So instead of engaging with the grim public health reality, the White House has instead reportedly relied on a rosier model prepared by controversial White House economic adviser Kevin Hassett that implausibly shows coronavirus deaths plunging to zero by mid-May. It’s difficult to tell exactly what the White House is basing its Covid-19 policies on at the moment, in part because Trump is preventing House Democrats from asking government public health experts what’s going on. During another part of his Q&A with reporters on Tuesday, he said that he’s blocking the government’s top infectious disease expert, Dr. Anthony Fauci of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, from testifying to the House of Representatives because “the House is a setup.” (Fauci will testify next week before the Republican-controlled Senate.) “The House is a bunch of Trump haters,” Trump added. “They, frankly, want our situation to be unsuccessful, which means death.”  REPORTER: Why won't you let Fauci testify before the House?TRUMP: "Because the House is a set up. The House is a bunch of Trump haters ... they, frankly, want our situation to be unsuccessful, which means death." pic.twitter.com/G3G5OoV5IV He went on to suggest that the US coronavirus response is the envy of the world. “The whole world is excited, watching us, because we’re leading the world,” Trump said — ignoring that the nearly 70,000 coronavirus deaths the US has experienced to date are well over twice the number endured by the No. 2 country, Italy, which has had just over 29,000. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  President Donald Trump’s February response to the coronavirus pandemic was so botched that the New York Times described it as a “lost month.” Throughout that month, Trump spent much of his time denying that the novel coronavirus was a significant threat to Americans — suggesting the virus would miraculously subside — and his administration failed to scale up the testing and health care capacity needed to confront the challenge ahead. Now, it looks like April was another lost month. In a viral tweet thread, Jeremy Konyndyk, an expert in disease outbreak preparedness at the Center for Global Development, argued that the federal government wasted April in its response to the coronavirus: Despite some gains in March on health care capacity and testing, the US failed to capitalize on social distancing throughout April to continue scaling up measures and get the coronavirus under control. Consider testing. Experts widely agree that the US needs at least 500,000 Covid-19 tests a day, on the low end, or even tens of millions, on the high end, to safely end extreme social distancing measures. Throughout March, the US made some progress toward that: It went from a few dozen tests a day to a few hundred to more than 100,000. In April, that progress seemed to stall out. In the last week of April, the US averaged around 220,000 tests a day — not much of an improvement from the roughly 150,000 a day that it reported during the first few weeks of the month, and far from what experts say is needed to control the outbreak (as South Korea and Germany have). The result, Konyndyk and other experts warn, is the US still isn’t ready to safely reopen its economy. Confirmed Covid-19 cases and deaths aren’t trending down — with the country reporting around 25,000 to 30,000 new cases each day throughout April and now into May. US cases, April 1: 25.1kUS cases, April 30: 29.5kWe have spent the month of April on a plateau. Daily counts fluctuating between 25-30k, no longer rising but not definitively declining. pic.twitter.com/SgI2aPKqjj “There’s no definitive downturn,” Konyndyk, who served in President Barack Obama’s administration, told me. “We’re on a plateau.” No country is escaping — or at least is expected to escape — the coronavirus pandemic unscathed. Besides the US, developed nations like Italy, Spain, and France have also dealt with a frightening number of cases and deaths. But in Konyndyk’s view, the US is unique among the rest of the developed world in that it has consistently bungled its response even after it became clear that the coronavirus is a real threat. From South Korea to Germany, other countries have taken the steps necessary — scaled-up testing, expanded contact tracing, and built-up health care capacity — as coronavirus began to appear within their borders. The US has taken some steps here and there, but it’s struggled to build an expansive national response. The difference isn’t that all of these other countries have better public health systems than the US, Konyndyk argued. It’s that their political systems have done a better job, with strong national leadership and coordination. “This is a disease that does not just test your health system,” Konyndyk said. “It tests your political system. It tests the quality and competence of your governance.” Konyndyk spoke in greater detail about the Trump administration’s response to the coronavirus pandemic. Our conversation is below, edited for length and clarity. Why do you say the federal government wasted April? The federal government has not done a great deal to get the country ready to exit the lockdown. The lockdown is not meant to be a permanent state of affairs; it’s intended to be a giant pause button that buys you time to get ready for the next phase. That’s why I see a really striking parallel between February and April. In February, the main thing that the federal government was doing was the travel bans. The public health literature on travel bans says they are at best a delaying tactic, but they are defensible if they’re used to buy extra time to prepare. We didn’t. In February, infamously, the Trump administration was not using that month to prepare. They were not signaling the hospital system to get ready. They were not reinforcing our supplies of PPE [personal protective equipment]. They were not scaling up nationwide testing. All those things they began doing in the middle of March, they should have been starting the moment they put those travel bans in place in February. In the month of March, the federal government started to do some things. They began to scale up testing, with a major increase in the number of tests throughout the month. They began to get FEMA [the Federal Emergency Management Agency] into the game. They began doing work on PPE, although that’s been highly fraught. By the end of March, almost the whole country had put stay-at-home orders in place, had put social distancing, physical distancing measures in place. We actually made headway in March. But April, we didn’t. You see that in the case numbers: They’ve been basically flat the month of April. According to Johns Hopkins, on April 1 the [daily] case level was 25,100, and on April 30 it was 29,500. Throughout the month, they got as low as 22,000 one day; they got as high as 36,000 one day. Without the outliers, [the case level] was hanging between 25,000 and a little over 30,000 new cases every day.  There’s no definitive downturn. We’re on a plateau. Social distancing stopped the growth of transmission, but it didn’t drive it down. The hope had been that once this came into place, it would begin driving transmissions down. That’s what we saw in China. That’s what we saw in Italy. That’s what we’ve seen in Spain. What should the US have been doing in April that it didn’t do? We should have been laying the groundwork for going from being stuck to actually suppressing cases, and laying the groundwork for an ability to lift the [stay-at-home] orders in a safe way. There’s a ton of consensus in the public health community around what needs to happen. It’s practitioners, policymakers, scientists. You’ve got Trump’s former FDA commissioner and someone like myself, who served in the Obama administration and is pretty progressive in my political views. It’s not a political or partisan thing. We need to test much more widely. We need to scale up contact tracing. We need to protect the most vulnerable populations. We need enhanced surveillance so we can actually see what this virus is doing. And we need to reinforce the hospital system. The basic components of a sustainable suppression strategy are pretty universally agreed upon at this point. They mirror what’s been successful in other countries. They mirror what’s been successful in South Korea, Hong Kong, and Taiwan. There’s no indication we’re making headway on that in a serious way. You tweeted that if we have another month like April, we’ll have another month with a death toll that’s equivalent to all American casualties in the Vietnam War. And even if you look at less grave impacts, the lack of action means people will have to social distance for longer.  It seems like everything negative we associate with this pandemic is going to stay the same or get worse the longer we keep having these lost months. Absolutely. This is what’s so confounding about the federal position right now: What needs to happen is very clear.  But what we need is federal leadership; it requires the federal government to take ownership of some of these problems. Testing is not going to be resolved until the federal government takes ownership of expanding it; as long as they keep kicking it to the states, we will remain stuck. Contact tracing is going to be difficult to scale up at a national level without a consistent federal approach. The bottlenecks on PPE aren’t going to be fixed without federal leadership. The federal government wants to shift all the political responsibility on the states. If something is going wrong, blame the governor. But they still want to take the credit for getting the win. I was struck by this “blueprint” the Trump administration put out, which basically said states and the private sector will have to solve every problem and the federal government will play a supplementary role — a “supplier of last resort.” But if Maryland sees a swab factory in Maine become the bottleneck for testing, what can Maryland do? That seems to be the problem here. That’s why you need federal leadership. That’s exactly right. There’s a reason why when we go to war, we don’t go to war with each governor running their own brigades. We go to war with a unified military. If we’re going to say that this is like a war — and I think that’s a fair analogy for what we’re up against — we need the federal government for this just as much as we need it for any other war. There are really important, substantive reasons for that. The federal government has much more buying power than the individual state has. The federal government has the leverage to solve problems across and between states.  Take contact tracing. You have to have a contact tracing network that can cross state lines, because people cross state lines, the disease crosses state lines. If this is all being run by individual state departments of health that are relatively siloed from each other, you don’t get that kind of connectivity. But we have a federal CDC for a reason. We have FEMA for a reason. If they weren’t relevant, they wouldn’t exist. There’s this great quote from Abraham Lincoln to Gen. George McClellan during the Civil War. McClellan was proving tepid about actually fighting the Confederates. Lincoln said, “If General McClellan does not want to use the army, I would like to borrow it.”  If President Trump doesn’t want to use the federal government, he should let someone else borrow it — because there is a lot of capability there that’s simply not being used. I wanted to focus on this point a bit. To some degree, this pandemic would be bad no matter what. Many countries have underinvested in public health. Many countries have seen cases and deaths. Even those that haven’t, they face a threat from Covid-19.  But part of what you’re talking about here is that the US and this administration have done particularly badly compared to other countries. Well, let’s start with the fact that clearly we are doing worse than just about everyone else. The only places that got this right from the beginning are South Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Vietnam. You could argue Singapore, although recent developments there have called that into question. These were countries that right from the beginning took it seriously. It’s no coincidence that these were all countries that experienced SARS, MERS, or other novel coronavirus outbreaks. They saw cases, but they didn’t have their health-care systems overwhelmed, because they acted very early. That’s the best tier of countries. Then you have the next tier of countries, which bungled it initially but then got on top of it. I would put China in that category, but also Germany. Initially, they had a pretty significant acceleration of transmission, and they didn’t do enough to prepare. But once it became clear how bad it was, they swung into very serious action. They had a peak that’s higher than it should have been, but once it arrived, they at least did what was necessary — and they’ve been able to get their numbers way down now from the peak that they experienced. Then you have countries like the US, which is the third category. Not only did we fail to prepare initially, but then we have mismanaged the response once we began responding. We were late, slow, and unprepared, and then we executed poorly once we began acting.  That’s what really sets the US apart. The countries that have done well have done well not just because of their stronger public health systems but also because their political systems performed better.  That’s the critical variable here: This is a disease that does not just test your health system. It tests your political system. It tests the quality and competence of your governance.  Looking forward, how do we make sure May is not a repeat of February or April? I can answer that in a technical way by laying out the strategic elements that we need to be executing on. But the gap we face right now is not a failure to know what to do. It’s a failure of the political will to do it. That’s the hardest thing to generate. The way we avoid May being like April is we get serious about national-level contact tracing, we have the federal government get serious about PPE production and using the DPA [Defense Production Act] to go big on PPE production, and we have the federal government going big on strengthening the supply chain for testing supplies. All those things are absolutely things that need to happen, and would have a helpful impact. But they all require the political will by the president to have the federal government own those problems. And that seems to the one red line.  I don’t know how we do that. Do we have Congress force his hand? Do we have governors band together and demand that he do it? The only way he’s going to do it is if he’s forced to. To your point, the approaches you listed are things you and other experts were telling people in February and early March. It’s not stuff we just figured out in late April or May. That’s right. That’s what’s so infuriating. We have a clearer idea now of what we need to do than a month ago or two months ago, but we knew the broad strokes. As little as I expected from this administration, I expected that they would have this sorted out by now. And they don’t. The fundamental issue here is we have an incompetently managed federal response — and that is unlikely to change. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. It’s tough to exaggerate the stakes in Wisconsin Legislature v. Palm, a lawsuit filed by Wisconsin’s Republican-controlled legislature that seeks to halt that state’s coronavirus-related stay-at-home order. The Wisconsin Supreme Court, which is also controlled by Republicans, will hear oral arguments in this case on Tuesday. The immediate question in Wisconsin Legislature is whether the head of the state’s health agency, Andrea Palm, exceeded her authority when she ordered “nonessential” businesses closed within the state and instructed most people in Wisconsin to remain at home — an order that was initiated on March 24 and then extended on April 16. But the case threatens much more than a single order that Palm handed down to deal with a single emergency. Among other things, the Republican legislature asks the Republican state Supreme Court to permanently strip Palm — and anyone else who holds her job in the future — of much of their ability to swiftly respond to a public health emergency. Under the legislature’s proposed framework, the state’s health agency would be stripped of its authority to issue broad public health orders like the state’s stay-at-home order, unless it completed a lengthy process that takes two or three weeks at a minimum. Then, the GOP-controlled legislature also seeks the power to “delay or suspend” Palm’s public health order after the state health department finally completes this process. You can see the problem with this process: Give a pandemic two or three weeks to spread unchecked and any public health order the legislature approves would be too late.  What’s at stake here is that the state’s health department could be permanently stripped of its ability to react quickly to public health emergencies — not just the coronavirus pandemic, but future public health emergencies as well. Many states also have public health laws that resemble Wisconsin’s. So it is at least possible that other state Supreme Courts could follow Wisconsin’s lead if Wisconsin Legislature reads the state’s law narrowly. Wisconsin Legislature involves a state law that gives the state’s Department of Health Services extraordinarily broad power to confront a public health emergency.  Among other things, the department may “close schools and forbid public gatherings in schools, churches, and other places to control outbreaks and epidemics.” It may “issue orders ... for the control and suppression of communicable diseases,” and these orders “may be made applicable to the whole or any specified part of the state.” And, on top of all that, an additional provision permits the health department to “authorize and implement all emergency measures necessary to control communicable diseases.” The legislature claims that these powers should be read narrowly to prevent Palm from handing down the broad stay-at-home order at issue in this case, but their primary argument turns on an arcane distinction between “rules” and “orders.” Briefly, the legislature points to a state law defining the word “rule” to include any “general order of general application that has the force of law.” According to the legislature’s brief, the stay-at-home order counts as a rule “because it applies to every individual, school, and business in the State,” and therefore qualifies as a “general order of general application.”  The legislature concedes that certain narrow orders, such as “an order directed to a specifically named person or to a group of specifically named persons that does not constitute a general class,” do not qualify as “rules.” This distinction between “rules” and “orders” matters because the process for handing down a new rule is extraordinarily onerous. Even under an expedited process permitted for “emergency” rules, a state agency must first draft a “statement of the scope of the proposed emergency rule.” That statement then must be reviewed and approved by the governor and the state Department of Administration, and then it must be published in an official state publication that only publishes once a week. Then, after the statement is published, the agency must complete a 10-day waiting period before it is allowed to move forward, with no apparent way to waive this requirement. And then the rule can be delayed even longer if certain legislative leaders require the agency to hold a public hearing on the new rule. And then the new rule can potentially be suspended by a legislative committee — which may require the agency to start this process all over again. So, if the state’s stay-at-home order is designated as a “rule,” that means the order is unlawful unless Palm completes a weeks-long process and then gives Republicans in the state legislature an effective veto power over her order. Palm’s brief, meanwhile, makes the case that her stay-at-home order is merely an “order” and not a “rule.”  Among other things, she argues that the stay-at-home order “is not of ‘general application’ because it responds only to a specific, limited-in-time scenario” — that is, to qualify as a “rule,” the stay-at-home order would need to lay down lasting restrictions that extend beyond the coronavirus pandemic. Palm also makes a strong argument that the legislature’s proposed definition of the word “rule” cannot be squared with the state’s public health laws. Recall that the legislature claims that this order qualifies as a rule “because it applies to every individual, school, and business in the State.” But here is the text of a state public health provision allowing Palm to issue both rules and orders to prevent the spread of disease: the department may promulgate and enforce rules or issue orders for guarding against the introduction of any communicable disease into the state, for the control and suppression of communicable diseases, for the quarantine and disinfection of persons, localities and things infected or suspected of being infected by a communicable disease and for the sanitary care of jails, state prisons, mental health institutions, schools, and public buildings and connected premises. Any rule or order may be made applicable to the whole or any specified part of the state, or to any vessel or other conveyance. Pay attention to the bolded language, which explicitly states that a mere order “may be made applicable to the whole” state. This language is tough to square with the state’s suggestion that an order which applies statewide should be classified as a “rule.” Setting aside the question of what Wisconsin law actually requires of Palm, there are strong practical arguments for why Palm should not be able to shut down many of the state’s businesses indefinitely, at least without seeking legislative approval first. Palm’s actions are almost certainly justified, given the ongoing public health emergency. But the state’s public health law does concentrate an awful lot of power in one individual. Yet, while there are good reasons why Wisconsin residents should want a democratically elected legislature to oversee Palm’s actions, the fact remains that Wisconsin’s legislature is one of the most gerrymandered legislatures in the country. In 2018, Republicans won 63 of the state assembly’s 99 seats — despite the fact that Democratic candidates received 54 percent of the statewide popular vote. If the state Supreme Court does side with this gerrymandered legislature, that means that Wisconsin Republicans will gain a powerful veto over the state’s ability to manage the pandemic. And Palm may be forced to drag her feet through a weeks-long process if she wants to reinstate even some parts of her stay-at-home order. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Americans have relied on low-wage workers to keep essential services running during the pandemic, from harvesting and delivering food to cleaning public spaces. But many of these workers who lack legal immigration status have done so without receiving any financial assistance from the federal government. The $2 trillion CARES Act gives most taxpayers unemployment benefits and up to $1,200 in cash payments. But even though the 11 million unauthorized immigrants living in the US are no more immune to the effects of the current crisis, fearing for their livelihood and their health, the bill has conspicuously omitted them.  Unauthorized immigrants — who make up about a quarter of farmworkers and 8 percent of service sector and production workers — are typically ineligible for unemployment, but policies differ by state. And even if they pay taxes, they also aren’t eligible for stimulus checks, which the government started sending out in April, because they don’t have Social Security numbers. These exclusions impact not only the immigrants themselves, but also their families, including their US citizen spouses and children.  “People say that this pandemic is the great equalizer,” Rosana Araujo, an undocumented immigrant and domestic worker living in South Florida, said. “Sure, it could be an equalizer in terms of how everyone shares anxiety. But this actually exposes the deep inequalities our communities face. They haven’t taken undocumented immigrants into account.” Some cities and states have taken steps to bridge this gap in financial relief for these workers who have become critical to the US’s coronavirus response: California and New York City, for example, have created funds totaling $125 million and $20 million respectively to support unauthorized immigrants impacted by Covid-19. Advocates are putting pressure on Congress to offer such aid on a federal level, as well.  But absent further relief for the rest of the nation’s unauthorized immigrants, many won’t have any choice but to continue working despite public health warnings to stay home, which could further spread the virus and pose a risk to public health. And should they contract the virus and have to seek medical care, they will have no financial safety net.  While many immigrants are continuing to work in essential fields, ranging from medical care to cleaning to grocery stores, they are taking an economic hit like many other workers who are facing layoffs, furloughs, and pay cuts. For Joel and Emilio, both unauthorized immigrants living in Panama City Beach, Florida, the pandemic has left them without full-time employment and unable to continue supporting their families in their home countries. (They both asked to be identified only by their first name to protect their privacy.)  Before the pandemic hit, Emilio and Joel were both working full-time on restoring hotels in the area as members of the organization Resilience Force, which helps rebuild homes and buildings devastated from natural disasters. But they were furloughed amid the pandemic and now, they’re making a living by shopping and delivering groceries for Instacart.  They arrived in the US in 2018. Emilio, who is originally from Argentina, was seeking economic opportunity. Joel was escaping the dictatorship of Nicolas Maduro in Venezuela. His mother, who is also an unauthorized immigrant, came to live with him the following year and was working at the same hotel as him before she was furloughed during the pandemic.  They always sent a portion of their paychecks home to their families. Emilio was sending about $100 to $200 weekly to his mother, and Joel was sending money to his grandmother, but neither of them have been able to afford to do so for weeks.  “It was completely terrible because I had normal weekly earnings and then when all this happened, I stopped having that income,” Emilio said, adding that now, his earnings on Instacart are “random and only by luck.” Araujo said she has also been sending money to her two sisters and nephew back home in Uruguay. She has been cleaning houses and warehouses ever since she left Uruguay in 2002 amid an economic crisis in the country. But she’s been without work since early March, and she’s not expecting to be able to return to work for possibly another two months.  She’s nevertheless still sending even more money home these days because her family is also experiencing financial hardship as a result of the pandemic.  Maribel Cruz, a beneficiary of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program living in Long Beach, California, said she is also worried about financially supporting her family. She has been able to continue working from home for her job at a nonprofit, but her parents, who don’t have legal status, have taken a big income hit. Her father, who previously worked in a factory producing T-shirts for sporting events, is without work and her mother, who cleans houses, has seen her hours reduced from four to two days a week.  Cruz has received a stimulus check because she files taxes with a Social Security number she obtained through DACA, which has allowed over 700,000 young undocumented immigrants to live and work in the US without fear of deportation. But her parents aren’t eligible for the checks.  During her day job, Cruz has encountered hundreds of other unauthorized immigrants in her area who are similarly struggling financially. She works for the Long Beach Immigration Rights Coalition, which recently created a $40,000 Covid-19 emergency fund for such families. But the organization received so many applicants that it will have to turn some down.  Other nonprofits, including the National Domestic Workers Alliance and Resilience Force, have also set up their own funds to offer immigrant workers financial support.  “The pandemic has really brought to the forefront their lack of access to resources,” Cruz said.  Unauthorized immigrants are particularly vulnerable to the virus due to inadequate access to health care. Noncitizens are significantly more likely to be uninsured compared to US citizens, which may dissuade them from seeking medical care if they contract the virus.  Neither Emilio nor Joel have health insurance, so they not only fear getting sick, but also the prospect of getting hit with huge medical bills should they need to be hospitalized. And Joel is also worried about infecting his similarly uninsured mother, who suffers from hypertension and has had problems with her heart.  “Every single day, I think this is a big risk I’m taking because I’m the only one that goes out on the street and if anyone would be infected, I would be the only one to bear the responsibility for that,” he said. “This worries me a great deal because I am exposed to places that are very crowded. Every morning when I leave and every evening when I arrive home, I pray to God that I will not be one more of those who becomes sick.” Araujo is also worried about getting the treatment she needs without health insurance. She has issues with her thyroid, but the hospital is no longer taking any cases that are unrelated to coronavirus and she can’t afford to go to a health clinic. As a result, she couldn’t get medication prescribed and her joints started aching. She’s concerned about returning to work and contracting the virus. Her employers don’t give her protective equipment, and she can’t afford to spend $15 on a box of gloves that she won’t be able to reuse. Many cleaners also develop respiratory issues due to the use of chemical cleaning products that could put them at higher risk of complications from Covid-19, the illness caused by coronavirus.  “I’m living with paranoia because I don’t know when I’m going to be infected,” she said. “I feel constantly exposed.”  Congress has even barred many family members of unauthorized immigrants from receiving stimulus checks, even if they’re US citizens. The bill excludes those in households with people of mixed immigration status, where some tax filers or their children may use what’s called an Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN). The IRS issues ITINs to unauthorized immigrants so they can pay taxes, even though they don’t have a Social Security number. If anyone in the household uses an ITIN — either a spouse or a dependent child — that means no one in the household will qualify for the stimulus checks, unless one spouse served in the military in 2019. Immigrant advocates at the Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund filed  a lawsuit on Tuesday challenging the CARES Act, alleging that it “discriminates against mixed-status couples” in violation of the US Constitution’s equal protection and due process provisions. But if the law is allowed to stand, it could impact an estimated 16.7 million people who live in mixed-status households nationwide, including 8.2 million US-born or naturalized citizens. Sarah and her husband Juan, who asked to be identified only by their first names to protect their privacy, are one such couple living in Evansville, Indiana. She is a born-and-raised US citizen, but he came to the US 14 years ago from Honduras without authorization, seeking to earn enough money to support his parents and siblings back home.  The couple married three years ago and shortly thereafter, she started the process of sponsoring him for a green card. He’s still waiting for an interview at a consulate in Honduras, which has been postponed on account of the pandemic. But if all goes to plan, he will soon have permanent residency and be issued a Social Security number.  In the meantime, however, Juan is still living in the US as an unauthorized immigrant, filing taxes under an ITIN. Neither he nor Sarah, therefore, are eligible for stimulus checks.  It’s not causing them financial hardship. Sarah is continuing to work from home during the pandemic, making $45,000 a year in medical billing. And Juan chose to take a month off from his job in painting and construction because they feared he would contract the virus at work, but he is now back on the job. She said that together, they make a decent living, but they do have a lot of expenses, including his biweekly $120 remittances for his family in Honduras so they can buy food and pay their water and electric bills.  Still, she’s angry that both she and her husband are being penalized amid the pandemic. “While not receiving the stimulus hasn’t been a burden, it feels like a slap in the face as a US citizen that even I won’t get it,” she said. “I personally am not opposed to my tax dollars paying for undocumented immigrants receiving aid during this pandemic, but I can understand why our government wouldn’t do this. But me? A US citizen? I’m insulted and angry. I feel like my country does not care about me in the slightest.” As immigrants on the frontlines of the pandemic, Joel said he and his peers have gone out in public to serve the country that has welcomed them. He said he sees it as a “way of returning the favor of being allowed to be here.”  “I feel pride to at least collaborate and do this work of delivering food to many homes, for many people that cannot leave their homes under any circumstances, especially the elderly,” he said. “So, I feel very proud of that, and I would like that we would be recognized and that our work as immigrants could be recognized.”  But he also faces a lot of uncertainty about his health, his mother’s health and his financial situation absent any support from the government or the US medical system: “At night, I look around and realize that I don’t have any type of security that I will be ok or that nothing serious will happen.”  That’s why advocates are calling on Congress to include support for unauthorized immigrants in its next coronavirus relief package. The Center for American Progress, a liberal think tank, is calling on lawmakers to ensure unauthorized immigrants have access to testing and treatment for the virus, which will also help stop the spread of the pandemic. It’s also pushing for all taxpayers to have access to expanded unemployment benefits and for all income-eligible residents to receive stimulus checks, regardless of immigration status. “If they pass another stimulus package, they have to include everyone that’s living in the country,” Cruz said. “I just hope that they don’t think of relief as a political tool. I just hope that they have some humanity in them to provide life-saving assistance to families.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   The general rule of unemployment has always been that you can’t collect benefits if you quit your job. But what about during a pandemic, when going to work means putting your life at risk? Apparently, the rule still applies. In late April, Iowa Gov. Kim Reynolds, a Republican, declared that employees who decline to return to work won’t be eligible for unemployment benefits, even if they’re concerned about contracting the coronavirus. It’s a “voluntary quit,” Reynolds explained, whatever the reasoning. So librarians, gym instructors, restaurant employees, retail associates, racetrack workers, and others in the 77 Iowa counties Reynolds allowed to reopen May 1 have a choice: Protect their paychecks, or protect their health. “You’re just caught between a rock and a hard place. What do you do? We’re not going to qualify for unemployment now that the salon’s opening back up, so you feel forced to go back to work,” Terri, a hairstylist in Georgia — which began reopening its economy in late April — recently told me. (Terri asked that her last name be withheld to protect her privacy.) Some people expressed outrage at Reynolds’s stance, noting that it puts workers in a terrible bind. It’s a scenario that’s been playing out for essential workers for weeks, and one that’s about to play out for workers across the country as states begin reopening their economies even as the coronavirus crisis continues to rage on. Many Americans aren’t comfortable going to work right now, but most don’t have much of a choice. There are no easy answers here. Being asked to go to work and risk catching an unpredictable and deadly virus is terrifying. And part of the reason the federal government expanded unemployment insurance during the pandemic, adding an extra $600 a week through July, is to allow people to remain home, stay safe, and stop the spread. But many states, right or wrong, are starting to open their economies, and that entails asking people to come back to work. You can’t reopen your hair salon if there’s no one there to do hair. The burden isn’t being distributed evenly. Many essential jobs, as well as those in industries hit the hardest by coronavirus layoffs, are low-paid ones. Unemployment insurance is indeed a more lucrative and safer scenario for these workers, many of whom don’t have employer-subsidized health insurance. In addition, many of these jobs are disproportionately held by women, people of color, and those who are already vulnerable. In March, President Donald Trump signed into law the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act, a $2.2-trillion stimulus package. Part of that was used to beef up unemployment insurance to the tune of $600 a week through the end of July, on top of whatever state benefits people receive. It also expanded the pool of potential recipients to the self-employed, freelancers, and contract workers, all of whom are usually ineligible to collect. Speaking with essential workers in recent weeks, issues with the CARES Act’s expanded benefits became clear. First, it was creating some animosity with those workers, who had rightly noticed they would be making more on unemployment than they were at their jobs. Second, they knew they couldn’t quit and apply for it. Generally, unemployment benefits go to workers who are fired, furloughed, or laid off, not to those who quit — even if you’re a grocery store worker making $10 an hour who didn’t exactly sign up to put your life on the line. “If I say, look, I want to be at home with my family, then, okay well you lost your job and you can’t collect unemployment,” Kristi, a Family Dollar worker in Georgia, recently told me.  One hospital social worker in upstate New York described to me recently sitting in a car with a coworker who was crying over her anxiety about going to work, worried she might infect her grandmother. She didn’t want to quit and lose her source of income, but also couldn’t be fired. “You’re stuck in a hard place,” the social worker said. “You’re coming in every day and thinking you’re going to get sick or give it to someone you care about.” As nonessential workers across the country are being recalled to their jobs, they’re experiencing a similar scenario: Sure, you can quit or decline to go back, but that means no more unemployment insurance. Many states offer partial unemployment benefits, so if someone’s hours are reduced, they may get some benefits, explained Rebecca Dixon, executive director of the National Employment Law Project. But if not, it’s a tough spot. “If we’re talking about, ‘I was called back and I’m given a full-time schedule,’ it is correct that if you quit voluntarily in most unemployment insurance programs, then you’re not eligible,” she said. The CARES Act does extend benefit eligibility for certain coronavirus-related circumstances, including workers who have been diagnosed with Covid-19, or live with (or are taking care of someone) who has; workers who are the primary caregiver of children whose schools are closed because of Covid-19; and workers who have become the primary source of financial support for a household in which the former head of the household died of Covid-19, among others. But for many people, those provisions don’t apply. “As it stands, yes, if people are recalled to work, they are not supposed to be getting unemployment benefits because they’re not unemployed, and whether they like it or not, they need to return,” said Susan Houseman, vice president and director of research at the Upjohn Institute for Employment Research. Workers have options if they feel unsafe, including contacting the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and their state agencies. “Will OSHA be responsive? They’re not well funded, and not at the state level, either,” Houseman said. Congressional Republicans are pushing to include liability protections for businesses in future rounds of coronavirus legislation. That could complicate the situation even further, as businesses could feel less pressure to ensure the safety of their employees (and customers). Unemployment insurance guidelines vary state by state, but for workers, it’s still try at your own risk. A spokesperson for California’s Employment Development Department told me that people may be eligible to collect benefits if they quit work because of child care needs or choose to stay home due to health conditions or concerns about coronavirus exposure, but that it will be determined on a case-by-case basis via individual phone interviews.  A spokesperson for the New York Department of Labor told me that workers should file a complaint on the department’s website if they feel unsafe, and that fear-related cases will be determined on a case-by-case basis. An Alabama Department of Labor spokesperson said quitting voluntarily, generally speaking, would normally disqualify you, but added that for Covid-19-related claims, someone would qualify if they’re medically quarantined by a doctor or government official. “If someone is fearful of going back to work, we are encouraging employees to work with their employers on a safe back-to-work plan,” said Kersha Cartwright, a spokesperson for the Department of Labor in Georgia, one of the first states to start reopening its economy. She acknowledged that the issue of people who are wary of returning to work is a “gray area.” There are ways to address some of these issues through policy and enforcement. Democrats and labor leaders are pushing the US Labor Department to ensure federal safety guidelines for worker protections are in place and enforceable before states reopen. And Democrats and some Republicans are advocating for essential workers to receive hazard pay, so at the very least, they’re being compensated for the added risk they’re taking on. When expanded unemployment benefits were being negotiated, some Republicans publicly fretted that they would be so generous, people wouldn’t want to go back to work. And indeed, they had a point that the additional benefits would cause tension. But the tension among workers generally isn’t about laziness, it’s that they are legitimately afraid for their health and their lives, concerned that the benefits will expire as soon as economies reopen, and anxious about choosing between staying safe and getting paid. So, we’re in a coronavirus-induced economy where there is a dichotomy within the working class: those who can work from home and those who cannot. And those who cannot are being asked to carry an enormous burden. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Bill Gates saw this coming.  “I rate the chance of a widespread epidemic, in my lifetime, as well over 50 percent,” he told Ezra Klein in 2015. “Something like the Spanish flu in the modern day — health systems are far better, so you think, okay, that wouldn’t be very bad. What we showed [when infectious disease researchers working with the Gates Foundation modeled the scenario] was that the force of the infection, because of modern transport ... within days, it’s basically in all urban centers of the entire globe.” The world’s second-richest man (he recently lost the top spot to Jeff Bezos) has, in the years since he and his wife founded the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation in 2000, made a name for himself in philanthropy, especially in the field of public health. The foundation funds vaccinations through programs like GAVI, which Gates set up with a $750 million grant in 1999 and which is estimated to have saved millions of lives. (The foundation’s support to GAVI has totaled $4.1 billion to date.) The Gates Foundation funds fights against diseases like malaria and polio, and in its first 20 years of existence, it has spent some $40 billion on global development and public health programs.  And when the pandemic Gates long warned about arrived, he got to work on philanthropic initiatives to fight it. Today, he pledged another $50 million for that fight, making $300 million in total commitments. Much of his recent commitments have been for distributing treatments and vaccines in the developing world, a problem rich-country governments have almost entirely neglected as they struggle to keep a handle on things at home. Gates is not the only one making big donations in this emergency — many companies and rich individuals have pledged eye-popping sums to the global fight against the coronavirus. But Gates deserves special attention. He has more money than all but one, more experience working in public health and infectious disease response, stellar approval ratings among the American public, and — thanks to his early warnings about the disease — a resource that may be just as important as money: credibility.   In a February letter published in the New England Journal of Medicine, he urged the government to start a strong policy response at home, and to contribute to preparedness in lower-middle-income countries, which is where Gates has dedicated much of the $100 million he pledged in February to the coronavirus fight. He called for accelerated work on treatment and vaccines. He also laid out a plan for how to make sure a situation like this doesn’t happen again. On April 15, Gates committed an additional $150 million to testing, treatment, and aiding poor countries in their coronavirus response. “Realistically, if we’re going to return to normal, we need to develop a safe, effective vaccine. We need to make billions of doses, we need to get them out to every part of the world, and we need all of this to happen as quickly as possible,” Gates argued on April 30th, explaining his relentless focus on getting a vaccine on an unprecedented timescale. It’s the sort of response many people would have liked to see from the US government; the Trump administration was still insisting in late February that there was no cause for concern in the United States. It is catastrophic that the federal government has failed as badly as it has. Into the breach have stepped private actors — Gates leading among them — to address the problems the government has failed to address.  Billionaire philanthropists like Gates have attracted justified criticism, but it’s crucial to look at the good side, too: The crisis has been an example of how, at its best, billionaire philanthropy can do critical work that democratic systems are failing to get done. It’s fair to say that things would be much better off if President Donald Trump had mounted a competent response — and much worse off if Bill Gates weren’t around to help fill the void the incompetence at the top has created. One of the many early heroes in the fight against the coronavirus in the United States was the Seattle Flu Study, a Gates-funded research project that studied influenza-like illness in the Seattle area. The group spent most of February seeking permission to test the samples it had acquired for its study of influenza in Seattle for the novel coronavirus (government regulations prevented the group from using those samples for a different purpose, in this case tracking the spread of a new disease). Eventually, the Seattle Flu Study did a test — and found a person with coronavirus.  The state reacted fast once the detection of early cases was announced, implementing social distancing measures earlier than most of the country. The positive tests from the flu study resulted in cases being detected sooner, and might have helped the state react in time: It went from the nation’s leader in coronavirus cases to its current 14th place.  That effort is emblematic of many of Gates’s coronavirus response programs. Because the Gates Foundation was already working in infectious disease response and global health, it had connections with scientists and researchers and preexisting expertise in vaccine deployment and public health response. Confronting a new threat in the Covid-19 coronavirus, he has put those resources to use.  In the developing world, global health teams Gates has funded, like the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI), have pivoted to working on a coronavirus response as the virus has made their original work unsafe (they could spread the coronavirus) and created pressing new needs in the communities they serve.  “The GPEI will use our tools, our workforce, and our laboratory and surveillance network to support countries as they respond to COVID-19,” Dr. Erin Stuckey, epidemiologist and program officer at the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, said. “What that looks like will depend on the situation in each country and the extent of the polio operations that are up and running there — but in general, the systems we’ve built for polio eradication will help support things like coordination of response operations, surveillance of suspected cases, training for healthcare workers, and standing up data systems.” The Gates Foundation, headquartered in Seattle, has done additional work at home, too. In March, it partnered with the University of Washington’s Seattle Flu Study again to explore home testing kits for the virus; the Food and Drug Administration has since banned at-home testing, but the team is working on a test that can be self-administered at a testing site. The foundation has also launched the Covid-19 Therapeutics Accelerator to study the most effective treatments for the virus, with $125 million in initial funding. Already, it has shown some promising results. While most studies have explored treatments, some early studies launched by the accelerator have looked at prophylaxis — drug treatments that prevent people from getting sick in the first place, likely for health care workers and people at similarly high risk. “We’re not expecting to find a 100-percent-effective solution right off the bat,” Trevor Mundel, president of the Gates Foundation’s Global Health program, explained, noting that other viruses like HIV, as well as other lung infections like tuberculosis, have proven most responsive to cocktails of several drugs.  “That’s why the Accelerator is looking to identify a shortlist of about 50-100 FDA-approved drugs, and then narrow this down to a few that could be scaled up. And what this will look like is, first trying to use individual drugs, and then of course combinations of those individual drugs,” he added. Like the program it was modeled on — the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), an international collaboration to make vaccines available quickly when disease outbreaks happen — the Therapeutics Accelerator is an international project, with contributions from Gates as well as many national governments.  CEPI is also a Gates Foundation initiative. As you might expect, Gates has also started directing resources at finding a vaccine for the coronavirus. “I do think manufacturing, construction, a lot of things we’ll do, but large public gatherings may have to wait until we have that vaccine,” he told NPR in April. “Until we get a vaccine that almost everybody’s had, the risk of a rebound will be there.” With that in mind, Gates has been airing another big idea. Usually, only the vaccine that is going to be used is manufactured. That means a delay in the rollout between when a vaccine is chosen and when it is actually available at the necessary scale.  Gates’s proposal is to build seven factories, for all the leading vaccine candidates, and manufacture lots of each of them. It will mean some wasted money, but it’ll be worth it to get a vaccine to patients sooner. He estimates this will cost billions. Though the foundation hasn’t disclosed how much it will personally be spending, a project of this magnitude will require other stakeholders — as have most of Gates’s public health projects. “The Gates Foundation is working with a range of national and multilateral stakeholders who are funding the development of vaccines for COVID-19. Enhancements of global manufacturing capacity are clearly required given the population-level scale at which a COVID-19 vaccine will need to be given,” the Gates Foundation told Vox in a statement. “Many of the current vaccine approaches are novel and have never been scaled for a commercialized product. In addition, governments need to continue to provide important vaccines for other diseases while scaling a successful COVID-19 vaccine.” On April 15, the foundation announced an expanded commitment to the global Covid-19 response, with an additional $150 million in funding to help with more diagnostics, treatments, and vaccine research, as well as funding for Africa and South Asia, where countries are grappling with the spread of the virus without the resources to address it. On May 4, it announced another round of commitments, bringing total funding to $300 million, with an emphasis on delivering vaccines to lower-income countries once they’re developed. Gates has, of course, attracted critics. That includes conspiracy theorists who believe he engineered the whole pandemic, possibly so that he can inject us all with a surveillance system as part of the vaccines. Another conspiracy theory has seized on the fact that a nonprofit Gates funded did a tabletop pandemic response exercise in 2019 that imagined the emergence of a new coronavirus. Infamous conspiracy theorist Alex Jones has led his followers in calling for Gates to be arrested as a “collaborator” in the virus outbreak. Needless to say, these are fictions.  But there are legitimate critiques. One line of criticism is familiar. Gates, it acknowledges, is plainly doing great stuff. But a lot has gone wrong in our society if we are in the position of relying on individuals to make eye-popping sums of money starting tech companies and then devote their retirement to bailing out the rest of us. Shouldn’t we have institutions that solve our problems more systematically? And there’s a related critique, prominently articulated in recent years by Anand Giridharadas, among others: When billionaires donate to charity, they’re not just buying vaccines — they’re also buying good PR. If you think that addressing the most pressing problems in society requires changing how wealth works so there aren’t any billionaires, then this looks like a bad trade: We’re accepting gifts from billionaires in exchange for entrenching them. This is the whole problem; it tells the story. the billionaires collectively own the government, fleece it, shrink it, render it impotent. Then when gov fails, a billionaire steps in and we say, see, billionaires and corporations are saving the day! Which makes them stronger. https://t.co/f2NYHadAgY Billionaires back us into a corner.They’ve tax-dodged, lobbied, wage-thieved, benefit-cut, monopolized, and rigged society to a place where, in a crisis, people and institutions are hard-up and they have resources.So they step up to fix what they helped break. And we take it. https://t.co/9bXdClggoy When you see a virus donation by a company or billionaire, one question you might ask -- beyond whatever understandable gratitude you may feel -- is: Would this crisis have hit us as severely as it has had that money instead been paid as taxes or wages or worker benefits? But there are problems with this critique. In particular, it’s not low taxes that hampered the US response. The FDA didn’t refuse to approve private tests for critical weeks because it was short on budget — it was short on a sense of what was at stake. This critique also doesn’t acknowledge that the administration in power might not necessarily share everyone’s priorities for where taxes should go — witness Trump’s budgets, which have sought to cut funding for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  From the top down, the official US government response has been slow, incompetent, and poorly suited to what was at stake. Abolishing billionaires would not magically make Trump more competent. In that context, I find it hard to wish that Bill Gates had been taxed until he no longer had the resources he’s now spending to try to attack this pandemic. And until the problems that produced this government response are fixed, I’m opposed to tearing down the philanthropic safety net that has been there to catch us when the Trump administration failed. To be sure, Gates isn’t necessarily representative of his class. But the point remains: Abolishing the billionaire class hardly guarantees the kind of competent government response needed in a crisis like this.  Additionally, it’s worth noting that Gates has been touring the world advocating for increased funding for those agencies, and warning that a dangerous global pandemic might happen if funding weren’t increased. (More broadly, Gates has also pushed for higher taxes on the billionaire class.) But that’s not to say there’s no space for accountability. “With the prospect of catastrophic numbers of deaths, any effective response, no matter the source, is to be wished for,” Stanford philosopher Rob Reich, who criticized the dynamics of billionaire giving in his book Just Giving, told me. “When government is as ineffective as it has proven to be, responses from individuals, corporations, philanthropies, should be welcomed, insofar as they are effective.” But, he pointed out, it’s important that we target our accolades at the projects that actually are effective. We don’t want to uncritically praise or uncritically criticize — we want to ask questions, elevate the best projects, and assign credit where it’s due.  “Whatever the source of a large-scale response is, we should direct scrutiny at it. Just as when [New York Gov. Andrew] Cuomo or Trump or [California Gov.] Gavin Newsom stand up to offer their own responses, there’s a critical and question-asking press corps debating whether their responses are worthy. So too should we be directing that scrutiny at corporations and philanthropists,” he told me.  So there are some good questions to ask Gates. Are vaccines the best focus here, when realistically the US cannot stay on lockdown until one is ready? Should there be more focus on low-tech measures like cloth masks and reminders to stay away from people? Even as we acknowledge Gates’s good deeds, we should continue pressing him and other philanthropists on these questions — in the spirit of helping identify what works, what can work even better, and what most deserves assistance from other funders.  But for all the good Gates and other billionaires might be doing, it’s important to remember that it will not be nearly enough to meet the current crisis. In a catastrophe of this magnitude, no billionaire can actually do a fraction as much as the US government can. If Gates liquidated all his wealth — no more vaccine programs, no more Gates Foundation — to distribute to every American, everyone would get less than $300 each. The $2 trillion coronavirus stimulus package spends far more money than all the billionaires in America combined could.  “This pandemic has unleashed an extraordinary philanthropic response. While significant, it is still only one small part of what must be a coordinated effort to beat this global crisis,” foundation CEO Mark Suzman said in an April 15 press release. “Philanthropy cannot — and should not — supplant the public and private sectors. What philanthropy is good at is testing out ideas that might not otherwise get tried, so governments and businesses can then take on the successful ones. With all sectors working together, we can avoid the worst-case scenarios of human, economic, and social costs.” So the sensible role for philanthropists is not trying to replace the government. They can’t do that. It’s filling in the gaps — moving faster than the government, moving around bureaucratic red tape, making sure that good ideas break ground immediately instead of waiting weeks for approval. Gates pledged some initial money toward his idea of building seven factories for the seven most common vaccine candidates, knowing most of the vaccines produced would fail clinical trials, but he won’t put up most of the money for the project.  “The foundation is exploring using its catalytic funding to get the process moving, recognizing that any large-scale projects will require multilateral and/or government funding,” the foundation told Vox in a statement. As Gates has acknowledged, the factory plan will cost billions that even he would struggle to put up personally, so while he can donate the seed money to kick it off, it will only really happen if governments pitch in.  “From the perspective of a foundation,” Reich wrote in 2013, “successful philanthropic giving consists not in funding social innovations and then sustaining the most successful of them forever. Because the assets of even the largest foundations are dwarfed by the assets of the marketplace and of rich states, success consists in seeing proven policy innovations ‘scaled up’ by private firms or by the state.” But Reich was imagining a process that took place over years or decades. What’s happening now is that same process, but on the scale of weeks. Gates sets up a trial for therapeutics, and then the results are seized on by states and by doctors desperate for insight into how to treat coronavirus patients.  I asked Reich if the events of the pandemic had changed his understanding of the role charitable giving should play in a democratic society. “I had written about philanthropy and defended it as a distinctive source of risk capital for long time horizons,” he told me. “In general, emergency responses are not the sort of thing where you’d want risk capital for long time horizons. And yet given the abject failures of the government, I’m glad they’re doing disaster relief.”  Foundations can’t do it all. But extreme circumstances like the one we find ourselves in highlight the need for their logjam-breaking, research-boosting, government-guiding role even in short-term and fast-moving situations — at least if the government is falling down on the job.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.       Update, May 4: New research from a group of political scientists affirms that mail-in voting in Colorado raised turnout more than 10 points among the most vulnerable demographics, including low-income voters, and benefited Republicans and Democrats equally. It’s powerful support for the argument that mail-in voting should be universally accessible for the November elections. The following piece, making that argument, was originally published on April 8, 2020.  The political climate in the US is tumultuous. The Covid-19 pandemic hangs over everything even as a dozen other issues — an oil crisis, a divided Democratic Party, and a corrupt, impeached president — compete for our scant remaining attention.  Into that muddle, I would like to introduce what I hope is a note of clarity, a fixed point around which all Americans of good faith ought to be able to rally.  To wit: Americans need to have safe, free, and fair federal elections in November.  The date of the election is in law and can’t be changed without an act of Congress. The country is in a fragile, distrustful place already, and a chaotic election viewed by large swathes of the population as illegitimate could tip it over into a full-fledged constitutional crisis or even violence. This is a make-or-break issue for the country. 
    Related
   There is no way to stop Trump from characterizing the election as compromised; he accuses opponents of fraud in all elections, whether he wins or not. He has already tried to cheat in the 2020 election — got impeached for it just a couple of months/centuries ago — and will undoubtedly continue trying, even as he ramps up accusations against Democrats. He assumes Democrats will do the exact same thing: cheat and accuse him of cheating.  His tweet in early April captured his argument succinctly: Republicans should fight very hard when it comes to state wide mail-in voting. Democrats are clamoring for it. Tremendous potential for voter fraud, and for whatever reason,  doesn’t work out well for Republicans. @foxandfriends And where Trump goes, right-wing state media, led by Fox, dutifully follow. They will back him up with conspiracy theories about voter fraud that at least some large part of the core conservative base will believe.  But what happens around the margins matters. Committed partisans will line up the same way regardless of the fact that voting is not partisan (Utah, a red state, has a 100 percent vote-by-mail system.) But that leaves a large, fuzzy, semi-engaged class of voters whose opinion of the election will be shaped by their personal experience and the signals they receive from trusted sources about the validity of the process. The best way for Democrats to ensure that November’s elections are viewed as free and fair amid a coronavirus pandemic is to make them so. The best way to make them so, in the time remaining, is to implement universal access to postage-paid mail-in ballots with extended deadlines, serviced by a funded and functional Postal Service. (This is not the only reform needed, but it is the backbone.) 
    Related
   The only way for Democrats to secure that policy is to make it non-negotiable bottom line — a condition of voting through any further stimulus bills. This would be a tough political strategy to follow through on, running counter to national Democrats’ institutional timidity and fears about holding up cash and unemployment for those who really need it. They would be attacked ruthlessly by the right and mau-maued endlessly by the centrist pundits whose opinions they so prize.  But it is the right thing to do on the merits, so they should do it, and defend it without apology. This ought to be a messaging war they can win. If not, what good are they? It might seem obvious to say that free and fair elections are important in a democracy. But this year, they are by no means assured. Experts say social distancing could last six months or more, and even after that, it’s possible that the virus could periodically return in various cities or regions, occasioning new stay-at-home orders. Even South Korea and Singapore, places where the virus response has been considered exemplary, which thought they might be reaching the far end, are now reinstituting social distancing measures. Without a vaccine, there is no certain plan, anywhere in the world, for how to emerge on the other side of this thing. Compared to those two countries, the US’s response has been a fiasco. The US has more than 12,000 reported deaths, the third-highest count in the world after Italy and Spain. The US is woefully behind in testing and tracking, the two key tools for bringing the virus under control. And there is still no coherent federal plan to secure needed medical supplies, ramp up testing, or bring social distancing to a safe end.  It may simply not be safe to go out and vote in person, among crowds of other people, in November.  For those curious about the person in this picture: Jennifer Taff requested but never received an absentee ballot. She spent hours in line to vote despite the risk to herself and her father who has lung cancer: "I'm disgusted."https://t.co/PE5Z04jZEw pic.twitter.com/XWYI1gnpg0 Unless changes are made, the elections will thrust a choice upon millions of Americans, especially those from the most vulnerable populations (the elderly, people of color, people with chronic medical conditions): vote and put your safety at risk, or skip voting to stay safe.  No democracy worth the name can allow that to happen.  Voting by mail is not designed to give one party or the other an advantage. “It’s not partisan,” says Amber McReynolds, CEO for the National Vote At Home Institute, “it’s about making sure every voter can vote in a secure, effective, and safe way.” (More on this below.) Nonetheless, it is clear that someone or some organization on the right has recently been working to convince Republicans otherwise.  When Democrats suggested voting reform for the phase 3 stimulus bill, Trump warned of “levels of voting that if you’d ever agreed to it, you’d never have a Republican elected in this country again.”  In a recent interview discussing Georgia’s upcoming primary election, state House Speaker David Ralston conceded that, if every voter got a mail-in absentee ballot, it “will certainly drive up turnout,” but that would be “extremely devastating to Republicans and conservatives in Georgia.”  Republican Sen. Lamar Alexander contended that forcing voters to risk their lives is preferable to voting by mail. “Around the world we’ve had people in new democracies go to vote when their lives were at risk because the right to vote was so precious,” said the mordant lawmaker. “Most Americans would be very skeptical of significant changes in our ability to go cast a ballot in person, certainly at this point.” The House’s foremost Trump supplicant, Thomas Massie, even tweeted that “universal vote by mail would be the end of our republic as we know it.” The Washington Post’s Dave Weigel reports several more examples of Republicans across the country attacking mail-in voting — mainly, it seems, because groups they view as liberal, including Democrats, support it.  When pressed, conservatives will generally say that they oppose mail-in voting because of the potential for fraud. But it’s clear that what they really fear is more people (the wrong people) voting. Both fears are misplaced. The US Election Assistance Commission releases a yearly Election Administration and Voting Survey (EAVS). The 2018 edition reports on the state of mail-in voting and early voting: All states allow for some form of by-mail voting and in-person early voting for at least some segments of their domestic civilian population, although how that happens in practice varies widely. Three states [Colorado, Oregon, and Washington] administer their elections entirely by mail and four states have all-by-mail voting in select local jurisdictions. About one-quarter of states require in-person early voters to provide an excuse. Almost one-third of states have vote centers or allow voters to cast ballots at any polling place in their jurisdiction. As the 2017 EAVS report showed, the percentage of Americans early, absentee, or mail voting doubled from 24.9 million in 2004 to 57.2 million in 2016, to roughly two out of every five ballots cast. By 2018, the percentage voting by mail reached almost 26 percent, more than one out of every four American voters. The trend is particularly pronounced in the West, where 68 percent of voters voted by mail in 2018.  Analysts expected those numbers to rise in 2020. Since 2018, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Virginia have moved to no-excuse absentee ballots, California has shifted to 100 percent mail-in voting for over half its population, and Hawaii has gone 100 percent. Gerry Langeler, director of communications and research at the National Vote at Home Institute, told me that, in the absence of the virus, they were expecting mail-in voting numbers to hit the mid-70s in the West and around 30 percent nationally in 2020. (Now, with the virus, no one knows for sure.) That’s almost a third of the population, and not all in blue states. Utah has a 100 percent mail-in voting system. Counties had to opt in; the final county did so last year. (This Washington Monthly story recounts the patient expansion.)  “Being a very red state,” Utah director of elections Justin Lee told Weigel, “we haven’t seen anything that helps one party over another at all.” Red Nebraska allows any county with 10,000 residents or less to shift to mail-in voting. “Rural parts of the country benefit tremendously from this kind of system,” says McReynolds; it can save rural residents from long drives to polling places. In the 2018 election, statewide voter turnout in Nebraska averaged 58 percent; turnout in the four counties with mail-in voting averaged 71 percent. In red North Dakota, 31 of 53 counties have shifted to mail-in voting. Even red Texas allows no-excuse access to mail-in absentee ballots ... for voters 65 and older. (Like Medicare, but for accessible voting!) Another fan: Donald Trump, who voted absentee in Florida a few weeks ago. President Trump: "I think mail-in voting is horrible, it's corrupt."Reporter: "You voted by mail in Florida's election last month, didn't you?"Trump: "Sure. I can vote by mail"Reporter: "How do you reconcile with that?"Trump: "Because I'm allowed to." pic.twitter.com/Es8ZNyB3O1 Mail-in voting has increased turnout in those red states just as it has in blue states, and there is no evidence that it has increased turnout disproportionately among Democratic voters.  Rather, vote-by-mail primarily seems to increase turnout among low-propensity voters without strong partisan attachments (unaffiliated voters, or UAFs).  It was long conventional wisdom in US politics that UAFs tended to vote Democratic when they showed up, because UAFs tend to be clustered in vulnerable populations. But as long-time political strategist and analyst Celinda Lake says, “that can include people of color in inner cities, but it can also include white people in trailer parks in North Carolina.” It was Trump himself, she says, who overturned the conventional wisdom.  In 2016, increased turnout brought UAFs off the sidelines into his camp, not Clinton’s. The same could happen in 2020. After all, the group among which mail-in voting seems to most increase turnout is voters 65 and older. That is not exactly a stalwart Democratic demographic. There’s just no evidence that mail-in voting disproportionately benefits Democrats. A February 2020 survey of 12,000 non-voters by the Knight Foundation concluded that, “if they all voted in 2020, non-voters would add an almost equal share of votes to Democratic and Republican candidates.” Regardless, that shouldn’t be the point. “This intertwining of election policies and procedures with partisan outcomes not helpful to anybody,” says McReynolds. “It’s who votes, not who wins.”  With mail-in voting, more people vote. And they love it. Rozan Mitchell, previously election director of Salt Lake County, told the Monthly: “I didn’t realize how important that was to some people, that they could take that ballot they got in the mail, sit down at the kitchen table, and really study out the issues. I feel like vote-by-mail voters are much more informed than the average voter who would just show up on Election Day.” No county or state that has adopted mail-in voting, red or blue, wants to go back.  Trump keeps saying that voting by mail makes cheating easy. That is false. In fact, it makes cheating incredibly difficult. Phil Keisling, the former Oregon secretary of state who introduced that state’s mail-in voting system, explains why: Mail-based voting systems today are far less risky than most polling place elections, precisely because they distribute ballots (and electoral risk) in such a decentralized way. To have any reasonable chance of success, an organized effort to defraud a mail-based system and its safeguards must involve hundreds (if not thousands) of separate acts, all of them individual felonies, that must both occur and go undetected to have any chance of success. Contrast that to the risks inherent in polling place elections that increasingly rely on direct-recording electronic (DRE) voting systems and proprietary software systems that both record and tally votes. A single successful software hack potentially could affect thousands of votes. It’s the difference between “retail” fraud and “wholesale” fraud. Vote-by-mail makes wholesale fraud all but impossible. Voters hand mark paper ballots and receive a stub with a code that allows them to track their ballot as it proceeds through the system and ensure that it is properly tallied. It is a trackable paper system — just what election security experts recommend. (As long as it is done well, of course; design matters.) Because this system doesn’t take place in a private polling booth, people tend to imagine lurid scenarios whereby abusive husbands, controlling pastors, or other bad actors control or otherwise influence other people’s votes. So it’s important to note is that in well-designed mail-in voting systems, anyone who wants to can, any time before election day, go to a polling place, report that their vote was coerced (or just mistaken), and request a replacement ballot. There are mechanisms in place to record and track any such problems, but they just don’t seem to happen on any appreciable scale. (Here the conservative Heritage Foundation struggles to build a pair of dubiously sourced stories from 20 years ago into a case that mail-in voting causes fraud; you can decide whether it’s convincing.) The only serious modern case of election chicanery associated with mail-in voting was perpetrated by, you guessed it, Republicans. As the New York Times reported, Republican nominee Mark Harris contracted with operative L. McCrae Dowless Jr. in a scheme so blatant even his son thought he should step down over it. And it wasn’t voter fraud, it was GOP operatives defrauding voters, mishandling absentee ballots in an election they were supposed to be fairly administering. And they were caught! This isn’t the place to completely rehash the case for vote-by-mail; I explained it more fully in a post from 2017 and another from 2018. Suffice it to say, mail-in voting systems have a well-established record, are used regularly by tens of millions of Americans without incident, consistently boost turnout, and are enduringly popular where they have been implemented.  And there is simply no other way to ensure everyone access to voting without forcing them into crowded polling places. Democrats have limited leverage in Washington, DC, right now, but they do have some.  It’s clear by now that the $2 trillion recovery package that Congress passed last week is simply not going to be enough. Unemployment is skyrocketing to its highest levels ever, GDP is falling faster than it ever has, and the virus hasn’t even arrived in many places in earnest. There will be much more economic pain and dislocation ahead, and demand for Congress to do more. Already talk of a phase 4 stimulus has begun. Democrats don’t seem to have internalized this, but Republicans need the next stimulus bill more than they do. Trump can spin every day from his press briefings, and he has a massive media machine that will work to shield him from accountability, but hundreds of thousands of deaths and a historic depression are what they are. Political science shows that voters tend to hold the party in power responsible for their circumstances, especially in the run-up to an election. (Though as political scientist Larry Bartels, the source of much of that research, told me, “no one really knows whether past experience is relevant in our current circumstances.”) If there’s no additional stimulus after phase 3, the suffering will be vast and unrelenting and Republicans are likely to catch the brunt of the blame. They know this. So whether they admit it or not, they need to pass another stimulus bill. Democrats control the House of Representatives, so no bill passes unless they agree. That gives them leverage. I agree with @ewarren that our response to the COVID-19 crisis must include a robust plan to protect the right to vote, and in fact, make it easier to vote.https://t.co/bgWZomzt3j I wrote a long post about some of the things that ought to be included in such a bill (or bills), focusing on long-term investments to accelerate the shift to clean energy. But if I had to pick one issue that Democrats should absolutely insist on — one package of reforms without which they should refuse to pass a bill — it would be voting reform.  Vote-by-mail is not a silver bullet or the only voting reform needed. Senators Amy Klobuchar and Ron Wyden have introduced a bill with a package of emergency voting reforms. The Defending Democracy Program has a good list of reforms, including curbside voting (for those with no permanent address) and a number of security measures like post-election audits. The Brennan Center for Justice has its own list, with considerable overlap. (Lake also emphasized same-day registration, a reform many states, including Utah, have used to boost turnout. But most reformers agree that universal mail-in voting is the core of a safe and secure election system. It’s the simplest and most reliable way to ensure that everyone can participate, especially at a time when going to the polls could be dangerous. Democrats should insist on it. As Axios documents, there are various voting reforms being contemplated in various states in response to the novel coronavirus — and many more states are likely to get in on the action. But the basic security of federal elections cannot be left entirely to state governments. Republicans claim to oppose the Klobuchar/Wyden bill because of federalism. States are in charge of election law, they say; no “one size fits all” approach will work. But the bill, like the voting reform bill from House Democrats last month, doesn’t dictate specific procedures or staffing, it simply imposes a few baseline conditions that must be met for the election to count as free and fair. One is universal access to mail-in voting. Regardless, Republicans are likely to fight federal voting reform with everything they have, if only because they instinctively fight everything Democrats want these days. And as usual, they will have a coordinated media machine behind them to attack and browbeat their opponents. They will accuse Democrats of trying to rig elections. They will accuse Democrats of “playing politics,” holding up needed stimulus for unrelated partisan reasons. They will spin the mainstream media into presenting the whole thing as a political squabble rather than a fight over basic voting rights.  All of that is as predictable as the sun rising.  The phase 3 stimulus fight did not offer much reason to hope that Democrats are willing to stand up to that kind of (by now, numbingly familiar) bullying. When they pushed back on the ludicrous corporate giveaway the Republican Senate put forward, conservatives immediately drove “Democrats delay recovery” headlines into the media and Democrats immediately started sweating. They let DC media get to them — and conservatives find it trivially easy to manipulate DC media. (Trump himself has literally mocked reporters for being such suckers for every “new tone.”) This is an absolutely new message and new tone from Trump. https://t.co/bgVnEdKCK2 Still, the stakes are too high this time. The more chaos and uncertainty there is as November approaches, the more opportunities there will be for cheating and the less the American public will trust election results.  If the country wants to conduct free and fair elections, it needs to start preparing now. Procedures need to be put in place; people need to be hired; the Postal Service needs to be bulked up. (The Center for Civic Design has a great tool kit for scaling up mail-in voting; the National Vote at Home Institute has detailed plan for taking mail-in voting national by November; the National Task Force on Election Crises has its own set of Covid-19 related suggestions, also featuring universal mail-in voting.) Democrats need to prepare themselves for the fight of their lives. Any pro-social policy will be wrested from the hands of recalcitrant Republicans in the Senate through political force. It will be a fight, a game of chicken, not the collaborative bipartisan process of Democratic reveries. They will need a thick skin and uncharacteristic unity. But they have some power if they are willing to use it.  If Democrats don’t get a fair shot at competing in November — in a political system already so heavily tilted against democracy and against Democrats — all their dreams of action on climate change, health care, and immigration reform will come to nothing, and the country they were elected to serve could very well come apart at the seams.  They must hold the line on free and fair elections.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.President Donald Trump’s “America Together: Returning to Work” Fox News town hall event was a remarkably dishonest affair, replete with lies about topics ranging from the efficacy of hydroxychloroquine on Covid-19 to the trajectory of new coronavirus cases in the country to how tariffs work. At one point, Trump whined that he’s treated worse than Abraham Lincoln — a president who was assassinated. But one moment of unusual honesty stood out. With the US coronavirus death toll approaching 70,000 as of May 4 — a grim milestone significantly beyond the “50 or 60,000” number that Trump said the country was “going toward” on April 20 — Trump revised his estimate upward. And he acknowledged he was doing so. “I used to say 65,000. Now I’m saying 80 or 90, and it goes up and it goes up rapidly. But it’s still going to be, no matter how you look at it, at the very lower end of the plane if we did the shutdown,” Trump said, alluding to the 100,000-to-200,000 death estimate cited in late March by public health experts like Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. Trump: "Look, we're going to lose anywhere from 75, 80 to 100,000 people" to COVID-19. pic.twitter.com/lwAH7zPDQR While it’s good that Trump is making an effort to level with the American people, 80,000 deaths is an extremely optimistic projection. Sunday saw the fewest single-day coronavirus deaths reported in the country in about a month, but prior to that, the number of daily deaths in the US had plateaued at around 2,000. Even at a reduced rate, the country would likely pass the 80,000-deaths mark this month. On Monday, the New York Times reported that instead of deaths declining, the Trump administration is actually projecting “a steady rise in the number of cases and deaths from coronavirus over the next several weeks, reaching about 3,000 daily deaths on June 1” — a number significantly higher than the 1,700-2,000 deaths reported per day from Covid-19 over the past week or so. 
    Related
   Deaths can be a lagging indicator, but there’s little reason to believe the trajectory of new cases will bend down anytime soon. As I detailed on Sunday, despite Trump and others pushing for states to reopen businesses, when hardest-hit New York state is taken out of the equation, the national trajectory of new daily coronavirus cases shows an upward trend, and things are likely to get worse as states relax stay-at-home orders and businesses reopen. This is a very important graph for the debate about "reopening" the country. This is new cases per day nationwide excluding New York State. pic.twitter.com/VJFQ80unBT It’s this reality that led Trump to say during the town hall, “We’re going to lose anywhere from 75, 80, to 100,000 people. That’s a horrible thing.” While’s Trump’s comments on Sunday are more realistic than much of what he’s said about the coronavirus, they represent a dramatic departure from what he was saying during the crucial period of February and early March when the virus was spreading largely undetected, in part because of his government’s failure to quickly devise an effective and widely available coronavirus test. On February 26, for instance, Trump noted that there were only 15 known cases of Covid-19 in the country and claimed that “within a couple of days is going to be down to close to zero, that’s a pretty good job we’ve done.” Two days later, he said, “It’s going to disappear. One day, it’s like a miracle, it will disappear.” As of May 4, there are more than 1.2 million confirmed cases of Covid-19 in the country, according to the Johns Hopkins tracker. 
    Related
   As recently as March 9, Trump posted a tweet suggesting that the measures taken by state governments to shut down economic activity in the hope of slowing the spread of the virus wouldn’t be necessary because tens of thousands of people die from the flu each year (including more than 30,000 in the 2018-19 season), yet with the flu, “[n]othing is shut down, life & the economy go on.” So last year 37,000 Americans died from the common Flu. It averages between 27,000 and 70,000 per year. Nothing is shut down, life & the economy go on. At this moment there are 546 confirmed cases of CoronaVirus, with 22 deaths. Think about that! During a press conference four days later, Trump compared his government’s handling of the coronavirus favorably with that of the Obama administration’s response to H1N1. “Interestingly, if you go back — please — if you go back to the swine flu, it was nothing like this,” he said. “They didn’t do testing like this. And actually, they lost approximately 14,000 people. And they didn’t do the testing. They started thinking about testing when it was far too late.” Trump’s claim about the number of Americans who died from H1N1 in 2009 and 2010 is false. A CDC study conducted years after the fact found that about 12,500 died. And ProPublica recently detailed how the Obama administration presided over the CDC’s development of an H1N1 test that became available for use just two weeks after the first case was detected. 
    Related
   Trump, by contrast, oversaw a botched CDC test-development process that put the US behind the curve when it comes to detecting the spread of the coronavirus. He’s absurdly tried in recent weeks to pin blame for these testing failures on Obama. While the death toll goalposts have shifted dramatically since the early days of the coronavirus outbreak, they’ve moved noticeably in recent weeks as well. Since early April, when the numbers of per-day US coronavirus deaths began to exceed 1,000, Trump has gradually ramped up the projected death toll numbers. On April 17, Trump said he expected “around 60,000, maybe 65,000” American deaths from the coronavirus. Ten days later, he cited 70,000 as a top-end projection. Last Friday, Trump moved the goalposts by saying “hopefully we are going to come in below that 100,000 lives lost.”  TRUMP: "Models predicted between 1.5 million & 2.2 million people would die in the US ... we have saved thousands and thousands of lives ... hopefully we are going to come in below that 100,000 lives lost." (Trump has moved goalposts from 0 deaths to 60,000 to 70,000 to 100,000.) pic.twitter.com/IZ7wsp2n95 On Sunday, Trump revised that number yet again. Praising his own government’s response, he said, “That’s one of the reasons we’re successful, if you call losing 80 or 90,000 people successful.” This changing perspective of what counts as successful — despite “success” entailing a massive loss of life — suggests the president would be willing to proclaim a number even greater than 100,000 a success, since such a figure would be “at the very lower end” of the 100,000-to-200,000 range identified in March by Fauci. Trump also claimed he’s responded well because he’s saved “hundreds of thousands of lives.” But his baseline for this claim is a death projection based on a scenario in which he literally did nothing to slow the spread of coronavirus. In that scenario, experts estimated as many as 2.2 million Americans would die.  As Trump was declaring victory and congratulating himself, during an appearance on the latest Fox News Sunday, Dr. Deborah Birx, coordinator of the White House’s coronavirus task force, gave a different assessment of the deaths to come, one that contradicted the president. She claimed that “our projections have always been between 100,000 and 240,000” deaths. TRUMP, April 20: "We’re going toward 50 or 60,000 [deaths]."BIRX, today with death toll at 68,000: "Our projections have always been between 100,000 and 240,000 [deaths]." pic.twitter.com/js68n55bSW As recently as last Friday, however, Trump was expressing hope that the American death toll would come in under that number. And hopefully it does. But as the administration continues to struggle in its response, the goalposts continue to move. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Canada and the United States are, in many respects, similar countries. With the coronavirus outbreak, the two North American nations had comparable risk profiles, sharing (for example) similarly aged populations and similar distance from the earliest hot spots in Europe and East Asia. Yet the outbreak has been dramatically worse in the United States than its northern neighbor.  Per capita, the United States is currently seeing about twice as many confirmed coronavirus cases as Canada and about 30 percent more deaths. When you look at per capita cases and deaths across the course of the entire outbreak, the comparison looks even worse: the United States has over two times as many confirmed coronavirus cases as Canada and roughly twice as many deaths. Canadian testing rates have been consistently higher, especially during critical early stages for the two countries: In mid-March, the Canadian testing rate was roughly five times higher than the American one. To explain this divergence, I spent the last week speaking with Canadian public health experts who had been following the situation in the two countries closely. These experts varied in their take on their own country’s performance during the pandemic, assessments ranging from middle of the pack by global standards to one of the very best in the world. But they all shared the same view of the difference between the United States and Canada: The Canadian policy response has been orders of magnitude better than the American equivalent. “We have a federal government that is supporting provinces’ responses,” says David Fisman, an epidemiologist at the University of Toronto. “You have a chief executive who is directly undermining the public health response.” There are a number of factors that have enabled Canada to perform at a higher level than the United States, including more consistent pre-virus funding for public health agencies and a universal health care system. But one of the most important seems to have been a difference in political leadership.  The American response has become infected by partisan politics and shot through with federal incompetence. Meanwhile, Canada’s policies have been efficiently implemented with support from leaders across the political spectrum. The comparison is a case study in how a dysfunctional political system can quite literally cost lives. The Canadian approach has not been perfect. Its death rate is currently much higher than best-in-class performers like Germany and South Korea; Canadian officials have fallen down, in particular, when it comes to long-term senior care and the indigenous population. But given the interdependence between these two large neighboring economies, Canadians are not only vulnerable as a result of their own government’s choices but also because of their southern neighbors’ failures. “The biggest public health threat to Canada right now is importing cases from the United States,” says Steven Hoffman, a political scientist who studies global health at York University. The easiest way to see the divergence between the two countries is to look at this chart of per capita cases across the epidemic, courtesy of Our World in Data: You can see in the data that cases began to tick up in the two countries at roughly the same time. But in March, the American caseload spikes significantly higher and faster than the Canadian equivalent, indicating greater Canadian success at “flattening the curve.” Through early May, the Canadian numbers remain consistently and significantly lower. The most immediately visible reason for this divergence has been the choices made by each country’s political leadership. Throughout the crisis, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau has taken a consistent stance that the virus is a serious threat that requires a strong federal response. In mid-March, Trudeau’s wife Sophie Grégoire tested positive — causing the prime minister himself to enter strict self-isolation well before mandatory distancing became part of everyday life. He took over parenting duties from his sick wife and conducted socially distanced press briefings from his front lawn. Since his wife’s recovery, Trudeau has been consistently emphasizing the need for Canadians to stay the course and remain distanced — unlike his counterpart in the White House. Of course, such rhetoric would seem like a performance if not backed up by actual policy. But the Trudeau government has won high marks from experts when it comes to core federal responsibilities. Two clear points of contrast with the US are personal protective equipment (PPE) and testing. In Canada, the federal government has served as a centralized hub of PPE purchases — buying supplies in bulk and distributing them to the country’s provinces on the basis of need. In the United States, the federal government’s efforts in this area have been haphazard and marked by political favoritism.  Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan is currently hiding thousands of coronavirus tests, purchased from South Korea, in an “undisclosed location” protected by the National Guard. Hogan, a Republican Trump critic, is worried that the federal government might seize them. After the federal government seized 500 ventilators requested by Colorado’s Democratic governor, Trump sent 100 back to the state — crediting them to Sen. Cory Gardner, a Republican up for reelection in 2020. Canada was ahead of the North American curve on testing because its federal government once again made the right choices. In mid-March, Canadian federal authorities launched a large-scale testing procurement program aimed at ensuring the country could test early and often. By contrast, Trump put his unqualified son-in-law, Jared Kushner, in charge of the country’s testing ramp-up. Kushner proceeded to hype a Google testing website that didn’t exist and spearhead a drive-through push that, as of early April, had built a grand total of five testing centers across the entire country. The top-level response isn’t all that matters here. Canada has a similar federal system to America’s, where a lot of the key decision-making on this epidemic — like the power to issue stay-at-home orders — is devolved to provincial authorities. In theory, there could have been a situation like America’s, where Republican governors of large states were either slow to implement distancing measures or refused altogether, largely for ideological reasons. The premiers (governors) of Canada’s provinces performed at varying levels of quality during the outbreak. But what’s notable is that there was no dissent from local authorities over the basic need for extreme measures to stop the virus’s advance. In late March, Canadian provinces moved en masse toward distancing, with no real difference between provinces governed by Liberals, Conservatives, or any other party. “We put in factors like physical distancing fairly quickly, and there wasn’t any inconsistency like what you’re getting right now with Trump,” says Anna Bannerji, a physician and expert on respiratory infections at the University of Toronto.  This speaks to the deeper political reasons for Canada’s superior performance, ones that go beyond the personal qualities of Justin Trudeau and Donald Trump. While Canada’s political divisions are stark, with a sharp urban-rural divide very much reminiscent of America’s, partisan identities are not nearly as fixed or powerful as they are south of the border. In a world where partisanship isn’t so extreme and there’s a greater degree of political consensus between the major parties, it’s much easier for political leaders to come together during a time of national crisis. “In Canada, polar ends of the political spectrum are completely aligned on how to manage this pandemic. And I gotta tell you, it’s extraordinarily helpful,” says Isaac Bogoch, an infectious disease expert at the University of Toronto. “That’s one of the main drivers of success here.” A forthcoming paper in the Canadian Journal of Political Science by scholars at Toronto and McGill University, analyzed data on coronavirus attitudes among both members of parliament and the general Canadian public. They found that, unlike in the United States, there was zero evidence of political polarization on the coronavirus — of Liberals taking it more seriously and Conservatives being skeptical. “Both Canadian elites and the mass public are in a moment of cross-partisan consensus on COVID-19,” they conclude. “Unlike in the United States, response to the coronavirus is not structured by partisanship, at least at the moment.” Perhaps the most interesting example of this is Doug Ford, the premier of Ontario (Canada’s most populous province). He’s a right-wing populist who won power by contrasting himself with unpopular center-left opponents, rallying rural and suburban voters against the alleged insularity and immorality of the urban elite — though Ford, like Trump, hails from his country’s largest city. There are certainly places to criticize Ford’s response; an Ontario nursing home made international headlines for being one of Canada’s hardest-hit locations. But he’s held to the national consensus rather than trying to position himself as a leader of a populist uprising. When asked recently about a tiny anti-distancing protest in Toronto, he unequivocally condemned it. “It’s reckless to do what they’re doing and personally I think it’s selfish,” Ford said, describing the protesters as “a bunch of yahoos.” In discussing the United States, Ford has taken a decidedly different tone that underscores the disparity between the two nations. Despite being unusually open to immigration by right-wing populist standards, he has been quite concerned about the risks of the much more severe outbreak down south.  “I don’t want them in Ontario,” he recently said of Americans. “We need to keep our borders closed.” While the nature of politics in the two countries seems to be responsible for the sharpest distinctions between the two countries, it’s also worth noting that there are at least three other notable differences rooted in longer-term approaches to health policy. First, Canada has more direct experience with novel coronaviruses. In 2002, a coronavirus we now call SARS emerged in Guangdong, China, and eventually spread to about 26 countries. In 2003, there was a significant outbreak in Canada centering on Toronto; 44 Canadians died from the disease (the US had a tiny number of cases and zero deaths).  This recent experience with a respiratory disease outbreak is something Canada has in common with some of the best international performers during the coronavirus crisis, most notably South Korea and Taiwan. All of these countries, Canada included, studied these past experiences and used them to guide their policy during the current outbreak. “Obviously there were lessons learned from SARS,” Bogoch says. “How the municipal, provincial, and federal public health agencies coordinate with each other — many of those lessons [came from] SARS.” Second, the public health budget in Canada has increased in recent years. In the US, by contrast, authorities have been relatively starved of resources: CDC funding has fallen by 10 percent over the last decade in inflation-adjusted dollars. “Public health has faced chronic underinvestment in the United States for quite some time. Over the last couple of years, there have been further cuts,” says Hoffman, the York professor. “Countries get to choose how prepared they are for pandemics. And the United States made strategic budgeting choices that do not position it well.” Third, and finally, every expert I spoke emphasized the value of Canada’s single-payer health care system at this crucial moment, especially when compared to America’s extremely expensive and low-capacity system. The reasons varied. Some pointed out that, in a single-payer system, the universality of care meant that everyone would go to a doctor if they needed a test or treatment. If care is affordable, poor and marginalized communities — like, say, undocumented migrants — are less likely to become hot spots than they are in the American system, where out-of-pocket costs can be prohibitive. Others argued that a single-payer system gives Canadian authorities coordinating powers that their American counterparts lack. When the government controls the system of payment for health care services, rather than leaving decisions up to hospitals and insurance companies, they have a huge amount of power to commandeer the health system for national goods. If a Canadian hospital is having a spike in cases and needs an emergency shipment of PPE, the government can work to get it shipped over from a less-needy hospital. If an American hospital is having the same problem, they’re going to have a tough time getting it from a competitor (absent a level of aggressive police intervention we haven’t seen here). It’s a little tricky to say how much of the difference between these countries can be explained by the specific nature of Canada’s health care system. If you look across the world, there are countries with single-payer systems that have had severe outbreaks (like Italy) and countries with more privatized systems that have done well (like Australia). What’s clearer, rather, is the difference between the United States and everywhere else: Every other developed country has some kind of universal coverage system, while the United States does not. It’s not the sole reason why the United States has done worse than Canada, but it appears to be a factor. One problem that a lot of Canadians have with American reporting on their country is a tendency to romanticize its northern neighbor: making a country with real and significant problems seem like a cold, polite paradise. That’s as true on the coronavirus as it is on anything else. The Canadian experts I spoke to had no shortage of complaints about their country’s response.  The most striking such failure has to do with senior care facilities. As of mid-April, roughly half of all Canadians who had died were residents of such buildings, raising questions about the standard of professional attention and medical care at dedicated homes for the elderly. “It is profoundly troubling and deeply disturbing to me how broken this part of our health care system is,” Susan Bartlett, a professor of medicine at McGill University, told the New York Times’s Dan Bilefsky. Canada’s indigenous population is another important problem area. These communities, some of which are so isolated that they can only typically be reached by aircraft, are chronically under-resourced and underprivileged. While the death toll has yet to reach astronomical heights in those areas, they remain acutely unprepared for an outbreak. These are serious failings, ones that shouldn’t be glossed over or excused. Canadians can and should hold their government accountable for its mistakes. But no country’s response to this outbreak has been perfect. Even early success stories have faced problems down the line — second waves in Hong Kong and Singapore, for example. Canada could see a turn for the worse and end up with an experience closer to America’s. But at this point in the crisis, the worst you can say about the Canadian response is that it has been basically competent — what you would expect from a country with a functioning political and health care system. The United States, by contrast, hasn’t cleared this lowest of bars. Our lack of attention to public health, poorly designed national health care system, and deep political dysfunction have contributed to the greatest public health crisis of our lifetimes. The United States could have been in a similar situation as Canada. We have the world’s largest economy and its finest academic institutions; the Canadians show us that, had our political leadership marshaled these resources in the right ways and at the right times, some significant numbers of American lives would likely have been saved. That’s not what happened. We now have every reason to believe that our broken political system is quite literally deadly. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The White House would like to put a pause on a fourth coronavirus spending package. But can the country really afford to? In an appearance on CNN’s State of the Union with Jake Tapper on Sunday, White House economic adviser Larry Kudlow said the Trump administration is taking a wait-and-see approach on providing more federal support for Americans as the United States continues to weather the coronavirus crisis and the accompanying economic downturn.  “Well, I don’t want to get too far ahead of the story, Jake,” Kudlow said. “There may well be additional legislation. There’s a kind of pause period right now. You know, we have put up $3 trillion of direct federal budget assistance in one way or another; the Federal Reserve has actually put in as much $4 to $6 trillion. So it’s a huge, huge package.” The former CNBC host told Tapper the White House wants to see what happens “as we gradually open the economy” — a move more than two dozen states are making or are about to make — and the administration will “probably have some ideas.” But the administration isn’t champing at the bit to provide more help. “We will see in a couple of weeks, Jake, what needs to be done and perhaps how to do it,” Kudlow said. However, the economy remains in a serious crisis, with governors from both parties, economists, and Democratic lawmakers warning more help will be needed, and getting started on that work can’t wait.  States and cities have been sounding the alarm that their finances are in trouble as spending has skyrocketed in response to the health crisis and revenue has fallen off a cliff. States are warning they’ll face enormous budget shortfalls and be forced to make catastrophic cuts without federal assistance. President Donald Trump has suggested relief will be used as leverage to force states and cities to change their immigration policies, a message reinforced by Kudlow on Sunday. Meanwhile, the first round of federal funding for small business loans under the Paycheck Protection Act was quickly tapped out. Congress has replenished it, but already, an additional $179 billion has been given out. Essential workers still lack protections and aren’t getting federal hazard pay. Expanded unemployment insurance — which provides an additional $600 in weekly benefits for displaced workers — is set to lapse at the end of July. States are still figuring out how to get medical equipment and seeing increased health and medical costs. The country is not back to business as usual. And the coronavirus crisis isn’t close to over. Thus far, the federal government has enacted three sweeping coronavirus-related packages, the last one being the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act, a $2.2 trillion stimulus package. President Trump signed it into law in late March. Now, a fourth bill is taking shape, but there’s hardly a consensus around it. As Vox’s Ella Nilsen lays out, Republicans and Democrats are at an impasse over state and local funding — Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has gone as far as to suggest states should just declare bankruptcy, which is currently not permitted under federal law. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi has suggested the bill could cost billions. And both parties, plus the White House, have competing wish lists. For example, Democrats are pushing for hazard pay for workers, and Republicans are concerned about protecting businesses from liability if workers and customers get sick. But whatever the disagreements, Congress and the White House will need to address them, because of the dire economic and health crisis. On Wednesday, Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell said at a press conference he believes the economy will contract by an “unprecedented rate in the second quarter” and warned that a double-digit unemployment rate in April is possible. Roughly 30 million Americans have filed jobless claims over the past six weeks, and unemployment numbers from April will be released Friday. “Both the depth and the duration of the economic downturn are extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on how quickly the virus is brought under control. The severity of the downturn will also depend on the policy actions taken at all levels of government to cushion the blow and to support the recovery when the public health crisis passes,” Powell said.  He said Congress’s reaction thus far, including the Paycheck Protection Program and expanded unemployment insurance, have amounted to an “extraordinary, historically large reaction” from lawmakers. “But I would say that it may well be the case that the economy will need more support from all of us if the recovery is going to be a robust one.” If the federal government were to pause further stimulus measures, as Kudlow, the White House, and some Republicans are suggesting, it could slow that recovery markedly. For example, states may have to lay off employees, make cuts to education, and scale back infrastructure spending, creating an even bigger drag on the economy. Some politicians are  worried about overdoing it on support, but the real concern is the opposite. “The risk of doing too little is much greater than the risk of doing too much,” Betsey Stevenson, an economist at the University of Michigan and former Obama administration official, recently told me. On Sunday, Kudlow, who in February said the virus was contained despite a growing chorus of warnings from health officials, offered a rather rosy prediction of the US economy’s future. Current support via the Paycheck Protection Program and expanded unemployment, combined with state reopenings, could suggest a “potential strong spring-back” in May and June, he said, adding he thinks 2021 could be a “spectacular year in the economy.” Many economists disagree with Kudlow’s assessment that better days are just around the corner. But he undercuts his own hopes and aspirations by promoting a sit-back-and-wait approach. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Amid rising confirmed coronavirus case counts, and a death toll that has begun to plateau, President Donald Trump spent much of Sunday lashing out at politicians, attacking the media, and bragging about his poll numbers. He also seemed to suggest Covid-19 is a cosmic or biblical force — and one that has already been stopped.  Sunday morning, the president panned former President George W. Bush’s recent call for bipartisan unity in the face of the coronavirus pandemic, arguing his predecessor should have spoken up on his behalf during Trump’s impeachment process.  “Let us remember how small our differences are in the face of this shared threat,” Bush said Saturday in a video message to the public. “In the final analysis, we are not partisan combatants.”  Trump felt this was inappropriate, however, quoting comments made by Pete Hegseth, a weekend cohost of Fox & Friends, who asked “where [Bush] was during impeachment calling for putting partisanship aside.” To this, Trump added, “He was nowhere to be found in speaking up against the greatest Hoax in American history!” .@PeteHegseth  “Oh bye the way, I appreciate the message from former President Bush, but where was he during Impeachment calling for putting partisanship aside.” @foxandfriends  He was nowhere to be found in speaking up against the greatest Hoax in American history! After sending out the tweet about Bush, Trump proceeded to send out one adversarial and divisive post after another.  He deemed NBC and CNN “Chinese puppets who want to do business there” and “the enemy of the people.” He boasted about his approval ratings among Republicans and said that a new Gallup poll shows “Trump beating Sleepy Joe Biden.” (It does not.) He said there were “many complaints coming in” over Maine’s coronavirus response (despite the state government’s rising approval ratings) — and then added that he won the state. He also retweeted some of his old tweets, one in which he declared a video of a boat owner who painted Trump’s name onto his boat “very cool,” and another in which he falsely claims Democrats want “OPEN BORDERS.”  He capped off his spree with a tweet about America coming together as a nation — and it was an odd one, in which he described an America rising from the “death and destruction” caused by “a great and powerful Plague” that led to “lost souls all over the World:” ....And then came a Plague, a great and powerful Plague, and the World was never to be the same again! But America rose from this death and destruction, always remembering its many lost souls, and the lost souls all over the World, and became greater than ever before! Trump’s tone in the tweet, which didn’t seem to have any obvious contextual explanation, was roundly mocked on social media by his critics. “Camus wept,” quipped Charles Pierce, a politics writer for Esquire. Talking Points Memo founder Josh Marshall tweeted, “tfw you try to bible-speak on twitter.” The tweet appeared to suggest the danger posed by the coronavirus had largely passed, given that it was all written in the past tense, but with its biblical language also seemed to place blame for the virus on some force greater than Trump himself, and one that he didn’t have control over. While it is true that the coronavirus is believed to have come from nature, in reality, Trump has botched countless opportunities to fight against the virus. Among many other things, he downplayed its dangers, dismantled the bureaucratic expertise required to manage a pandemic, refused to swiftly take steps to provide Americans with protective gear and medical equipment, and conditioned aid to states on political favors.  These latest tweets have come during a period of heavy Twitter activity by the president. In general, Trump appears to tweet more when he feels under siege and wants to push back against particular narratives or Democratic attacks that undermine his reputation. Given that Trump is constantly under fire these days for his catastrophic mismanagement of the American coronavirus response, it’s not exactly surprising that he took to Twitter to unleash a wave of attacks. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell have declined an offer from the Trump administration to be sent rapid coronavirus tests for congressional use as lawmakers prepare to return to the Capitol next week. In a joint statement, released Saturday, the leaders appeared to be trying to avoid being seen as accepting special treatment, at a moment when testing capacity across the country is still far behind what’s needed to properly assess the spread of the virus. “Congress is grateful for the Administration’s generous offer to deploy rapid COVID-19 testing capabilities to Capitol Hill, but we respectfully decline the offer at this time,” the leaders wrote. “Our country’s testing capacities are continuing to scale up nationwide, and Congress wants to keep directing resources to the front-line facilities where they can do the most good the most quickly.”  The offer came as the Senate is expected to get back to work in Washington on Monday. But testing capacity at the Capitol is far from adequate for monitoring cases among lawmakers and their staff — which is one reason why the House of Representatives does not plan to end its recess. On Thursday, the Capitol’s attending physician, Brian Monahan, reportedly told lawmakers testing capacity was so limited that senators could only get tested if they appeared to be sick. And according to Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-CA), Monahan told “House leadership that he recommends against resuming their session” earlier in the week due to concerns over testing and community spread.  Despite these concerns, McConnell didn’t alter his plan for the Senate to return to the Capitol on May 4. House leadership, on the other hand, heeded Monahan’s advice; it is unclear when that body will return to Washington. A number of senators raised their concerns with McConnell’s plan, and seemingly in response, Secretary of Health and Human Services Alex Azar tweeted Friday that the administration was sending Abbott coronavirus tests — which can provide results in as few as five minutes — for the Senate to use as it got back to work. “Good news: as the Senate reconvenes to do important work for the American people during this public health crisis, we have now received an initial request and are sending 3 Abbott point of care testing machines and 1,000 tests for their use,” Azar tweeted. Saturday morning, Trump boasted about the offer, tweeting that there was “tremendous CoronaVirus testing capacity in Washington for the Senators returning to Capital [sic] Hill on Monday.” Trump added, “Likewise the House, which should return but isn’t because of Crazy Nancy P[elosi].”  It’s unclear how much use the 1,000 tests would have been. There are 100 senators, 435 members of the House, and across both chambers, there are tens of thousands of staff members, many of whom would be traveling across the country through high-risk areas like airports to get to Washington. So an extra 1,000 tests doesn’t seem to be a game-changer in terms of helping ensure that everyone working in the Capitol is free of coronavirus. Instead, Congress would need enough tests to institute the sort of testing regime used in the White House. Trump and Vice President Mike Pence are reportedly tested more frequently than once a week, and a number of senior staff members like White House Chief of Staff Mark Meadows are tested weekly. Anyone who comes into regular contact with Trump also gets tested.  Good testing in the Senate is imperative to minimize the chances of community spread, as Vox’s Li Zhou explained on Friday, because lawmakers are at particular risk for Covid-19: The Capitol’s limited testing capacity is concerning in itself: Many senators are over the age of 65 and within the range of individuals who are more likely to experience severe coronavirus symptoms. And while in the Capitol, their work inherently brings them, and staffers, into close contact with one another. Prior to departing for recess, senators were spotted in tight groups on the chamber floor during a stimulus vote. And when Sen. Rand Paul (R-KY) tested positive for Covid-19, several of his colleagues including Sens. Mitt Romney (R-UT) and Mike Lee (R-UT) had to self-isolate out of concerns about their exposure. McConnell and Pelosi may have turned away tests that might have made the Hill slightly safer, but their judgment reflects political common sense: when across the country it’s still strikingly difficult to get tested, it might not be a great look to get a special set of tests as a favor from the White House. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. President Donald Trump’s purge of officials who question his leadership continues — this time targeting another watchdog, one who accurately described America’s dearth of medical supplies and tests as the country works to confront the coronavirus crisis. Late on Friday, the Trump administration announced it had nominated Jason Weida — an assistant US attorney in Boston — for an inspector general position at the Department of Health and Human Services, one of the agencies tasked with responding to the country’s outbreak.  The problem is that position is already filled by Christi Grimm, who before the nomination had not publicly expressed a desire to step down as the department’s principal deputy inspector general. So why the sudden change? The answer is easy enough to divine: her report released last month laid bare Trump’s feckless coronavirus response. In late March, Grimm surveyed over 300 hospitals in nearly 50 states and territories to better understand what they faced as an influx of coronavirus patients flooded their facilities. What she found was “their most significant challenges centered on testing and caring for patients with COVID-19 and keeping staff safe. Hospitals said that severe shortages of testing supplies and extended waits for test results limited hospitals’ ability to monitor the health of patients and staff.”  “They also reported that widespread shortages of personal protective equipment (PPE) put staff and patients at risk,” she also wrote. “In addition, hospitals said that they were not always able to maintain adequate staffing levels or to offer staff adequate support.” While the report didn’t directly question the federal government’s response, it made clear hospitals still had serious concerns about their ability to care for patients many weeks after the first coronavirus case was detected in the US. Trump was asked about this report during an April 6 press conference with the government’s coronavirus task force. He fumed at the conclusions.  “It’s just wrong. Did I hear the word ‘inspector general’? Really? It’s wrong. And they’ll talk to you about it. It’s wrong,” he asserted. And then he wanted to know exactly who wrote the report. “Where did he come from — the inspector general? What’s his name? ... No, what’s his name? What’s his name? ... If you find me his name, I’d appreciate it.” When it became clear to him that Grimm served in the Obama administration, he derided the report as “a typical fake-news deal.” But, Grimm is a career official who’s been in government since the Clinton administration and has worked for two Democrats and two Republicans, including Trump. She took over her current role as acting inspector general after the last person in that position left. None of that information seemed to sink in for Trump, as just one day later he assailed Grimm on Twitter. Why didn’t the I.G., who spent 8 years with the Obama Administration (Did she Report on the failed H1N1 Swine Flu debacle where 17,000 people died?), want to talk to the Admirals, Generals, V.P. & others in charge, before doing her report. Another Fake Dossier! It’d be one thing if Trump’s ire was reserved only for Grimm and her eventual dismissal was a one-off thing — as disturbing as such a one-off would be. But this is clearly a pattern for the president, one that’s a troubling sign about the health of good governance in America. In early April, Trump went on a firing rampage. He pushed out Intelligence Community Inspector General Michael Atkinson, the oversight official responsible for forwarding the Ukraine whistleblower’s report to Congress and triggering Trump’s impeachment. Days later, after attacking Grimm, news broke that Trump removed another inspector general, Glenn Fine, from his job overseeing coronavirus relief spending — abruptly and without explanation. Vox’s Zack Beauchamp last month described what all of this really meant: Atkinson’s firing was not merely revenge for impeachment. It was a warning that, during the coronavirus crisis, Trump would not tolerate similarly vigorous oversight of his conduct. Official watchdogs are on notice: Doing your job too effectively could be career suicide. This is a war on the very concept of oversight — and a sign that the United States is not immune from a global trend of creeping coronavirus authoritarianism. This was perhaps the logical end point after Trump pressured Ukraine into opening investigations into former Vice President Joe Biden’s family last year without an indictment from the Senate. The president has surely concluded he can now get away with anything, including punishing those who dare point out his presidency is anything other than a roaring success. That, experts note, is scary. “This is a war on accountability,” tweeted Walter Shaub, the former White House ethics chief who stepped down over Trump’s actions, “and [it] won’t end until Trump destroys every last institutional safeguard against corruption.” Based on Trump’s decision to replace Grimm, it’s a war the president seems to be winning. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Three counties in California have announced they’re reopening segments of their economy in defiance of Gov. Gavin Newsom’s statewide restrictions on nonessential business, which were put in place to curb the spread of coronavirus. The announcements, which came as anti-lockdown protests sprang up across the state this week, raise questions of how much Newsom can expect voluntary compliance with social distancing restrictions as unemployment skyrockets, cabin fever sets in for people stuck at home, and quarantine measures become increasingly politicized. Modoc County was the first county to make the move. On Thursday it announced it would reopen many kinds of venues on Friday, including restaurants, bars, and churches. Modoc  County is a small, rural, and conservative district on California’s border with Oregon — it has 9,600 residents and no confirmed cases of Covid-19 as of May 2.  There, some county officials framed their decision to disregard the statewide order as nothing more than the early adoption of future reopening plans — and they argued the fact they’ve seen no confirmed cases means the safeguards required in a place like Los Angeles aren’t needed in Modoc County. “We’re not in this at all to defy anything. We align with the plans. We’re just at a different phase in this because of where we are and how we live,” Heather Hadwick, deputy director of Modoc County’s Office of Emergency Services, told Politico. The county’s plan does call for some limited restrictions — for example, restaurants and bars are expected to cut maximum capacity by half, and officials recommend that people who are over the age of 65 or have underlying health conditions remain at home. Since March 19, California has been under shelter-in-place orders which call for residents to stay at home. That order says only essential services such as grocery stores and pharmacies can remain open. (Restaurants can offer take-out and delivery.) On the state’s website, there is a section explaining how local orders should be seen in relation to the statewide order; the site simply notes, “This is a statewide order” — which suggests the directive is meant to override local orders. Despite this, on Friday, two other counties — Sutter and Yuba — announced that they too will be reopening venues as of Monday. “The purpose is to continue to mitigate the spread of the virus to the greatest extent possible while addressing the need to gradually reopen the economy in order to ensure vital services are resumed in a safe manner,” Phuong Luu, who serves as the health officer for the two adjacent counties, said in the news release. Luu described the reopening as intending to comply with the state order, even though it blatantly diverges from it. The counties will allow restaurants, shopping malls, gyms, hair salons, tattoo parlors, and many other venues to reopen. Unlike Modoc County, these counties have substantial populations (around 170,000 combined) and dozens of confirmed cases of Covid-19 as of May 2. As Politico reports, state lawmakers in the region have praised the move. Assemblyman James Gallagher said “there is no longer any justification for [Newsom’s] executive order as it pertains to our communities,” and that he’s “optimistic that other counties will soon follow soon.” It’s unclear what measures Newsom could or would take to enforce state orders. But what’s plain is that he’s coming under increasing pressure to relax his stay-at-home measures. And some people — particularly conservatives who are more skeptical of policies to curb the spread of coronavirus — are inclined to go rogue. Some of that pressure is coming from areas of the state that have seen far greater confirmed Covid-19 case counts.  As in many other states across the US, small demonstrations protesting lockdown measures have surfaced across California in recent weeks. On Friday, those protests appeared to escalate, with demonstrations in San Francisco, Sacramento, San Diego, and Orange County’s Huntington Beach. City police estimated that nearly 3,000 people showed up at the Huntington Beach protest alone. Many demonstrators framed Newsom’s orders as unacceptable government overreach, and formed tight crowds that violated social distancing guidelines. “I served in the army and fought tyrants and dictators overseas and this has gone too far,” a protester at Huntington Beach told the Los Angeles Times. “I didn’t do that to come back here and live under a tyrant in my own country.”  WATCH: Large crowds gathered in Huntington Beach to protest the closure of Orange County beaches -- which Gov. Gavin Newsom closed because of large crowds at area beaches. https://t.co/FuksIg1cmJ pic.twitter.com/QInDR5Dt80 Thousands of people — many not wearing face masks — showed up at the state capitol in Sacramento to call for, among other things, an end to restrictions on business. Some of them held signs questioning whether coronavirus is real, and arguing against vaccines. At a Friday news briefing, Newsom attempted to walk the line of acknowledging rising tension and anxiety without coming across as yielding to political pressure. “We’re all impatient and we’re deeply anxious and deeply desirous to start to turn the page and turn the corner,” he said.  “The data is starting to give us more confidence.” He also suggested that the schedule for reopening he’s discussed earlier might be accelerating.  “We’re getting very close to making very meaningful augmentations to that stay-at-home order,” he said. “We said ‘weeks, not months’ about four or five days ago. I want to say ‘many days, not weeks.’ As long as we continue to be prudent and thoughtful in certain modifications, I think we’ll be making some announcements.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.White House officials have blocked Dr. Anthony Fauci, the White House’s top infectious disease expert, from appearing at a House of Representatives hearing on America’s coronavirus response. It appears, however, that he will be allowed to appear at a later Senate hearing. After the House Appropriations Committee sought Fauci’s testimony for a May 6 hearing on coronavirus and the government’s efforts to combat it, they were rebuffed by the White House, a committee spokesman told Vox.  “The Appropriations Committee sought Dr. Anthony Fauci as a witness at next week’s Labor-HHS-Education Subcommittee hearing on COVID-19 response. We have been informed by an administration official that the White House has blocked Dr. Fauci from testifying,” committee spokesman Evan Hollander said in a statement. In a statement to the Washington Post, the White House said it would be “counterproductive” to allow Fauci to testify in front of Congress in the midst of the government’s efforts to fight coronavirus.  “While the Trump Administration continues its whole-of-government response to COVID-19, including safely opening up America again and expediting vaccine development, it is counter-productive to have the very individuals involved in those efforts appearing at Congressional hearings,” White House deputy press secretary Judd Deere said in the statement. “We are committed to working with Congress to offer testimony at the appropriate time.” As of now, Fauci is still slated to appear in front of the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee on May 12. Rather than hearing from a current White House official, the House Appropriations Committee will instead hear from Dr. Tom Frieden, the former director for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the Obama administration.  “Congress and the American public deserve a clear-eyed view of the path forward for responding to the COVID-19 pandemic,” said House Appropriations Committee Chair Nita Lowey (D-NY) and Labor-HHS-Education Appropriations Subcommittee Chair Rosa DeLauro (D-CT) in a statement. “The people of this country deserve a federal government that is up-to-date, modernized, and prepared to protect lives.” Fauci is the White House’s top infectious disease expert. But he’s become known for his straightforward, no-nonsense approach to discussing coronavirus — even if that means contradicting statements made by President Donald Trump or saying the administration could have acted sooner. These admissions, of course, fly in the face of statements by the Trump administration, which argue it acted swiftly and decisively to limit the effects of Covid-19. It isn’t clear whether these comments were a factor in the White House decision not to allow Fauci to testify. Given the topic of the hearing, however, it seems inevitable questions about the Trump administration’s failings in addressing coronavirus would be posed. It also remains to be seen whether Fauci will be deemed too busy to appear before the Republican-controlled Senate committee later in May. Fauci’s time has been in high demand. Public polling shows his approval rating with the American public is much higher than Trump’s, and he has become a sought-after official, both for interviews with the media and congressional testimony.  Fauci’s standing with Trump himself, however, is harder to ascertain. Trump once retweeted a call to fire Fauci that came from a conservative former California congressional nominee, without directly echoing the sentiment himself.  Sorry Fake News, it’s all on tape. I banned China long before people spoke up. Thank you @OANN https://t.co/d40JQkUZg5 As Vox’s Sean Collins wrote, it’s hard to know how serious Trump is about firing his incredibly popular top public health official in the middle of a pandemic.  In this context, what Trump’s retweet means — if anything — is unclear. On one hand, he has a history of communicating displeasure with members of his administration on Twitter before firing them, once tweeting, for example about his dissatisfaction with former Inspector General Michael Atkinson four months before suddenly firing him. On the other hand, Trump has been effusive with his praise of Fauci, calling him “extraordinary” and a “good man.” Given the president’s unpredictability, any number of explanations for the tweet are possible, from Trump blowing off steam at a moment of frustration over the CNN interview to him retweeting before having read the whole of Lorraine’s post. It is possible the White House will reverse its decision on the House testimony — Fauci and other top public health experts were reportedly banned from doing interviews on CNN for a time, a decision said to be quickly discarded. And as Congress ramps up its oversight of the Trump administration’s continued response to coronavirus, they may seek more details about why Fauci was not allowed to testify in front of members.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. More than a month after the CARES Act was passed, the Treasury Department has yet to disburse $8 billion in coronavirus relief funds to Native tribes. And now tribes are suing the department over the delay. On Thursday, tribes filed a lawsuit saying the Treasury Department missed its April 26 deadline to distribute funds, which was 30 days after the CARES Act passed. It’s one of two lawsuits tribes have filed over the administration’s handling of the stimulus money in recent weeks. The other was over the Treasury’s plans to distribute the money to for-profit Native corporations that tribes say have no business being earmarked for the relief funds in the first place.  On Monday, a federal judge ruled in favor of the more than a dozen Indian nations that contested the Treasury’s move to give Alaska Native Corporations (ANCs) money set aside for tribes in the $2.2 trillion CARES Act. The injunction ruled that ANCs did not meet the definition of a “tribal government” set out in the act.  But on Friday, even in the face of the tribes’ new lawsuit, the Treasury Department sent a status report to the court, saying it “has not yet arrived at a determination” as to how to distribute the funds, according to the New York Times. The Treasury Department has not responded to Vox’s request for comment about a timeline for disbursement or the court cases. The funds are critical for many tribes struggling to combat the Covid-19 crisis. According to a new study from Indigenous researchers at UCLA and the University of Arizona, the rate of new Covid-19 cases per 1,000 people is four times higher on Indian reservations than in other parts of the US. Meanwhile, Gallup, New Mexico — situated within the Navajo Nation — has reported one of the largest surges of cases in the past two weeks.   For many Indigenous communities, where access to health care and other infrastructure like clean running water is limited, Covid-19 presents significant challenges. This is compounded by high rates of chronic illness among Native people that could lead to complications from the coronavirus. Congress has also been putting pressure on the Treasury Department to act. On Wednesday, House Democrats wrote a letter to Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin demanding the department distribute the funds, saying “the detrimental impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic have had a disproportionate health care and economic impact on federally recognized tribes due to a chronic lack of essential resources.” Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi also told Mnuchin in a press conference Thursday to release the money “now.” Sen. Tom Udall (D-NM), vice chair of the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs, has been demanding accountability for weeks. “It’s now been more than a month since Congress passed the CARES Act, and Tribes still haven’t seen a dime of the relief funding Congress directed Treasury to provide for Tribal governments,” he told Vox in a statement on Friday. “While Tribes have been working around the clock to provide emergency services and economic stability for their communities on the front-lines of the COVID-19 crisis, the Treasury Department is unnecessarily dragging its feet following the Court ruling earlier this week that cleared the Department to get this money out to Indian Country.” In the meantime, tribes have been left scrambling to keep their governments running and protect their citizens. “We are 100 percent relying on these dollars,” said Aaron Payment, chairperson of the Sault Ste. Marie Tribe of Chippewa Indians, on an Indianz.com broadcast earlier this month.  While the funding crisis is urgent for many tribes in Indian Country, the question being considered in the ANC court case was whether these corporations are considered tribal governments — a question that became a concern after the Trump administration said these corporations could access the $8 billion in stimulus money designated for the 574 federally recognized tribes. And because of Alaska’s complicated history, the answer is not entirely clear-cut. ANCs were created after the passage of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) in 1971, which solidified control of 44 million acres for Alaska Native communities but also extinguished all other land claims tribes had in the state. While there were several reasons for its passage, one was abundantly clear: ANCSA paved the way for oil and gas exploration, which some ANCs have gone on to profit from in the years since.  “Oil and gas industry really drove ANCSA in the first place. [The federal government and industry officials] are the ones who said, ‘To put the [Trans-Alaska] Pipeline in, we need to go through Indian land; we want an Act of Congress to give us authority to do that,’” Matthew Fletcher, a member of the Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians, a Potawatomi descendant, and director of the Indigenous Law and Policy Center at Michigan State University College of Law, told Vox. When ANSCA was passed, both ANCs and Alaska Native communities did not have a government-to-government relationship like federally recognized Indian nations do. Only in 1994, 23 years after ANCSA was signed, were Alaska Native communities officially recognized under the Federally Recognized Indian Tribe List Act. Today, there are 229 Indian nations in Alaska, which is over half of all federally recognized Indian tribes in the country. There are more than 200 ANCs.  This history creates a unique, bifurcated system of tribal governance in Alaska. While the 229 Alaska Native tribal governments maintain sovereign status, ANCs still own all the Native land in the state. Many Alaska Native communities have a federally recognized tribal government and either have a Native village corporation or belong to a regional corporation, both of which are ANCs. This means that if stimulus money went to both ANCs and Native tribes in Alaska, some communities would get money twice — which tribes both inside and outside Alaska say is unfair.  According to court documents, in a hypothetical scenario in which all tribes, including ANCs, received equal amounts of funding, each tribe would get $4 million less. For many tribes still grappling with federal neglect and broken promises, that $4 million could make the difference between keeping a town running and not. ANCs argued in court that they provide services to the tribes, and that because of the bifurcated governance system in Alaska, leaving out ANCs would harm Alaska Native communities and peoples.  “Where a lot of complexity in this case comes from is that some of those corporations are nonprofit corporations that do governmental work,” said Fletcher. In other words, while they were not set up as governments, ANCs sometimes offer services like job training and scholarships and don’t always profit off tribes. On Monday, the federal court sided with the tribes and ruled that ANCs did not count as tribal governments. While normally, discrepancies between Alaska Native tribal governments and Alaska Native corporations would be settled at the state level, considering ANCs are incorporated under Alaska state law, the Trump administration’s decision to include ANCs as tribal governments has turned what would normally be a state issue into a national one. It cannot be overstated how unique this situation is. “I don’t know of any other cases like this,” said Fletcher. Regardless of the confusion in this case, one thing is clear: None of this needed to happen. By originally making the decision to consider ANCs part of tribal governing structures, the Trump administration created a crisis on top of a crisis, at the expense of Indigenous peoples both in and outside Alaska who are in desperate need of funds that have not yet arrived. Unfortunately, that’s an all-too-common story in Indian Country.  This is not the first time the Trump administration has taken actions that have harmed Indian tribes during the coronavirus pandemic — in March, it revoked the reservation status of the Mashpee Wampanoag tribes in Massachusetts. But what’s clear from looking at the history of Alaska Native communities, and tribes throughout Indian Country, is that the problems being faced today have much longer histories than the current administration.  On one hand, the $8 billion in stimulus is significant for tribal governments. Even after adjusting for inflation, it is one of the biggest funding infusions to Indian Country ever, including ANCSA. Yet that $8 billion is still a drop in the bucket compared to coronavirus relief funding for other state and local governments. For many tribes, this funding cannot even begin to fix the systemic disinvestment Indigenous communities have had to endure. In a sworn declaration in one of the cases, Cheyenne River Sioux Chair Harold Frazier noted that the only on-reservation health care facility had “8 inpatient beds, 6 ventilators...and zero respiratory therapists” for the tribe’s 10,000 residents. According to court documents, Akiak Native Community Chief Mike Williams noted that without more funding, the tribe would be forced to shut down its food bank and turn off water and sewer services for some tribal members. On the Navajo Nation reservation, many houses lack access to running water and electricity, making public health recommendations around hand-washing hard to abide by.  With such high levels of inequity already across Indian Country, $8 billion is like sending a sprinkler to a wildfire. This, perhaps, is what makes the current funding fight so egregious. Tribes have had to make the hard choice to compete against other Indigenous peoples to secure desperately needed funds that are still inadequate to protect their communities. And they have yet to receive this money. “This is an urgent situation, and Native communities cannot afford to wait for the administration to get its act together,” Udall said. “Treasury needs to follow the law and the intent of Congress and get this money out the door and into the right hands as soon as possible.” As Indian Country looks at the Covid-19 pandemic, memories are triggered of not only historical pandemics — like the 1918 flu epidemic — but of the historical negligence of the government obligated to protect them. In remembering his tribe’s removal to their current reservation, Frazier said, “the supplies came late, if ever, and were often spoiled and contaminated. The legacy of those limitations lives on ... despite our best efforts to improve the quality of life of our people.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.                                             How many people are likely to die in the United States of Covid-19? How many hospital beds is the country going to need? When will case numbers peak? To answer those questions, many hospital planners, media outlets, and government bodies — including the White House — relied heavily on one particular model out of the many that have been published in the past two months: the University of Washington’s Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME).  The model first estimated in late March that there’d be fewer than 161,000 deaths total in the US; in early April, it revised its projections to say the total death toll through August was “projected to be 60,415” (though it acknowledged the range could be between 31,221 and 126,703).  The model has been cited often by the White House and has informed its policymaking. But it may have led the administration astray: The IHME has consistently forecast many fewer deaths than most other models, largely because the IHME model projects that deaths will decline rapidly after the peak — an assumption that has not been borne out.  On Wednesday, the US death count passed the 60,000 mark that the IHME model had said was the likely total cumulative death toll. The IHME on April 29 released a new update raising its estimates for total deaths to 72,433, but that, too, looks likely to be proved an underestimate as soon as next week. Even its upper bound on deaths — now listed as 114,228 by August — is questionable, as some other models expect the US will hit that milestone by the end of May, and most project it will in June. One analysis of the IHME model found that its next-day death predictions for each state were outside its 95 percent confidence interval 70 percent of the time — meaning the actual death numbers fell outside the range it projected 70 percent of the time. That’s not great! (A recent revision by IHME fixed that issue; more on this below.)  This track record has led some experts to criticize the model. “It’s not a model that most of us in the infectious disease epidemiology field think is well suited” to making projections about Covid-19, Harvard epidemiologist Marc Lipsitch told reporters. But if that’s the case, how has it risen to such prominence among policymakers? Other models have done better than IHME’s at predicting the course of the epidemic, and many of them use approaches epidemiologists believe are more promising. Yet it’s the IHME model that has generally guided policymakers, for the most part, in the direction of focusing on a return to normal.  One potential explanation for its outsize influence: Some of the factors that make the IHME model unreliable at predicting the virus may have gotten people to pay attention to it. For one thing, it’s more simplistic compared to other models. That means it can be applied in ways more complicated models could not, such as providing state-level projections (something state officials really wanted), which other modelers acknowledged that they didn’t have enough data to offer.  Meanwhile, its narrow confidence intervals for state-by-state estimates meant it had quotable (and optimistic) topline numbers. A confidence interval represents a range of numbers wherein the model is very confident the true value will lie. A narrow range that gives “an appearance of certainty is seductive when the world is desperate to know what lies ahead,” a criticism of the IHME model published in the Annals of Internal Medicine argued. But the numbers and precise curves the IHME is publishing “suggests greater precision than the model is able to offer.” The criticism of the IHME model, and an emerging debate over epidemiology models more broadly, has brought to light important challenges in the fight against the coronavirus. Good planning requires good projections. Models are needed to help predict resurgences and spot a potential second wave. Dissecting what the IHME model got wrong, what other models got right, and how the public and policymakers read these models is essential work in order to create the best pandemic plans possible. Models of disease spread are meant to help decision-makers in an environment where math will outperform intuitions. Most people have a hard time thinking about exponential growth, which is why many were taken by surprise in March as the virus spread. That’s why models can be useful.  Models usually lay out some foundational assumptions and offer projections based on those assumptions. The IHME model seeks to project death rates and hospitalization rates assuming widespread social distancing and strong measures to prevent the spread of the virus. Since testing is so unreliable at identifying the infection rate, the model uses only death rates as data (though evidence from all-cause mortality data suggests we’re undercounting coronavirus-caused deaths, too). That projected hospitalization rate was one of the things that set it apart, IHME researcher Ali Mokdad told me. It was one of the few models offering that projection, and it was actionable information governments could grab on to and plan around.  Another reason it rose in prominence was IHME’s decision to model the effects of strong social distancing measures. That choice proved correct — strong measures were indeed taken across the US — and the lower death numbers the model churned out as a result reportedly led to it being received favorably by the Trump administration.  But as the weeks have passed, it has become clear that the IHME’s projections have been too optimistic, and slow to adjust to reflect the fact that deaths have plateaued rather than rapidly decreasing to zero. The IHME has been regularly updating its model as new data comes in, but the updates have often been slow enough that the numbers are absurd by the time they’re changed in an update. For example, in late April the model still stated the expected total death toll was 60,000, even as the US was clearly only a few days from that milestone. Mokdad told me when we talked that a fix was in the works, and it went up a few days later: The model now projects 73,433 deaths by August. That, too, is probably an underestimate — most other models project that total will be reached next week. In the IHME’s defense, it does offer a 95 percent confidence interval that is more accurate than the topline numbers. That range goes from 59,343 — significantly less than the number of people already dead of the virus — to 114,228. That might sound like a wide range, but it’s still optimistic, and the actual toll is on track to lie outside that range entirely. MIT projects the US will surpass that upper bound in mid-June, and the Los Alamos forecast, like the MIT one, predicts the country will burst through the IHME’s 95 percent confidence interval in around six weeks. That’s one of the core complaints about the IHME model: its confidence intervals seem too narrow, both for its next-day and several-months-ahead predictions. For instance, when used to predict the number of deaths in a state the very next day (which doesn’t require any complex modeling of the long-term effects of uncertain policies), other researchers found the true deaths were outside of the 95 percent confidence interval given by the model 70 percent of the time. Those are embarrassingly poor results. The day-to-day numbers are jumpy because some counties don’t report numbers every day, Mokdad told me. “The model is kind of confused because states are not reporting deaths consistently,” he said, adding, “The model assumes deaths will increase and then come back down,” and so it reacts poorly when deaths instead vary day to day. Smoothing over the course of a week — the latest update the IHME team made — means the model should be more predictive.  Indeed, the latest update to the model solves the problem where the next-day deaths are usually outside the model’s confidence interval by giving the model extremely wide confidence intervals. That’s commendable. It is better to be honest about your extremely high uncertainty than to claim certainty you don’t have.  That might lead to unsatisfying models with extremely wide ranges — 176 to 3,885 deaths today — but if that’s an accurate reflection of the state of uncertainty, then so be it. It’s better to have a wide confidence interval, acknowledging your uncertainty, than to have a narrow one that is usually wrong. And if next-day deaths are usually wrong, as IHME’s are, that undermines confidence in the long-term predictive value of the model.  
    Related
   (But while the IHME has made its day-to-day confidence intervals larger, it still has very narrow confidence intervals for its projections several weeks into the future — which is odd, as there should be even more uncertainty about those.) An even bigger issue with the IHME model is that the way the model is published can obscure its problems. When it’s updated, it can be hard to see what its old, obviated predictions were. A website, covid-projections.com, has been set up so that you can look at the predictions made by old versions of the IHME model (and at the history of other models). The IHME models are frequently fairly far off. The IHME model is unusual compared to other epidemiological models for its design, too. While most of the models use standard epidemiology modeling tactics like SEIR (susceptible-exposed-infected-recovered modeling) or use computer simulations, the IHME model is effectively just about fitting a curve from early data in China and Italy to the disease’s trajectory elsewhere. The IHME model is based “on a statistical model with no epidemiologic basis,” the Annals of Internal Medicine critique argues.  The IHME team has defended its model against those complaints.  “We’re willing to make a forecast. Most academics want to hedge their bets and not be found to ever be wrong,” IHME director Christopher Murray told Politico. “That’s not useful for a planner — you can’t go to a hospital and say you might need 1,000 ventilators, or you might need 5,000.” The change to the model has certainly improved it, but some problems with the confidence intervals remain. The new model acknowledges extremely high uncertainty about what will happen tomorrow — in my state, California, it says there will be between 5 and 103 deaths tomorrow. That’s a really wide range. But on May 20, the model is entirely sure there will be zero deaths. The 95 percent confidence interval runs from zero deaths to ... zero deaths. That’s an extremely strong claim. I pressed the IHME team about whether they were sure of it. Mokdad said the model’s zero-deaths predictions were correct: “Based on the graph, in certain states, yes — in California, May 17, zero. The virus is not circulating anymore; you would expect it to go to zero.”  But the virus is still circulating in California. On April 28, there were 1,187 new cases reported in the state. Even if all infections in California stopped instantly today, it is likely that some already infected people would die in mid-May or later. California’s case numbers (like those of many states) are declining, but only slowly, as social distancing has limited the spread of the virus but not fully stopped it. That ties into another problem with the IHME model: It assumes that social distancing measures, once put in place, are always sufficient to rapidly decrease case numbers to zero. In the report explaining the model, the researchers write that they look at four measures: “School closures, non-essential business closures including bars and restaurants, stay-at-home recommendations, and travel restrictions including public transport closures. Days with 1 measure were counted as 0.67 equivalents, days with 2 measures as 0.334 equivalents and with 3 or 4 measures as 0.”  In other words, the model has a built-in assumption that once three of those measures have been put into place, cases will rapidly fall to zero. No new data can change that assumption, which is why the model continues to project zero deaths by mid-May in any area that hasn’t lifted social distancing restrictions, even though case numbers have only plateaued rather than declined in many areas.  There are many similar frustratingly confident predictions: On July 12, the model says, we’ll need between 0 and 12 hospital beds in the whole US for coronavirus patients, and there will be 0 deaths at any point after July 12. All these concerns make it frustrating to many epidemiologists that the IHME model is the one being widely used and cited. “That the IHME model keeps changing is evidence of its lack of reliability as a predictive tool,” epidemiologist Ruth Etzioni told Stat News in an article about the problems with the model. “That it is being used for policy decisions and its results interpreted wrongly is a travesty unfolding before our eyes.” Alex Merz, a microbiologist at the University of Washington’s School of Medicine, has written that “@IHME_UW’s overly optimistic modeling projections contributed to this debacle” of the coronavirus’s rapid spread in the US, and condemned their “amazing shrinking error band that, preposterously, constricts to zero uncertainty in mid-June. That is not only bad science communication — it is bad science.”  The IHME model has also brought the discipline under fire from other fields. Tyler Cowen, whose widely read blog Marginal Revolution has linked many of the papers demonstrating how poorly the IHME model works, argued “now really is the time to be asking tough questions about epidemiology, and yes, epidemiologists.” That’s not fair, many epidemiologists say — the model doesn’t use any of the standard tools of the discipline, and they hate it too.  “The IHME approach departs from classic epidemiological modeling,” epidemiological modelers at the University of Texas at Austin argued. “Rather than using systems of equations to project the person-to-person transmission of the virus, the [IHME] model postulates that COVID-19 deaths will rise exponentially and then decline in a pattern that roughly resembles a bell curve (i.e., normal distribution).” (Their paper puts forward their own attempt at modeling the disease with a curve-fitting approach, but one tweaked to use better data and to better represent uncertainty.)  So it might not be fair to draw conclusions about the field as a whole from one model that mostly avoided using its standard tools.   Moreover, the public should be aware that there are better models. The Imperial College model that the British government relied on to inform their country’s coronavirus strategy has held up reasonably well, with case numbers loosely tracking the model’s predictions for what would happen if social distancing were implemented (as it was shortly after the model was published). It, too, has been frequently revised in response to new data and has come under criticism for overconfidence, but the inaccuracies are smaller and less pervasive, and the initial numbers before any revisions weren’t that far off.  Other models, employing more standard epidemiological approaches, perform even better — though usually in narrower domains, like trying to project just the peak of the outbreak, or just the rate of new cases.  The IHME team says their model performed pretty well on key problems like predicting the peak in most states (it’ll be clear in coming weeks how true that is) and that they’re continuing to revise it to make it better. Meanwhile, as the debate over epidemiological models heats up, it’s fair to say that holding the shortcomings of the IHME model against epidemiology as a whole isn’t fair.  But that still leaves the question: Why did the IHME model become so popular?  The flaws I’ve noted above were also features that made the model appealing when it was first launched. It was optimistic, projecting lower deaths than other models. It was clear and precise, with narrow confidence intervals. It projected hospitalizations, which few others were doing — though those projections turned out to be wrong because not enough was known to project hospitalizations well at that stage. In a time of uncertainty, the IHME model was compelling.  But it turns out the uncertainty being reflected in a lot of other, better models is showing up for a reason — there really is still a lot unknown about the course this disease will take.  As my colleague Matt Yglesias has written, “We need to value scientists and listen to experts, but part of listening means understanding that right now, what they’re saying is that they do not have all the answers.” Given the enormous uncertainty ahead, responsible scientists are avoiding giving dramatic topline numbers they’re unsure of, emphasizing the very wide confidence intervals on their estimates, and being careful not to publish results that the Trump administration or the public may interpret as definitive.  But people keep searching for definitive answers (understandably so), and so any model that is presented more confidently will rise to prominence over models that are humbler and better reflect the confusion. The IHME model is one of several released by researchers at the University of Washington, but it has been far more widely cited and discussed than the others — despite being less accurate.  Ultimately, the problem may not be that some models are inaccurate. It was predictable that some models would be inaccurate, with the situation as confusing as it is. There are dozens of models, and ideally we’d be doing something like aggregating them and weighting each according to how well it has performed so far in predicting the crisis.  The current process is almost exactly the opposite of that. Most models are nearly ignored, while a few are cited by the White House and widely referred to in the press. The process that makes some models prominent is not a process that picks out the best of the best — and in fact, it may actively be picking out worse models, by emphasizing ones with notable numbers and statistics to cite, by leaning into the seductive “appearance of certainty” that researchers have warned about. In other words, the fact that many epidemiological models are performing badly isn’t great, but it could be part of a productive process of arriving at better models. But the media, policymakers, and the public need to be conscious of what kind of models we gravitate to and why. If we elevate the ones we like and quote numbers from them as if they’re definitive, then the models will certainly end up shedding more heat than light. Sign up for the Future Perfect newsletter and we’ll send you a roundup of ideas and solutions for tackling the world’s biggest challenges — and how to get better at doing good. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   A new bill from Sen. Kamala Harris (D-CA), the Covid-19 Racial and Ethnic Disparities Task Force Act, would set up a task force to address the racial disparities that have emerged in coronavirus cases and deaths.  In recent months, data tracking the coronavirus pandemic has highlighted an alarming pattern when it comes to who’s affected: According to state-level numbers, people of color are disproportionately dying from the virus.  This pattern, the result of inequities in health care access and systemic discrimination within the health care system, has been evident in early demographic data that’s been released by various places across the country. In Louisiana, black people make up 57 percent of confirmed coronavirus deaths, and 33 percent of the state’s overall population. In Michigan, black people make up 40 percent of coronavirus fatalities, and 13.6 percent of the state’s overall population. There’s been a serious lag in the disclosure of such breakdowns across the board. According to a tracker by Johns Hopkins University, 41 states are currently releasing data on race and the number of cases they’ve detected. In April, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released preliminary federal data, though the agency noted that it was incomplete.  Harris’s bill requires the Department of Health and Human Services to establish a team of health care policy experts, regional leaders, and federal officials that would use demographic data about who’s affected by the coronavirus pandemic to develop funding and policy prescriptions for FEMA and other agencies. The bill wouldn’t just stop at data collection; the idea is to use the information to better inform the response to the pandemic.  “The COVID-19 Racial and Ethnic Disparities Task Force Act is a necessary step to fully understand the impact of this virus in the hardest hit communities, and make targeted investments that correspond with their unique needs,” Harris said in a statement. The bill faces a tough road to becoming law; Senate Republicans have been hostile to most Democratic ideas on tackling the coronavirus crisis aside from rescue for small businesses, and Harris’s bill is unlikely to attract the necessary support from across the aisle. However, some other prominent Democrats, including Sens. Cory Booker (D-NJ), Michael Bennet (D-CO), and Sherrod Brown (D-OH), are cosponsoring the legislation.  Harris’s bill would bring together representatives from different groups that are involved with combating the pandemic, and set up a task force focused on identifying places where there are racial and ethnic disparities in the number of people being tested, diagnosed, and hospitalized for coronavirus. The group would then use this information to provide weekly recommendations to FEMA for disaster aid and the allocation of supplies such as personal protective equipment, testing kits, and ventilators.  “We need to convene health care and policy experts with local leaders in order to allocate the necessary resources to meet everyone’s needs — especially in communities that have historically suffered from unfair and insufficient response from the government during times of crisis,” says Marc Morial, president of the National Urban League, in a statement about the bill. Task forces have already been established in multiple places including New York City and Boston, in an effort to combat the disproportionate impacts coronavirus has had on residents of color.  The most recent stimulus bill that Congress passed, the Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act, requires the HHS Secretary to provide Congress with a report on the demographics of people who have been tested and diagnosed with coronavirus, within 21 days of the legislation’s enactment. A bill from Sen. Elizabeth Warren, the Equitable Data and Disclosure Act, would also require HHS to post daily data updates on coronavirus cases, broken out by race, ethnicity, and other demographic traits.  Harris’s legislation adds to these efforts in an attempt to set up a team that would direct agency funds to combat such inequities, once more comprehensive data sets are available. The bill would also establish a permanent Infectious Disease Racial and Ethnic Disparities Task Force when the pandemic ends, in order to continue monitoring inequities within the health care system. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  As President Donald Trump weighs ideas for punishing China over its handling of the coronavirus outbreak, some inside and outside the White House want him to respond forcefully. “In my personal opinion, we should drop the fucking hammer on them. Stop being such pussies,” a senior White House official told me, speaking on condition of anonymity because they weren’t authorized to disclose internal deliberations. Top Trump allies, including Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and Republican senators, are pushing Trump to castigate China. Sen. Lindsey Graham, for example, has said the US should “make China pay big time.” The Washington Post reported Thursday that US officials from multiple agencies were planning to gather that day to discuss crafting some sort of retaliation against China. “President Trump has fumed to aides and others in recent days about China, blaming the country for withholding information about the virus,” the Post reported. The Chinese government delayed releasing information about the outbreak of Covid-19 in the city of Wuhan, costing world governments precious time to prepare. It’s ruthlessly exploiting the pandemic to further its own foreign policy goals. And on Friday, Sky News reported that the Chinese government is refusing to allow investigators with the World Health Organization to participate in China’s inquiries into the virus’s origin. These actions — as well as Trump’s likely desire to deflect some of the blame from his own administration’s poor response to the coronavirus crisis in the US — are why the Trump administration is looking to formally rebuke China in some way.  Here’s what’s in the works. The ideas reportedly under consideration include stripping China of its “sovereign immunity” status under US law — which would allow the US government or private citizens to sue the country — and cancelling some or all of the interest payments on the more than $1 trillion in debt the US owes to China (the senior White House official I spoke to said they favor the latter option). “Punishing China is definitely where the president’s head is at right now,” one senior adviser told the Washington Post on Thursday. Yet Trump, in public at least, has sounded far more cautious about using these measures. “You start playing those games and that’s tough,” Trump said at a press conference on Thursday when asked about the idea of canceling interest payments to China, adding that doing so could undermine the “sanctity of the [US] dollar.” This echoes comments made the same day by Trump’s top economic adviser Larry Kudlow, who called reports the administration was considering canceling debt payments “absolutely and unequivocally untrue,” adding that “the full faith and credit of US debt obligations is sacrosanct.” This is why the senior White House official I spoke to said they’re “very doubtful senior advisers will allow” the debt-payment idea to go forward, acknowledging that Congress would likely try to block such a move anyway. But some Trump advisers and allies are still pushing the president to retaliate against China in some way. At the same Thursday press conference, Trump suggested another idea: imposing billions of dollars in additional tariffs on China. To punish China, the US “can do it with tariffs,” Trump said Thursday. Yet there’s (at least) one big, glaring problem with this idea: Though Trump has long believed that China pays these tariffs and the money goes to the US Treasury, that is not at all how tariffs actually work. Tariffs raise the price of buying Chinese goods for American consumers. The idea is that by making Chinese products more expensive, American consumers will stop buying them from China and buy them more cheaply from somewhere else instead. While that would ultimately harm Chinese producers in the long run, in the short run, it’s American consumers who are stuck paying these tariffs, not China. With US unemployment claims having reached a staggering 30 million and the country facing an economic downturn unseen since the Great Depression, making things more expensive for American consumers would be less a punishment on China and more a self-own. On top of that, the US has already placed tariffs on nearly every major Chinese product, so it’s not even clear that the eventual impact on Chinese manufacturers would be all that meaningful. Still, it seems some kind of retaliation is coming. Asked Friday about the administration’s China considerations, White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany said she wouldn’t get ahead of the president on any announcements, but she reiterated Trump’s “displeasure with China,” adding, “It’s no secret that China mishandled this situation.” Some sort of grander planning has already begun. Multiple sources at the State Department told me that Pompeo has almost every office doing some sort of work involving China. Whether in Asia, the Middle East, Latin America, or elsewhere, Pompeo has staff looking at ways to counter China’s aims, such as having US allies end certain business contracts with Beijing. However, some in the State Department believe there’s no real strategy to the top-down directive. The entire idea is “shortsighted,” said one staffer tasked with finding ways to push back on China, who spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to talk to the press. “The China approach is all over the place.” Another State Department staffer pushed back against the notion that the department is in search of a more-robust-than-normal stance against China. “It is our standard policy to counter Chinese influence,” they told me. What’s clear, though, is that the administration is thinking of ways to up the ante against China. When, and what, Trump decides to do is what everyone’s waiting on. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  President Donald Trump signed an executive order this week declaring meat processing plants “critical infrastructure” that should stay open wherever possible. Invoking the Defense Production Act, Trump said that plant closures “threaten the continued functioning of the national meat and poultry supply chain.” Yet keeping the plants open threatens workers’ lives. Facilities across the US have become hot spots for Covid-19 outbreaks: More than 3,000 workers have tested positive for the coronavirus, and at least 17 have died. Some plants have been forced to close due to high rates of infection. At a Tyson plant in Waterloo, Iowa, more than 180 employees got sick. At a Smithfield plant in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, it was more than 640 workers. But the leaders of these giant companies aren’t happy about shuttering plants, and they’re pushing back. Tyson’s chairman took out full-page ads in the New York Times and the Washington Post, claiming that “the food supply chain is breaking.” And Smithfield’s CEO said plant closures are “pushing our country perilously close to the edge in terms of our meat supply.” To evaluate these claims and discuss what America’s obsession with the meat supply might be missing, I called up Leah Garcés, the president of Mercy for Animals. She suggested that while we’re all focused on the possibility of a meat shortage, what we should really reflect upon during this crisis is our profoundly immoral food system. Like many supply-chain experts, Garcés said we probably won’t see severe nationwide meat shortages anytime soon (though there may be spot shortages of certain meats in some grocery stores). But what we will see, in the processing plants that stay open, is thousands more workers getting sick. And in areas where plants close, we will see millions of animals being euthanized by farmers who have nowhere to send them for slaughter. That means these animals will die for nothing — the meat will never make it to our plates. I talked to Garcés about the moral dimensions of the crisis we’re facing, whether the pandemic will prompt us to hit the “reset” button on our food system, and how meat companies can stop driving the problem and start driving the solution. A transcript of our conversation, edited for length and clarity, follows. What do you think of Trump’s executive order declaring meat plants “critical infrastructure” that should stay open? This is not an appropriate use of the Defense Production Act. Slaughter plants are not critical infrastructure, and they are certainly not worth the price that will most certainly be paid: further death and illness. This is a slap in the face to workers and protects the industry from being held accountable for the deaths and illnesses it is causing. Our government should be focused on protecting workers’ health and creating systemic solutions to overhaul our outdated, unsafe, and inhumane food system, not providing protections for Big Ag. Trump’s order came after the leaders of some of America’s biggest meat companies issued dire warnings — like Tyson’s claim that “the food supply chain is breaking” and Smithfield’s claim that plant closures are “pushing our country perilously close to the edge in terms of our meat supply.” Are those claims true? Our meat supply is not “perilously close to the edge.” These claims are simply meant to stoke fear. US meat producers are still exporting meat, and the industry still has a surplus of meat in frozen storage. The National Chicken Council even said, as they were asking for relief funds [from the government], they have “historically high cold storage supply levels.”  And so I don’t have that concern about shortages direct to grocery stores or to consumers. In terms of our supply, I doubt there’s going to be that issue. But I think the industry will suffer because people are eating out less. It sounds like what we’ve got is not so much a meat-supply problem — it’s more a problem of getting the meat processed. Can you help me understand why our system for getting meat is so fragile? When [animal behavior expert] Temple Grandin talks about factory farming, she says, “Big is fragile.” It’s a machine that relies on everything working perfectly. Like in the slaughterhouses, all of the chickens have to come to the exact same size so that they fit in their shackles perfectly. If there’s a tiny sliver of a problem, there’s a ripple effect through the whole system. And that means farmers might not get paid, animals might be treated inhumanely, and consumers might not get the product that they were hoping for. Okay, so right now, it’s in the slaughterhouses where things are breaking down, right? Yes. Covid-19 is very infectious, and if you stand shoulder to shoulder with people, you’re [potentially] going to get it. Well, where are we continuing to stand shoulder to shoulder? In slaughterhouses. What is it about the way that slaughterhouses are set up that makes it almost impossible for workers to socially distance from one another? Let me describe what it looks like in a chicken slaughterhouse. The chickens arrive from the back of a warehouse in these crates, and then they’re moved onto a conveyor belt. And then workers who stand shoulder to shoulder are rapidly grabbing them by the legs and putting them on shackles that are moving extremely fast — the birds are hung upside down. And then they move rapidly away from the workers and they go through the process of being killed. From the workers’ perspective, each has a very specific job. One of them has to make this cut and the other one has to make that cut. Another one has to pull this part of the body off. One of them has to put it into a package. And they have to do all that very, very fast. You can’t step away to go to the bathroom, for example, because then your job in the machine is left unattended. [Even before the pandemic] there were reports that women were not getting bathroom breaks and were wearing diapers. Now that we’re impacted by Covid-19, workers are getting sick in droves because they’re continuing to stand shoulder to shoulder. It’s really questionable whether this is the right thing to be doing as a nation. Should we be putting these workers at risk just to deliver us cheap chicken? Recent reports say that coronavirus infections have spread through at least 48 meatpacking plants in the US, and 3,000 workers have gotten sick and at least 17 have died. And I bet the numbers are much higher than that, because as we know, there’s underreporting happening. People are being infected and they’re also bringing it home to family members who might be vulnerable, might be older. In South Dakota, 40 percent of all infections in the state have been linked to a Smithfield pork slaughterhouse. I mean, these are really serious concerns for how we’re going to control this pandemic. 
    Related
   When slaughterhouses close, what happens to all of the animals that were supposed to be slaughtered? Does it cause a choke point where animals on farms are just going to get killed because consumers aren’t going out to eat those products? In a single slaughterhouse, a million chickens are killed a week on average. Now, if even just one of those plants is at 50 percent capacity, it means that 500,000 birds that were supposed to be slaughtered are not going to be slaughtered now. So what’s happening to them? Well, the answer is that they’re being killed through emergency methods on farms. We know that because one poultry company reported that they were doing that. They said they’re just going to kill them on the farm en masse. Wait, how do they do that? They referred to these approved methods by the American Veterinary Medical Association. And those methods are through filling the barn with a layer of water-based foam that suffocates the birds. People might think, “Well, if they go to the slaughterhouse, they’re going to die anyway. Who cares?” But it’s a big difference in terms of the amount they suffer at their death. And it’s also crazy wasteful — the fact that all these animals went through a factory-farmed, horrible life, only to be foamed to death and then disposed of. I think it’s easier for us to justify slaughtering animals when we know people are going to eat them and that it will sustain [them] — there’s some use being gotten out of it, at least. But if we’re raising these animals and then just killing millions of them and not using them, that becomes a lot more morally difficult. Given all of this, do you think this pandemic is going to change how people think about eating meat in general? I really hope so. I think it’s one of the best shots we have at getting people to think about how the system needs to be changed. It’s a very rare opportunity to hit “reset” on the food system. What it’s shown us is that when we only rely on our protein coming from animals and a system that is so fragile, it leaves companies and consumers very vulnerable. While the majority of our protein today comes from animals, it would be far more efficient and sustainable for that to come from plants. And we know that that’s not a crazy idea, because several of the largest meat companies have already begun offering plant-based products, like Tyson and Perdue and Cargill. It’s interesting how all these big traditional meat companies are getting into the plant-based meat game. Plus, the plant-based meat companies themselves seem to be doing very well in this moment. Impossible Foods just announced they’re expanding sales of their products to another 750 stores across the US so people will be able to get their Impossible Burgers. It sounds like that’s part of the shift you’re advocating for. Absolutely. I mean, demand for meat just grows at about 2 percent or so each year. But sales in plant-based foods have jumped 11 percent over the past year. And so that is something companies that are concerned about their bottom line should be very interested in. If they’re smart, they’ll pivot and diversify and instead of being disrupted, they’ll be part of the disruption. Realistically, though, when I look at the US, I see a country where eating meat is super-entwined with national identity, and people eat, on average, more than 200 pounds of meat a year. So when this pandemic ends, are people actually going to hit “reset”? Or is it more likely that we’ll just go right back to business as usual? I think the pandemic is a tipping point. Like I said, companies were already investing in plant-based products and blending them into their portfolio, and that was without a pandemic. Now they’re seeing their entire supply chain disrupted. They’re unable to answer media calls about where animals are being killed and what is happening to workers. So I think the companies are going to be coming out of this saying, “There’s another option here, and we should be investing more in that.” I guess if we can enter a world where companies see it as in their bottom-line interest to make this transition, in addition to being in the interest of animals and human laborers, then there might actually be a shot of this happening. I always think when we’re trying to solve really big, hard social justice issues, we have to look for the win-wins. This is a win-win for consumers, for animals, for workers, and for the companies. It’s a mistake to just think about these companies as these monolithic beasts that are doing evil in the world. I mean, they’re made up of individuals who want to do good, too. We can appeal to that sense, that they’re just trying to feed people protein. I know this from experience, because I know Jim Perdue — the head of Perdue, which is the sixth-largest poultry company in the country. He said to me at one point: “Our mission is to be a premium protein company. And nothing about that says that it has to come from chickens.” Lo and behold, six months after saying that, [Perdue] came out with a plant-based blended product, because he said, “What the consumers want, we will follow.” So I am certain that this can be a win-win for everybody, including these big companies. And they don’t have to be these monolithic beasts, these enemies to us. They can be part of solving this problem. Sign up for the Future Perfect newsletter and we’ll send you a roundup of ideas and solutions for tackling the world’s biggest challenges — and how to get better at doing good. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. Future Perfect is funded in part by individual contributions, grants, and sponsorships. Learn more here. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.As countries across the world have gone into lockdown in response to Covid-19, economies are in free fall. Almost every sector is taking a hit, hemorrhaging jobs and value. And almost every sector will be shaped, for years to come, by the speed, amount, and nature of public assistance it receives. There is a finite amount of time, resources, and political will available to get economies going again; not every sector will get what it wants or needs.  In short, the decisions legislators make in response to the coronavirus crisis will have an enormous influence on what kind of economies emerge on the other side.  A few weeks ago, I wrote about what an ideal recovery and stimulus package would look like. Then I wrote about how shortsighted it is for Republicans (enabled by learned Democratic passivity) to reject aid for the struggling clean energy industry. BREAKING: WTI crude oil futures trade at negative price for first time https://t.co/pOSyH6AVtP pic.twitter.com/XsoH1jG8WH In this post, I take a look at why it is equally shortsighted for President Trump and congressional Republicans to remain so devoted to the fossil fuel industry. The dominant narrative is still that fossil fuels are a pillar of the US economy, with giant companies like Exxon Mobil producing revenue and jobs that the US can’t afford to do without. Even among those eager to address climate change by moving past fossil fuels to clean energy — a class that includes a majority of Americans — there is a lingering mythology that US fossil fuels are, to use the familiar phrase, too big to fail. But the position of fossil fuels in the US economy is less secure than it might appear. In fact, the fossil fuel industry is facing substantial structural challenges that will be exacerbated by, but will not end with, the Covid-19 crisis. For years, the industry has been shedding value, taking on debt, losing favor among financial institutions and investors, and turning more and more to lobbying governments to survive.   It is, in short, a turkey. CNBC financial analyst Jim Cramer put it best, back in late January, before Covid-19 had even become a crisis in the US: “I’m done with fossil fuels. They’re done. They’re just done.” “We’re in the death knell phase,” he said “The world has turned on [fossil fuels].” Cramer’s take is not yet conventional wisdom, but he’s right. Evidence in support appears in an April report from the Center for International Environmental Law (CIEL) called “Pandemic Crisis, Systemic Decline.” Let’s walk through it. The UK-based think tank InfluenceMap recently did an analysis that tracks corporate lobbying in the face of the Covid-19 crisis. It found that, across the globe, the oil and gas sector has been the most active in lobbying for interventions, seeking, as CIEL summarizes, “direct and indirect support, including bailouts, buyouts, regulatory rollbacks, exemption from measures designed to protect the health of workers and the public, non-enforcement of environmental laws, and criminalization of protest, among others.” In Canada, Australia, and the UK, the industry is arguing that it must be subsidized and deregulated in order to survive. In the US alone, the industry is seeking access to a range of stimulus funds, relief from a variety of pollution regulations, and use of the strategic petroleum reserve to bolster prices. Journalist Amy Westervelt is tracking at least a dozen other lobbying efforts. Recently the Federal Reserve changed its rules to allow bigger businesses access to “Main Street loans” (widely seen as a sop to oil and gas companies) and, as Emily Holden reports for the Guardian, records show that fossil fuel companies have already gotten $50 million in loans meant for small businesses.  The petrochemical and plastics industry, which is in large part an extension of the oil and gas industry, is exploiting the crisis as well. It has lobbied the federal government to declare an official preference for single-use plastic bags and suggested that more fresh produce should be wrapped in plastic.  The virus has not slowed down the Trump administration’s attempts to assist the industry. It is gutting fuel economy standards, which, by its own estimation, will increase pollution and eliminate 13,500 jobs a year. The EPA has dramatically eased the enforcement of pollution regulations and moved forward with its “secret science” rule, which will make it more difficult to understand and address the health impacts of air pollution — and more difficult to study the coronavirus. During a supply glut driven by historically low prices, the Interior Department is rushing to lease federal land for oil and gas development, despite an anemic response, rock-bottom prices, and calls from conservative and taxpayer groups to suspend leasing in the face of the coronavirus. The administration seems determined to bail out struggling shale gas companies, despite that overleveraged, debt-ridden sector being long overdue for a shakeout. (For more on that, check out Amy Westervelt’s reporting at Drilled.)  Trump is negotiating with Saudi Arabia and Russia on oil supply cuts, and has the Department of Energy buying up millions of barrels of oil for the strategic petroleum reserve, all to try to boost the price of oil to help struggling oil majors. A group of GOP senators is lobbying for fossil fuel companies, including coal companies, to be eligible for the small-business recovery fund. Last week, EPA Administrator Andrew Wheeler announced that the administration, in defiance of an enormous body of evidence and recommendations from EPA scientists and staff, will not tighten restrictions on soot pollution. And on Friday, Wheeler announced that the EPA will weaken standards on mercury and other toxic metals from fossil-fueled power plants, again in opposition to the scientific consensus, based on rigged cost-benefit analysis that deliberately excluded most benefits.  Across the board, the administration is doing everything it can to help fossil fuels. But it’s a mug’s game. The industry is faltering for reasons that well predate Covid-19. US coal is in terminal decline, for reasons I’ve written about many times before. No amount of stimulus money or weaker pollution regulations can save it. But on the surface, things look different for oil and gas. Thanks to fracking, production has been booming for the past decade, vaulting the US ahead of Saudi Arabia and Russia to become the the world’s leading oil and gas producer.  
    Related
   And the same goes for petrochemicals and especially plastics, which have been forecast to be the main drivers of rising petroleum demand in coming years. The industry has issued rosy projections of plastics’ growth and invested $200 billion in new petrochemical and plastics infrastructure.  But dig below the surface and things don’t look so good. First, fracking was a financial wreck long before Covid-19 hit. US fracking operations have been losing money for a decade, to the tune of around $280 billion. Overproduction has produced a supply glut, low prices, and an accumulating surplus in storage. CIEL reports: Since 2015, over 200 drillers have gone bankrupt, with 32 declaring bankruptcy in 2019. At the beginning of 2020, the industry continued to struggle as natural gas prices remained low due to sluggish demand growth. By the end of the first quarter, another seven drillers had declared bankruptcy, six additional drillers had their credit outlook downgraded, and several major banks had written down the expected value of many drillers’ reserves. A recent analysis from Rystad Energy indicated that, at prevailing oil and gas prices, almost all new fracking wells drilled would lose money. Even as its prospects grow dimmer, the enormous debt the industry has taken on over the years is coming back to bite it. Some $40 billion will come due this year alone, and around $200 billion in the next four years.  Second, both oil and gas prices were persistently low leading into 2019. Due to oversupply and mild winters in the US and Europe, there is a glut of both natural gas and oil, such that the entire world’s spare oil storage is in danger of being filled. Many big oil deals in “frontier countries” with as-yet-unexploited reserves, like Guyana, Argentina, and Mozambique, are falling through as low prices drag on.  Third, renewable energy and electric vehicles are threatening oil and gas’s dominance in both transportation, which represents 70 percent of global demand, and electricity. Natural gas’s status as a “bridge fuel” in the power sector is in increasing doubt; since 2014, orders for new gas turbines (to generate power) have fallen by half. As for transportation, a recent report from the international banking group BNP Paribas concluded that “the economics of oil for gasoline and diesel vehicles versus wind- and solar-powered EVs are now in relentless and irreversible decline.” Fourth, oil and gas majors are revealing their own weakness by writing down assets — effectively conceding that certain reserves cannot be profitably exploited. In 2019, Chevron wrote down $11 billion worth; Spanish oil company Repsol recently wrote down $5 billion worth. Exxon Mobil, after adding Canadian tar sands assets to its books in 2017, reversed course and wrote down 3.2 billion barrels last year.  Fifth, financial institutions — “institutional and retail investors, banks, insurers, and credit rating agencies” — are catching wind of fossil fuels’ weakness and beginning to back away. Many, like Wells Fargo, BlackRock, the European Investment Bank, and the World Bank Group, are restricting investments in carbon-intensive projects. As of March 2020, asset investors worth $12 trillion had declared that they would divest from fossil fuels.  As financial institutions divest, the ones still invested in carbon-intensive projects face increasing vulnerability to lawsuits charging them with ignoring material risks. “As the risks of investing in the oil and gas sector become ever more apparent,” CIEL writes, “more and more investors subject to fiduciary duties will likely choose to steer clear of these companies.” Like these other dismal trends, the financial turn from fossil fuels was underway well before Covid-19. Over the past decade, companies in the sector have spent more on stock buybacks and dividends than they have brought in through revenue, leading to a greater and greater debt burden. Declining confidence in the sector has made it the worst-performing sector on the S&P Index.  Finally, plastics, the great hope of the oil and gas sector, do not appear to be growing fast enough to justify the industry’s optimistic projections. Much of the US plastics industry is geared for export, but countries across the world (127 and counting) are adopting restrictions on single-use plastics. The most recent such restrictions were adopted by China, the world’s largest plastic producer and consumer. Plastics, like oil and gas, are suffering from the dual malady of overexpansion and underconsumption. As an example that encompasses all these structural problems, CIEL cites Exxon Mobil. The company’s plan for growth involves growth in its petrochemical operations, which is now in doubt; fracking in the Permian Basin, which is now in doubt; and expanding oil production in Guyana, which is now (owing to political instability) in doubt.  All these doubts are converging as Moody’s recently revised the company’s outlook to negative. It fell out of the S&P’s top 10 for the first time, its stock hit its lowest price in a decade, the rapid rise of renewables and electric vehicles rendered billions (and perhaps soon trillions) of dollars of its assets worthless, and it is keeping shareholders happy with debt-financed dividends. The Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis found that over the past decade, Exxon Mobil has spent $64.5 billion more on payouts to stockholders than it earned in free cash flow. That can’t go on much longer. Again: All of these structural trends predate Covid-19. But the global lockdown in response to the virus has accelerated all of them.  Into this already dismal situation for fossil fuels came the virus and the subsequent lockdown. The vertiginous plunge in consumer demand has hit every sector of the economy, but oil and gas, already facing oversupply and persistent low prices, were particularly vulnerable. “Oil, gas, and petrochemical stocks have been affected more rapidly and much more deeply than almost any other sector,” CIEL writes. “The oil and gas sector lost more than 45% of its total value from the beginning of January to early April 2020.” The already declining stocks of Exxon Mobil, Royal Dutch Shell, and Occidental Petroleum were sent tumbling even faster. In July 2014, Exxon stock hit a high of $107; as of early April 2020, it was at $42, its lowest level in decades.  Transportation represents 70 percent of petroleum consumption, but no one is moving. Rystad Energy estimates that as of March 2020, global traffic is down 40 percent. As lockdowns remain, that number will likely drop further.   Air travel has been the fastest-growing source of demand for transport fuels, but no one is flying. “In the final week of March 2020,” CIEL writes, “commercial air traffic was almost 63% lower than in 2019.” Public health officials warn that there could be periodic outbreaks for months or even years. Meanwhile, there are rapid advances being made everywhere in the infrastructure, technology, and practices of working remotely, from home. It’s entirely possible that auto and air travel won’t reach their pre-virus levels in the US for years, if ever. Travel by ship is also taking a hit. Cruise ships, beset by a series of viral horror stories, have suspended operations and many analysts doubt they will ever fully recover.  Meanwhile, oversupply, exacerbated by the drop in demand, is taxing the nation’s storage capacity — the International Energy Agency says global capacity is about 85 percent full. “Nearly all observers have concluded that at projected levels of demand destruction,” CIEL writes, “the total global capacity for storing unneeded oil and gas will soon be exceeded.” At that point, many producers will be forced to simply shut down operations and write-downs will accelerate. On top of all this has come a price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia, competing for the shrinking supply left over by the US supply glut. Global oil prices were at $69 per barrel in January 2020. The price of a barrel of Canadian tar sands oil appears headed into negative prices, as are Texas oil and natural gas in some parts of the US, for May futures (June prices are higher). The so-called OPEC+ group of oil-producing nations (OPEC + Russia) recently agreed to a 10 million barrel a day cut in production, but analysts agree that it is unlikely to be sufficient to stabilize prices.  (In the hours after this article was first published on April 20, oil futures for May fell to negative prices. Mind-boggling.) When storage capacity runs out, producers are forced to pay people to take oil off their hands. (Raise your hand if you had “negative oil prices” on your 21st-century bingo card.) Even if storage doesn’t completely run out, it will be close to full, serving to suppress prices, for years. Petrochemicals and plastics don’t have it much better, with major investors delaying or dropping out of projects left and right.  “In the medium term,” CIEL writes, “the prospect of a full recovery for many of these revenue streams is, at best, uncertain, and, in many cases, unlikely.” Fossil fuels and petrochemicals could struggle for years. And even if they eventually manage to achieve something like their pre-virus trajectory, that trajectory was sloping downward. As CIEL summarizes: “the pandemic exposes and exacerbates fundamental weaknesses throughout the sector that both predate the current crisis and will outlast it.” Slowly but surely, the world is beginning to take global warming seriously, shifting attention and investment to materials and sources of energy that do not produce greenhouse gas emissions. As more and more jurisdictions, institutions, and investors turn away from fossil fuels, explicitly citing climate change, those left holding carbon-intensive assets will become targets of increasingly intense legal and civic activism holding them responsible for the damages.  CIEL concludes with recommendations to investors, frontier countries, and local communities: Take heed of fossil fuels’ long-term weakness when making decisions about the future. CIEL also argues that public officials “should not waste limited response and recovery resources on bailouts, debt relief, or similar supports for oil, gas, and petrochemical companies.” Given the well-established inclinations of Trump and congressional Republicans, that recommendation is likely to fall on deaf ears, at least in the US. If Democrats do not muster the courage to stop them — and it does not seem they will — the GOP is likely to continue showering the fossil fuel industry with favors while dismissing aid to the clean energy industry as frivolous.  At best, they can slow down the transition to clean energy a bit. They cannot stop it. Adding stimulus money to fossil fuels’ already subsidy-rich diet will allow a little more pollution and a little more damage to public health for a little longer, but it’s only a delay. Meanwhile, other countries will be establishing a commanding position in some of the biggest growth industries of the 21st century.  It would be a shame to emerge from this crisis still clinging to the past rather than facing, and preparing for, the future.  Update May 1: This piece has updated to note new Federal Reserve rules to allow bigger businesses access to “Main Street loans.”  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. There’s a stark partisan difference in who has been affected by the coronavirus: Democrats are far more likely than Republicans to live in communities hit hard by Covid-19.  This has contributed to a partisan divide in attitudes about the pandemic, one in which Republican governors, lawmakers, and voters have remained broadly supportive of Trump — and have pushed for policies like the rapid reopening of businesses — while Democrats have not. It is well known that the disease has disproportionately hit large cities and metropolitan areas. Given the geographic pattern of American political polarization, this also means that Democratic areas of the country have suffered the most from the pandemic, while Republican areas — despite recent outbreaks in smaller towns as the disease has spread at meatpacking plants — have been hit relatively lightly, if at all. As of April 27, according to county-level case data compiled by the New York Times, Covid-19 cases and deaths were far more prevalent in counties won by Hillary Clinton in 2016 than in counties won by Donald Trump. Clinton counties make up a slight majority of the US population, but so far they have seen 76 percent of the Covid-19 cases and 80 percent of the deaths. Trump counties are 44 percent of the population, but just 24 percent of Covid-19 cases and 20 percent of the deaths. This means Democrats and Republicans have experienced the pandemic in objectively different ways. These differences are already shaping the nation’s pandemic response — and may well influence American politics for years to come. On April 8, 77 percent of cases and 80 percent of deaths were in Clinton counties, versus 23 percent of cases and 20 percent of deaths in Trump counties. Despite some evidence of the virus spreading to more rural and Republican areas, these numbers have not changed over the past three weeks. Of course, the true number of Covid-19 cases and deaths is unknown because of the lack of widespread testing. Still, given that the gap between Democratic and Republican areas hasn’t changed as more testing has become available suggests that the disparity between urban and rural areas is not just an artifact of incomplete testing. Overall, Clinton counties have had nearly 2.5 times more cases per 100,000 people, and 3.2 times more deaths per 100,000 people, than Trump counties. But these overall numbers obscure how the disease has had the most impact in heavily Democratic areas, but the least impact in heavily Republican areas. In counties where Hillary Clinton won in a landslide (20 percentage points or more), there have been 486 cases per 100,000 people. Where Trump won in a landslide there have been only 120 cases per 100,000 people. And this is not just because of New York City, the nation’s biggest metropolis and a Democratic stronghold, as well as the city worst-hit by the pandemic: Excluding New York City only drops the rate in Clinton landslide counties to 364 cases per 100,000 people. Similarly, in Clinton landslide counties there have been 27 deaths per 100,000 people; in Trump landslide counties, there have 5 deaths per 100,000. Even without New York City this pattern holds with Clinton landslide counties still having 17 deaths per 100,000 people. Trump voters are also heavily concentrated in counties with few Covid-19 cases or deaths. In fact, a majority of Trump voters (56 percent) live in counties with fewer than 100 cases compared to a majority of Clinton voters (56 percent) living in counties with more than 500 cases. The same is true for deaths. Almost one in five (18 percent) Trump voters live in a county with zero deaths from Covid-19. Half of Trump voters (49 percent) live in a county with 10 or fewer deaths. In comparison, only 31 percent of Clinton voters live in these counties. As much as we might like to think that this crisis will unite Americans across party lines, the reality is very different. Democrats are more likely than Republicans to reside in counties with large numbers of Covid-19 cases and deaths and therefore much more likely to have a friend, neighbor, coworker, or family member affected by the disease, not to mention possibly contracting the virus themselves. On the other hand, for many Republicans, the disease and the deaths associated with it are more likely to be abstractions, something with little if any direct impact on them or their community so far. There is some evidence these vastly different experiences are contributing to Democratic and Republican lawmakers — and voters —advocating for divergent policies. For instance, an April 19-21 Economist/YouGov survey found 81 percent of Democrats worried about contracting the virus, compared to only 54 percent of Republicans. This gap has not changed over the course of the pandemic. Another Economist/YouGov poll in mid-March found 71 percent of Democrats worried about contracting the virus compared to only 45 percent of Republicans. Similarly, the April Economist survey found that 26 percent of Republicans thought that people were overreacting to the risk of the virus, but only 6 percent of Democrats did. For Republicans, concentrated in counties with few cases, the primary impacts of the pandemic are the economic and social dislocations caused by business shutdowns and stay-at-home orders, which is affecting Democratic and Republican areas more equally than the disease itself: the April Economist survey found no difference between Democrats and Republicans on how much income they have lost due to the shutdown. To be sure, Republican Party leaders, from President Trump on down, have presented mixed messages or inaccurate information about the disease. This misinformation may well have contributed to Republican attitudes about the pandemic from the start. But the relatively light impact of the virus in Republican areas gives Republican officials and conservative commentators a receptive audience when they claim that stay-at-home orders and business shutdowns cause too much economic damage and threaten personal liberty, or when Fox News stars like Tucker Carlson, Britt Hume, and Laura Ingraham claim that the official death toll from the pandemic is inflated. Furthermore, anti-lockdown protests have sprung up in several states. To be sure, conservative groups have organized and directed these protests for their own purposes and the number of persons involved is still relatively small.  Nonetheless, the protests have been supported by a number of prominent Republicans, including President Trump who tweeted out calls to, “LIBERATE MICHIGAN!”; “LIBERATE MINNESOTA!”; AND “LIBERATE VIRGINIA.” Given this support, the protests seem likely to continue — and perhaps escalate — if Republican areas remain relatively untouched by the virus but continue to suffer economic damage. Exactly that happened in Lansing, Michigan, where protesters crowded into the state Capitol building and tried to gain access to the House floor while legislators debated whether to extend Gov. Gretchen Whitmer’s emergency declaration. Still, at the federal level, we have seen lawmakers advocating for economic aid on a bipartisan (albeit asymmetrical) basis, resulting in the implementation of programs like the Paycheck Protection Program. But the parties have been divided more on public health measures. Passage of last week’s small business relief bill was held up because Democrats insisted, over Republicans objections, on including money for hospitals and more testing. The differential impact of the pandemic also gives us clues about how the 2020 election might play out. Democrats will likely continue to criticize President Trump’s erratic and ineffectual response to the crisis and the need for the federal government to provide funding to meet the ongoing medical and economic emergency. President Trump, meanwhile, might argue that his actions have limited the pandemic at least in the areas where most of his voters reside, while Republicans might accuse Democrats of hyping the crisis in order to ramp up government spending for their voters in large urban areas. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell’s office has already called aid to state and local governments devastated by the pandemic “Blue State Bailouts.” Such a message is all the more pernicious and perhaps more effective since it triggers prejudices related to race, religion, and immigration. If so, it seems likely that the pandemic will only deepen America’s chronic social and political divides. Philip Klinkner is the James S. Sherman Professor of Government at Hamilton College in Clinton, New York. He is the author (with Rogers Smith) of The Unsteady March: The Rise and Decline of Racial Equality in America. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. When senators return to DC on Monday, there won’t be enough coronavirus tests for all of them to get proactively screened.  According to a report from Politico’s Burgess Everett and Marianne LeVine, the Capitol’s attending physician, Brian Monahan, informed Republicans about the dearth of tests during a phone call on Thursday. In this conversation, Monahan said that lawmakers and staffers who are in need of tests would likely be able to get one, but added that capacity is so limited that it wouldn’t be enough to cover all 100 senators. Despite ongoing concerns about the coronavirus’s spread, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has nevertheless expressed confidence in the decision to have the Senate return to the Capitol on May 4. The House, however, will not be following suit. House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer announced that members would not physically come back to DC just yet, after conversations with Monahan earlier this week.  The Capitol’s limited testing capacity is concerning in itself: Many senators are over the age of 65 and within the range of individuals who are more likely to experience severe coronavirus symptoms. And while in the Capitol, their work inherently brings them, and staffers, into close contact with one another.  Prior to departing for recess, senators were spotted in tight groups on the chamber floor during a stimulus vote. And when Sen. Rand Paul (R-KY) tested positive for Covid-19, several of his colleagues including Sens. Mitt Romney (R-UT) and Mike Lee (R-UT) had to self-isolate out of concerns about their exposure.  The Senate’s testing shortage is also emblematic of a broader problem the country continues to face: Even after recovering from a slow start on the subject, America’s testing capacity is still very far from what it needs to be for regular business and social gatherings to resume.  There are many compelling reasons for Congress to return to the Capitol including, specifically the need to advance more much-needed stimulus for workers and businesses that are reeling from the economic fallout of the coronavirus pandemic.  “We have a crisis to continue to work through. Our services are necessary. And in order to perform those services, we have to perform them here in Washington,” Lee said in a floor speech in April.  The big question, however, is whether lawmakers will be able to return and work on legislation — as well as McConnell’s coveted judicial nominations — in a safe way. Several Democrats have voiced concerns about the ability to do so given the information offered by the Capitol physician about the current state of the pandemic.  As Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-CA) noted in a statement, one senator, eight Capitol police officers, and 11 construction workers on a House renovations project have already tested positive for the coronavirus. She argued that lawmakers would be increasing the risk of spreading the disease to themselves and their staff by returning.  “The Attending Physician of Congress, Dr. Brian Monahan, advised House leadership that he recommends against resuming their session,” Feinstein said in a statement. “That’s why I ask the majority leader to reconsider his plan to reconvene the Senate.” The House, after all, announced earlier this week that it would not return next week based on concerns that Monahan had expressed about the growing number of cases in the Washington DC area.  McConnell has said there will be certain precautions taken to address lawmakers’ worries, including staggered voting.  Still, given the Capitol’s limited testing capacity, it’s unclear if Congress actually has the resources it needs to proceed in a secure fashion. As Politico reports, the Capitol physician notes that tests will take roughly two days to turn around for those who need them.  The uncertainty surrounding Congress’s return is similar to that hanging over states’ decisions to slowly reopen businesses and the broader economy: While there’s obviously an urgency around doing so, the shortages in testing make it very difficult to move forward without running the risk of spreading the virus even further.  As Vox’s German Lopez has reported, increasing the number of available tests is vital because it enables doctors and the government to identify who’s sick and attempt to trace others they’ve contacted in order to prevent further spread. As of last week, the US wasn’t doing enough, Lopez writes.  Whatever the case, even the best days of testing in the US are still far from what experts say is necessary to allow the country to safely reopen the economy. On the low end, experts say the US should be able to do a minimum of 500,000 tests a day. At the high end, some have called for much more — up to the tens of millions a day. So far, America isn’t even getting close to the low-end requirement. In lieu of ramping up testing to a sufficient level, the main option is to continue social distancing — both in Congress and beyond.  Since the pandemic hit earlier this year, Congress has struggled to legislate remotely, in part because there’s no clear mechanism to vote remotely on bills.  Although House Democrats are interested in advancing a proposal that would enable “proxy voting” in which some members can designate others to physically represent them on the floor, these plans have generated pushback from Republicans. In the Senate, too, McConnell has shot down an effort by Paul to advance a temporary remote voting procedure.  The push for lawmakers to return makes a lot of sense in the context of what’s still needed to help the US weather the massive unemployment and business shortfalls that have resulted since the coronavirus spurred stringent social distancing policies and closures.  The need to risk their personal health — and that of their staffers — in order to advance the country’s legislative needs, however, is a dilemma that could be resolved by approving remote voting procedures.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.It’s May 1, and seven weeks have passed since the World Health Organization’s declaration of a global pandemic. And while President Trump still maintains America has “done a great job of Testing” as recently as today, the country has yet to significantly scale its testing up to where experts say it needs to be. But a renewed effort from retail drug store chains is finally showing some promise, even if it will never be the completely accessible testing solution Trump implied it would be. On April 28, President Trump said the country was “getting very close” to running 5 million coronavirus tests every day. This would represent an incredible 25-fold increase over the approximately 200,000 tests that were run that day, and the president said that goal would be achieved in the “very near future” and “very soon.” If true, a surge in testing of this magnitude could be a game changer, considering that many experts believe we will need to run that many tests — or more — to safely reopen the country.  But Trump’s promise actually amounted to a fantasy. The 5 million tests a day figure surely surprised the public health officials responsible for coordinating those tests, given that the assistant secretary of health and testing czar Brett Girior said earlier that same day that 5 million tests per day was impossible. Sure enough, 24 hours later, Trump walked back his 5 million daily test claim, arguing that he never said the United States would run that many tests per day. The more realistic reality, according to Girior, was 8 million tests in the entire month of May.  What unfolded over the course of those two days is a pretty good representation of how Trump’s proposed public-private partnerships involving retail drug stores and big tech have fared so far. A Vox analysis found that they’ve only contributed a fraction of tests to the 6 million conducted, with testing sites at just 1 percent of the participating chains’ physical locations — or less.  Now, Trump might be setting the country up for another letdown. On April 27, he re-introduced the drive-through testing effort with the help of top executives from CVS, Walmart, Walgreens, Rite Aid, and Kroger. A newly signed bill allots $25 billion to testing programs, and with recent improvements to testing capacity and the supply chain, perhaps the widespread testing sites promised so many weeks ago will truly arrive now.  So there are some signs that the second phase of these public-private partnerships might be much more successful than the first, perhaps even fulfilling the initial promise. But there is also evidence that even if it is, those sites may not make it to the “critical” or even “convenient” locations the president said they would.  In contrast to the virus response from other countries, the Trump administration has been reluctant to deploy, let alone finance, the kind of comprehensive, national mass testing plan many experts have called for. Instead, the president placed the onus on respective states and private businesses to carry out piecemeal efforts with limited assistance from the federal government. This is all very apparent, now that the administration’s much-hyped partnerships with retail drug stores have produced disappointing results. Following Trump’s press conference in March, CVS, Walgreens, Walmart, and Target worked with the federal and state administrations to open drive-through testing sites across the country. The results of their efforts have been underwhelming. Trump had said Covid-19 tests would be “available in the critical locations identified by public health professionals” at a network of stores in “virtually every location” of the country. Trump also announced that Google was building a site that would “facilitate testing at a nearby convenient location,” which would go live within the next few days.  These turned out to be gross exaggerations from the president. From the beginning, the Washington Post reported, anonymous health officials said Trump’s announcement came as a surprise to them and that state health departments weren’t at all ready to help implement it. Company representatives didn’t have many details about the rollout of the promised testing sites. And Google had to tweet that the testing website was actually a product of life sciences company Verily — both Google and Verily are subsidiaries of Alphabet — which would initially roll out in the Bay Area. There were no plans for a national testing program at the time. Google launched its own information portal a week later, which was educational but did not include many of the features Trump promised. The retail companies featured in the first press conference — CVS, Target, Walmart, and Walgreens — gradually opened testing sites over the ensuing weeks. But they didn’t open that many of them. A month after Trump’s announcement, Business Insider found only 8 sites were operating among three of the companies. The fourth, Walgreens, wasn’t able to open the first batch of its promised 15 locations until April 17. Target opened only one site and appears to have dropped out of the effort. Rite Aid, which joined the effort later, had two sites. Meanwhile, none of these testing sites also offered tests to anyone who wanted one; tests were reserved for people who met certain criteria in order to make the limited supply available to the people most likely to need them.  In the past couple of weeks, these retail companies have expanded their efforts considerably. By the time Trump announced the renewed effort on April 27, four of the companies had 57 testing sites among them, 50 of which opened a month after the March 13 announcement, according to the companies’ press releases. Verily expanded its platform from the pilot sites in California to power Rite Aid’s 25 testing sites, providing an online portal for screening patients, scheduling tests, and delivering results. The second Trump press conference also featured supermarket chain Kroger, which has 30 test sites, though they appear to represent a partnership with states rather than the federal government. Rite Aid and Kroger’s sites are at 1 percent of their locations, and they both have more sites and fewer stores than their peers. The numbers from all of these companies’ testing sites stills seem low. Kroger, CVS, and Walmart performed at least 74,000 tests, which represents a small fraction of the approximately 6 million tests run nationwide since March 13, according to the Covid Tracking Project. Walmart did not respond to Recode’s request for total tests run but said in a recent press release that it ran 13,000 tests at one of its 20 sites. Verily said it has facilitated testing for 19,500 people, but that figure includes non-Rite Aid sites. Rite Aid would not give Recode its figures. Walgreens didn’t respond to repeated requests for its overall testing numbers.   Several valid reasons could explain why these numbers sound so small compared to the total number of tests conducted in the US. It takes time to set these things up, including coordinating with labs and testing personnel to get and run the tests and public health authorities to tell them where their efforts should be focused and provide the funding for the tests, which were free to qualified patients. There were major supply issues, including the personal protective equipment workers need while in close proximity to potentially infected people all day long. CVS told Recode that its biggest obstacle when trying to increase the number of sites was “the availability of testing equipment and capacity of the labs to process the tests.”  The second phase of drive-through testing at retail locations looks more promising than the first. There are now 87 sites up and running. Companies have paired up with test providers and labs to process the tests. Many supply chain shortages have been fixed or at least significantly improved. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has also expanded its guidelines for who can get tested — increasingly, anyone who wants a test truly can get one.  In their latest press releases, the companies involved in the public-private partnership say they will be able to perform 2 million tests per month at more than 1,150 locations in at least 49 states and Puerto Rico by the end of May. (That’s assuming they’re ultimately able to open as many locations and do as many tests as they say will.) CVS will contribute a major chunk of this — 1,000 locations and 1.5 million tests per month — but says those numbers are still “subject to availability of supplies and lab capacity.”  That might still not be enough. Experts have said the US should be testing at least 500,000 people per day to safely reopen; 2 million tests per month is about 65,000 tests per day. So, even if these retail pharmacies and grocery stores do hit their goals, they will only provide about a 10th of the tests the country needs. Assuming the retailers do hit their goals in terms of numbers, the challenge then is ensuring those tests go to the places that truly need them. Despite initial promises from the government and retailers that they would focus testing sites on the areas that needed them most, a Vox and Type Investigations analysis of Chicago data found that testing sites were few and far between in the minority neighborhoods that were disproportionately affected by the virus. Not one of the five retailers offers coronavirus tests in New York City.  
    Related
   It seems that plopping drive-through testing sites down on parking lots leaves out the people who don’t have access to cars or who live in neighborhoods that don’t have those retail stores in the first place. Perhaps this problem will be solved, too: Some of the participating companies said they plan to focus their expanded efforts on underserved areas. Given that this was also promised back in March, there is reason to be skeptical. As it is, it’s yet another way disadvantaged people are being left behind in these public-private partnerships, exposing the considerable limits of them. Profit-focused businesses will never serve everyone, whether it’s Apple and Google building a contact tracing tool that can only be used by people who own their phones or huge pharmacy chains offering free coronavirus tests that are only available to the people who have access to the sites performing them. Frankly, it’s not up to Google or CVS or any business to ensure that all the people in this country are provided for. It’s up to the government. There are other testing sites throughout the country run by county and state health departments and health care providers, for instance, and they’re available to more people now than ever. But they’re still not available to everyone, and they won’t be at every single participating drugstore location anytime soon — if ever. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   On each of the last four days, President Donald Trump has lamented that the coronavirus pandemic is the worst the world has seen since 1917. There’s just one problem — the flu pandemic he’s referring to actually began in 1918. This may seem like a little thing, and in a universe of Trump falsehood featuring claims about much more consequential matters such as climate change and voter fraud, it is. But since the lessons from how governments handled the 1918 pandemic that are relevant to the coronavirus, Trump’s ignorance, in this case, has a significance beyond illustrating a shaky grasp of details — that some of his falsehoods are utterly impervious to correction. “Who would think you could have a stock market at 24,000 after we’ve gone through the worst pandemic since 1917? That’s over 100 years,” Trump said on Wednesday, adding Thursday: “Tremendous death. It was just a terrible thing, the likes of which we haven’t seen I guess if you go back over 100 years, 1917. And that was a terrible thing.” Trump still hasn't figured out that the 1918 flu pandemic didn't happen in 1917 pic.twitter.com/7FQGlT9O9Z This didn’t just start this week. Trump has been regularly claiming that the 1918 flu pandemic started in 1917 since he started holding coronavirus-related press briefings in March. “Nobody’s seen this I would say since 1917, which was the greatest of them all, the greatest of this type of battle,” Trump said on April 4. “Right? 1917.” Trump keeps saying that the 1918 flu pandemic happened in 1917, which is wrong pic.twitter.com/7o4zNAEWnC According to a tally compiled by Susan Glasser of the New Yorker, Trump has incorrectly referred to a 1917 flu pandemic at least 27 times since March 11. As she noted: In a handful of instances—six, by my count—Trump referred to both 1917 and 1918, suggesting that someone had perhaps tried to give him the correct date, but he could never quite get it to stick. The ironic thing is that if anybody should be able to get the date right, it should be Trump. His grandfather, Friedrich Trump, died in New York City in 1918 from the flu during the early stages of a pandemic that killed about 675,000 Americans. Nonetheless, Trump, seemingly unaware of his family’s history, said in March, “Does anybody die from the flu? I didn’t know people died from the flu.” "I told the pharmaceutical companies that they have to do a better job on that vaccine" -- Trump admits he just learned that the flu can be deadly and says he wants the pharmaceutical companies to do something about it pic.twitter.com/7jPDsi7WAX Given that he makes the same false claim just about every day (and, as was the case on Wednesday, more than once a day), you’d think one of Trump’s advisers would try to correct him. Maybe they have and it just hasn’t stuck. Whatever the case, Trump just can’t seem to get it right. Trump has a notoriously shaky grasp of history. Recall, for instance, how during one of his first public events as president he described Frederick Douglass, who died in 1895, as “an example of somebody who’s done an amazing job that is being recognized more and more, I notice,” or how he regularly expresses surprise more people aren’t aware that Abraham Lincoln was a Republican.  While it could be argued that these gaffes are trivial, the 1918 pandemic actually offers some important lessons for governments struggling to handle the coronavirus. As my colleague German Lopez has detailed, perhaps the most important lesson is that moving away from social distancing too soon is a grave mistake. “Studies show that the social distancing efforts helped slow the spread of the 1918 flu and reduce the mortality rate overall,” Lopez wrote. “In city after city during the 1918 flu pandemic, giving up on such measures early consistently caused flu cases and deaths to rise again.” But even as the daily number of new, confirmed cases in the US in April plateaued instead of declined, Trump is pushing for businesses and schools to reopen. “I think what happens is it’s going to go away,” Trump said of the coronavirus on Wednesday, even though studies about the 1918 pandemic indicate that if he has his way and businesses reopen before the virus is under control, cases will spike. As George Santayana once wrote, “Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  The coronavirus is “a nightmare scenario” for the media, wrote New York Times columnist Charlie Warzel. “It is stealthy, resilient and confounding to experts. It moves far faster than scientists can study it. What seems to be true today may be wrong tomorrow.” Warzel is right. We’ve talked a lot in recent years about fake news. But combating information we know is false is a straightforward problem compared to covering a story where we don’t know what’s true, and where yesterday’s expert consensus becomes tomorrow’s derided falsehoods. In these cases, the normal tools of journalism begin to fail, and trust is easily lost. There’s been a lot of criticism of what the media missed in the run-up to the coronavirus. Some of it has been unfair. But some of it demands attention, reflection, and change. There’s also a lot the media got right, and those successes need to be celebrated and learned from.  The questions raised in this interview are hard, and go to one of the trickiest issues in journalism: How does a profession that prides itself on reporting truth cover the world probabilistically? What do we do when we simply can’t know what’s true, and when some of what we think we know might become untrue? Warzel covers the way technology, information, and media interact with and change each other. He’s one of the people I turn to first when I’m churning over these questions, which is … not infrequent. And so this episode of The Ezra Klein Show is a bit different than the normal fare: This is less an interview-with-an-expert, and more the kind of conversation that I — and others in the media — am having a lot of right now, and that I think we at least need to try and have in public.  Here’s a lightly edited transcript of part of our conversation, which we released this week on The Ezra Klein Show. You wrote that “the coronavirus emerges in the middle of a golden age of media manipulation. It’s resilient and stealthy and confounding to experts. And it moves faster than scientists can study it: what seems true today can be wrong tomorrow.” It’s the worst possible situation for the media because the way you might normally do your reporting begins to break down, and what you somehow need to be doing is probabilistic reporting. But we don’t really have good models for that, so it creates a trust crisis.  I think face masks are a good example because that’s somewhere where all kinds of media organizations were talking to the CDC and the US surgeon general and everybody said: Face masks are not that effective, they’re more trouble than they’re worth, we should save them for nurses and others. Then, midway through this crisis, they reversed that guidance to some degree. That’s a real problem for the media because we were trying to be accurate and what we were being told wasn’t accurate. Nobody wants to second guess the CDC on face masks, but that stuff does real damage in the long run to people’s faith in us. 
    Related
   I think it’s true. A month ago, there’s the sort of unthinkable moment where the American health care system looks like it might possibly explode. And there was this real backlash against the media — and it was founded.  I did a lot of soul searching in that moment as someone who covers technology, media, politics. I’ve never been a science reporter or someone who’s covered infectious diseases. But should I have seen this coming in some way? Should I have been paying more attention to this global issue, or to global issues in general? Should I always be paying 10 percent more attention to what is happening in China? And, if so, how would that have informed the way that I would have thought about this crisis in January and early February — before it really became real to me as the biggest story in the world?  I think you’re right to focus on [face masks] because I don’t know what the answer is there. The type of reporting that anyone would do is to reach out to the government experts — to speak to the people who are in these positions of authority. If that system breaks down, I don’t know what we’re really supposed to do.  There’s no good answer here, but I think this idea of probabilistic reporting is somewhere along the lines. The thing I’ve noticed from a media perspective is that there is sort of a realm of certainty around the framing of a story where you’re saying, “You don’t need to worry.” It’s framed and couched in an overly assured tone.  I think that when it comes to reporting on science or infectious disease — or probably even politics — the media needs to move a little bit toward embracing uncertainty. People want answers but they also want to be leveled with right now. I think generally that’s how a sophisticated news consumption audience wants to be treated. Part of what we need to do is embrace some of that uncertainty and say, “here’s what we know; here’s what we don’t know.” We need to be a lot more vigilant about foregrounding what we don’t know.   In February, Dr. Anthony Fauci was still saying the risk from the coronavirus to the US was “minuscule.” We assumed that the people we were talking to really knew what was going on. Maybe we should have been more skeptical and said we just don’t know that much here. On the other hand, it’s really hard as a reporter to question what the five epidemiologists you just called are telling you.  Reporters deal all the time with stories that could become something huge — viruses that could become the next global pandemic or financial issues that could become the next financial crisis — and most of them don’t. You become somewhat used to talking things down because you don’t want to constantly seem like the news organization crying wolf. But if you’re used to talking things down, and everything has a 5 percent or 2 percent or 1 percent probability of becoming the worst thing ever, then eventually you’re going to roll snake eyes. This is something I am really struggling with. I keep thinking about how do I cover things more probabilistically without somehow substituting expertise for things I don’t actually have expertise in.   I think that this is going to be a moment in a lot of our lives that will change the way in which we think about risk and resiliency, especially in industries like ours where there is either a future casting element or an assessment of risk and severity that we’re constantly making. I think some of the problem here has to do with the fact that we haven’t had a pandemic like this in a lifetime of people. There aren’t a lot of people alive who went through 1918 to loudly ring an alarm bell.  If you’re somebody who is constantly assessing risk and resiliency and thinking about the interconnected ways in which our systems work globally and are reliant on each other, then you might have rung the alarm bell a little bit earlier. I actually think that’s a reason why a lot of people in Silicon Valley are some of the people who took it really seriously early. You had some venture capitalists in the valley who banned handshakes [in early February].  Those types of people are always assessing the probability of 1 or 2 percent and the type of returns you can get from that. That’s the tech investor strategy. But that’s not necessarily the way you would want the press to act.  I think a lot about the idea that we’re also competing within information ecosystems. You’re competing for attention and eyeballs, and it’s very difficult to turn probabilistic, incredibly hedged, nuanced ideas into something that can get in front of people. It’s always been in our nature, in the press to get important work out to people. And sometimes [to do that] you have to frame things in a way that couches some of the nuance.   That’s a long way of saying, I think that we should constantly be reckoning, as people of the press, with what we’re doing right and wrong.  You can listen to the full episode by subscribing to The Ezra Klein Show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, Stitcher, or wherever you get your podcasts. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Are Democrats getting rolled on coronavirus stimulus?  The most recent bill — stimulus 3.5, I guess we’re calling it — “falls short even as an interim measure,” wrote the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. Republicans blocked aid to revenue-starved states and cities. They blocked a proposed increase to food stamps. Liberals were aghast to see the $25 billion in money for coronavirus testing — which came with a requirement for a national testing strategy — described as a win for Democrats because the Trump administration wanted to leave the disaster to the states.  “There is an enormous amount of bluffing going on among Republicans, who need stimulus measures just as much as Democrats,” writes my colleague Dave Roberts. “Sooner or later, if Democrats don’t want to get steamrolled, played, and blamed for the next six months, they are going to have to call some of those bluffs.” Behind this is an unusual bargaining dynamic: Democrats are acting as the governing party even though they’re in the minority. They’re fighting for the baseline policies that any normal administration, Republican or Democrat, would be begging for right now.  “From the very beginning, this administration made the decision that there was no legitimate role for the federal government to play in responding to this crisis,” says Sen. Chris Murphy (D-CT). “It wasn’t an accident they didn’t request any money in the early days. They really believed, as they believe today, that this is a problem states and local governments should confront.” This is an inversion of the traditional relationship between the White House and the opposition party. Typically, in a crisis, the administration would be pushing to do more, do it faster, and the minority party would be deciding whether to block those efforts or attach their own ideological priorities onto them. That’s because the administration knows it will be blamed for failure. But the Trump administration has refused responsibility for this crisis, and it has repeatedly wanted both less funding and less authority than congressional Democrats want to give it. “It’s the executive branch who normally takes control in a situation like this, and they haven’t,” says Sen. Brian Schatz (D-HI). “As a result, Democrats have stepped into the breach to minimize suffering. There are a lot of keyboard pundits who view this as a forfeiture of leverage, and I understand what they’re saying. But we have to be very clear: They’re talking about using suffering as leverage. That is what the Republicans do, not what we do.”  The result is that instead of acting like a minority party, Democrats are using much of their leverage to force Republicans to act like a majority party. Democrats are fighting for the policies that, if they work, Republicans will later take credit for. The testing program is a good example. Democrats forced the Trump administration to accept responsibility for a national testing strategy over the White House’s objections. But if the money and the strategy work, it’ll be Trump who runs on that success in November.  “We’re in a world where we control only a third of government,” says Rep. Ro Khanna (D-CA). “We’re negotiating with Donald Trump and Mitch McConnell. The response is bolder than 2008. The irony is, a Republican Congress would never have given this to Obama in an election year. They didn’t give it to him in his first year of the presidency. We have been far more responsible about how we’re operating.” He’s right, and that’s exactly what’s frustrating some liberals. Democrats tried to be responsible for the eight years of the Obama presidency, all while they watched McConnell and the Republicans light their priorities on fire and threaten to crash the economy. If there was any comfort in being the minority party during a national crisis, it’s that at least Democrats would be freed to negotiate with the reckless aggression Republicans displayed for the entirety of the Obama era.  But that’s not how it has played out. Democrats, now as then, are desperately negotiating for more stimulus to preserve essential economic functions, and Republicans are dismissing the aid as “blue state bailouts” and warning that deficits are too high. Democrats, now as then, are pushing for more economic support, while Republicans are calling for less. But because a Republican holds the White House and the GOP will reap the economic whirlwind in November, Senate Republicans have, in general, accepted the Democratic push for more economic support.  As a result, Democrats are achieving policies that would be impressive if they were in the majority. In a matter of weeks, they’ve passed more economic support than across the entirety of the Great Recession. The $600 weekly increase to unemployment benefits — the product of fast, smart negotiating by Sens. Ron Wyden (D-OR) and Michael Bennet (D-CO) — means many are seeing their incomes rise even though their jobs are lost, a recessionary generosity that would have been unthinkable even a few years ago. It speaks volumes that the debate is over whether the policy is too generous.  Which isn’t to say the support passed so far is sufficient: It isn’t, which is why another bill is being planned, of which I’ll say more in a minute. But there’s no doubt that this is the fastest, largest legislative response to an economic crisis on record. And Democrats have largely prioritized getting the rescue packages passed over including some of their longer-term goals, a decision that has frustrated many liberal activists.  In my conversations with congressional Democrats, they bristled at the idea that they should take the zero-sum approach to policymaking that they perceive Republicans as having taken when Obama was president.  “There is enormous suffering, and if we do not respond with the boldness and the scale that this crisis demands, then that suffering will continue,” says Rep. Pramila Jayapal (D-WA). “I think it’s important for us to not allow ourselves to be pulled into a place where we don’t define the agenda, given that we are in the position of really defining where the solution is going to land.” For Democrats, an ideological asymmetry has become a strategic asymmetry. Democrats want to convince the country of the government’s worth. Republicans want to convince the country of the government’s worthlessness. If Washington collapses into dysfunction and paralysis now, when the country needs it most, congressional liberals don’t see that as helping their long-term effort to rebuild trust in public institutions.  “It’s like the old saying that Republicans believe the government is incompetent and then get elected and prove it,” says Schatz. “They don’t want the federal government to work and we do. That’s what’s going on here, and I don’t have a quick, facile solution to it. If we engage in a zero-sum game, we’ll just accelerate the death spiral that is Grover Norquist and Mitch McConnell and the Koch brothers’ dream.” Politically, what Democrats are doing is working, and what Republicans are doing isn’t. While Trump hasn’t seen his poll numbers fall during the crisis, he hasn’t seen anything like the bump that other world leaders and US governors are experiencing. And congressional Democrats are seeing a polling boost, too.  There are more economic support bills to come, though, and as the crisis wears on, Democrats are going to come under more pressure to play hardball. One obvious place is on automatic triggers — legislative provisions that ensure economic support will continue so long as unemployment remains high. No congressional Democrat I spoke to thinks there’s a chance in hell Republicans will keep voting for economic support if a Democrat wins in November. Building in automatic triggers now would be good policy and good politics. And if Democrats don’t use Republican cooperation to build in those triggers now, they’re almost guaranteeing terrible economic pain if they happen to win later. Similarly, there’s much that the stimulus packages have left undone. Health care is a particularly glaring example. Jayapal and 30 other House Democrats are proposing a plan to open Medicare to the unemployed and to expand Medicaid to 300 percent of the poverty line for the duration of the crisis. That’s both good policy and, in terms of Democrats’ longer-term goal of expanding Medicare coverage to more Americans, good politics.  Democrats are right to think that they bear the weight of responsibility in this crisis. But you can worry so much about appearing responsible that you become irresponsible — and not being willing to force a fight over state and local aid, health care expansions, and automatic triggers tips into irresponsibility. “I don’t think we’ve been rolled,” says Jayapal. “But I think that the whole set of circumstances has been challenging. And we have not responded yet at the scale of the crisis that we face.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   Even as some states start reopening, there’s little sign the coronavirus pandemic — or most of its adverse economic effects — will end anytime soon. But the $600-per-week lifeline the federal government extended to newly laid-off Americans will.  The aim of that money is two-fold: to keep millions of newly jobless Americans and their dependents financially afloat in a time of great economic uncertainty, and to keep them at home and not potentially getting exposed to the coronavirus at work. But these expanded benefits will run out in late July, after which Americans will have to fall back on smaller amounts of state benefits. A new bill introduced by Rep. Dan Kildee (D-MI) would extend the amount of time people who are unemployed due to the coronavirus can stay on the federal government’s expanded unemployment insurance until December 31, 2020.  “We can’t have these short-term interventions for what will be a long-term problem,” Kildee told Vox in a recent interview. “We need to scale the response to the actual crisis.” Kildee’s bill would also:  In essence, Kildee is trying to ensure people who are laid off or impacted by the coronavirus economic crisis after July 31 still have a safety net to fall back on. “We’re going to see rolling layoffs, somebody could get laid off in October or September,” Kildee told Vox. “What we’re trying to do with this legislation is realistically frame the benefit to what we think the course of the crisis actually looks like and be realistic that we’re in this for a while.” Kildee introduced the bill as the House is working on its draft of the next coronavirus relief package, which will largely focus on getting money to states, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi has said. But given the depth of the economic crisis, Democrats are also looking at the possibility of either extending expanded unemployment insurance or extending the amount of time laid-off people can be on their state’s unemployment benefits. He’s hopeful this bill, which has 53 cosponsors, makes it into the next package, or at least goes into effect before July 31 rolls around.  It’s a medium-term idea, one that goes further than the immediate Band-Aid Congress slapped on in March and addresses the crisis’s continued impact on Americans beyond the summer. But it doesn’t go so far as other options floating around Capitol Hill, like one by Sen. Michael Bennet that would increase the federal government’s role in the unemployment insurance system long term. Even so, other House Democrats admitted Kildee’s bill could have a steep climb in the Republican-controlled Senate, where Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has signaled he wants to be cautious about further federal coronavirus spending.  “Dan is painting a picture where it’s going to be really tough for the rest of the year, and I respect that,” Rep. Don Beyer (D-VA), vice-chair of Congress’s Joint Economic Committee, told Vox. “But it has to get through Mitch McConnell and the president, too.” As the CARES Act currently stands, laid-off or furloughed workers impacted by the coronavirus (including freelancers and self-employed people) can apply for unemployment insurance through their state. The federal government is now providing $600 extra per week, on top of each state’s base weekly benefit. However, that expanded benefit will run out at the end of July unless Congress extends it. And as of yet, there’s no guarantee the economy will snap back into shape by mid-summer. Beyer’s committee recently released a report citing a sobering statistic from the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office: Unemployment could remain at 9.5 percent by the end of 2021, especially if social distancing measures continue throughout the rest of this year. For comparison, peak unemployment during the Great Recession was around 10 percent. “The biggest question for the economists has been V shape, U shape, L shape [recovery],” Beyer said. “No one says V shape. The economists are saying U shape, and the decisions we make could determine how flat that U is.” In other words, we still don’t know when the economic situation we’re in will end, but no one thinks there will be a quick, steep recovery after this precipitous decline. And it’s entirely plausible this drags on for many people, as my colleagues Emily Stewart and Dylan Scott explained, past the end of July.  That’s where Kildee’s bill steps in. Here’s what it would do. “We want to make sure they have some safety net available for them,” Kildee said. Kildee’s bill is one of a few others on Capitol Hill relating to UI, including a bill from Sen. Michael Bennet (D-CO), who is looking at something called “automatic stabilizers.” The idea behind Bennet’s plan is that the federal government should step in to fund unemployment insurance when there’s a sudden dip in the national economy due to an emergency, and then ease up on federal funds when things return to normal. As Vox’s Dylan Matthews explained: The plan would vastly ramp up “extended benefits,” the long-neglected part of the UI system mentioned above that is already part of the unemployment insurance law, and adds emergency money during large downturns. Bennet’s plan would fully federally fund the program, taking pressure off states, and trigger extended benefits automatically when the unemployment rate spikes, or if it ever exceeds 6.5 percent. It would set benefits to 100 percent replace wages, up to a maximum level (set at 80 percent of the median wage) during public health emergencies like the coronavirus. Kildee’s plan instead has a set date for when expanded UI would stop, focusing on the immediate problem. It’s a plan that anticipates a continuing US economic crisis and expands the safety net to prepare for it.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. In 2010, the moral philosopher Kwame Anthony Appiah made a list of practices that he believed people in the distant future will condemn our generation of humanity for, much as people in the 21st century almost universally condemn slavery or the denial of women’s suffrage. His four candidates were the American prison system, which cages about 2.3 million Americans at any given time; the exploitation of animals in factory farms; the abandonment of America’s elderly (and the elderly of many rich countries) in nursing homes; and environmental degradation. My friend Avi Zenilman, a journalist turned nurse, sent me Appiah’s piece a few weeks into the coronavirus pandemic, when Appiah’s list started to read like a premonition. Excluding the environment — climate change specifically, which has gotten a temporary respite as we do much less carbon emitting under quarantine — Appiah’s list doubles as a rundown of the most prominent and brutal vectors of Covid-19 in the US. Coronavirus outbreaks have been reported at carceral facilities across the country, including pretrial detention centers like Rikers Island where most inmates have not yet been convicted of the offense with which they’re charged; one prison in Ohio reported that 78 percent of inmates tested positive. More humane states are releasing prisoners simply to avoid a medical catastrophe that feels inevitable if they stay caged. The Tyson, Smithfield, and JBS meat production companies have shut down pork plants that collectively produce 15 percent of America’s pork due to coronavirus spread. Tyson’s CEO took out a full-page newspaper ad warning that the nation’s food supply is breaking down. That’s a ludicrous exaggeration (experts say the US isn’t about to run out of food), but it is true that the factory farming industry is particularly vulnerable to Covid-19 and poses a pandemic risk generally.  Nursing homes for both older people and those with disabilities are likewise seeing widespread coronavirus outbreaks. The Washington Post analyzed news reports and state data releases and found almost 1 in 10 nursing homes in the US have reported coronavirus cases. The Kaiser Family Foundation estimates that in the 23 states for which data exists, 27 percent of deaths from Covid-19 have occurred in nursing homes. In several states, like Massachusetts and Pennsylvania, most deaths have occurred in nursing homes. It’s not a coincidence that Covid-19 is foregrounding these institutions. This crisis has cast a spotlight on inequalities that have plagued American life for decades, and it is forcing us to look seriously at how we relate to one another. Social distancing has a way of clarifying social reality, and America’s social reality is one of haves and have-nots. If I were more religious, I would say this feels like a biblical plague, a force beyond our control identifying our worst societal sins to get us to finally pay attention. But that would be incorrect, because in many ways the spread of this virus is within our control. That the coronavirus has ripped through the US via these vectors only underscores how complicit Americans have been in making ourselves more vulnerable to this disease. What factory farms, prisons, and nursing homes have in common is that they’re warehousing efforts. They all involve placing people or animals into confined facilities where most of society doesn’t have to think too hard about them anymore. They are institutions optimized for neglect. Few people would likely be able to eat a Chicken McNugget if each order came with a photo of the tortured chickens who were killed to fulfill that order; but because that torture takes place behind closed doors, confined to a few big facilities in rural areas and staffed by invisible low-wage workers, people are free to forget about the actual chickens and the working conditions there and eat their nuggets in peace. It’s no fluke that “ag gag” laws banning the dissemination of information about factory farms are one of the industry’s main lobbying priorities. Big corporations know perfectly well what would happen if people actually paid attention. Prisons enable governments to take people civilian society doesn’t want to deal with anymore and stash them out of sight so that average citizens can forget about them. That enables truly horrendous conditions. Groups of prisoners in Washington, DC, and Texas are so desperate that they’ve sued for access to soap, cleaning supplies, and toilet paper amid the pandemic. “On at least one unit, a closet full of cleaning supplies and clean rags is present, but residents are told they will be punished if they attempt to access or use those supplies to clean the unit, their own cells, or their hands and bodies,” the DC lawsuit alleges.  These conditions are hardly new — a one-sheet-per-day rationing of toilet paper and a ban on showering more than once a week were among policies at Attica state prison in New York that sparked a 1971 prisoner takeover there. But this neglect is increasingly deadly in a pandemic. Nursing homes are not necessarily an injustice, and there are plenty of valid reasons for families to place relatives there, or for residents to ask to be placed in homes. My family is no exception. But the same mechanisms through which nursing homes ease pressure on family caregivers make them places where widespread neglect is possible. Richard Mollot, an advocate for long-term care patients, notes that about one-third of Medicare beneficiaries admitted to nursing homes reported suffering some kind of harm within two weeks of entering the home. “These are the short-term residents for whom homes are paid the most and who are typically most able to articulate their concerns if something is wrong,” Mollot writes. “Where does that leave a majority of residents who are there long-term, most of whom are older, frail and cognitively impaired?” Warehousing leaves its victims vulnerable to Covid-19 through at least two mechanisms. First, it forces affected individuals into close proximity with one another — including those maintaining the warehouse, like factory farm workers or prison guards or nursing home attendants. It’s difficult to socially distance under those conditions.  But the second mechanism is subtler and arguably just as important. Warehousing fosters social inequality, and we know that social inequality kills. Pandemics are times of scarcity. Tests are scarce, doctors and nurses are scarce, masks and gloves are scarce. And scarce goods tend to be distributed according to existing social inequalities, because those inequalities reflect varying levels of respect paid to various groups by governments, businesses, and other social decision-makers. So it is with coronavirus. It’s fairly well-known at this point that Covid-19 has disproportionately affected black Americans. Recent data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention suggests that of Covid-19 patients for whom race is known, 30 percent are African American, more than double African Americans’ share of the overall population.  Unauthorized immigrants in detention, or working close-proximity jobs at farms and as delivery staff, or just existing in the US without access to most of the social safety net, are uniquely vulnerable too, and not just in the US but in many rich countries. Many report fear of seeking out health care because of the risk that their status will be uncovered. We see the same inequalities with factory farms, nursing homes, and prisons. Incarcerated people, especially ones locked up for violent offenses, have long suffered from politicians’, and the public’s, conviction that their past deeds make them undeserving of help. That’s especially true now, with grave consequences for both them and their guards.  Nursing home patients are victims not just of density but of a broader societal disregard toward older people and those with disabilities. Texas Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick famously suggested that Americans 70 and older should be willing to die to get the economy back running again.  Meanwhile, the Covid-19 outbreaks at factory farms aren’t among their animals but among their workers and those at meatpacking facilities, who are disproportionately black, Latino, and/or immigrants. Warehousing hurts the people enlisted to do the warehousing, too. (And, it should be noted, even though the novel coronavirus didn’t originate in a factory farm, factory farms are a pretty big pandemic risk — if not this pandemic, it may well be the next one.) None of this is an accident. Social inequality, as the political theorist Judith Shklar taught us, fosters cruelty. In unequal societies, where one group of individuals is privileged in power above others, that power differential creates the social estrangement necessary for the powerful to treat the less powerful with cruelty.  But social equality can remedy social cruelty. “If such social distances create the climate for cruelty, then a greater equality might be a remedy,” she wrote. “Even Machiavelli had known that one cannot rule one’s equals with cruelty, but only one’s inferior subjects.”  Covid-19 is not simply a natural disaster. It is a brutal reminder of the consequences of inequality Shklar identified. And it is a reminder that things can be different. The US can shrink its prisons. It can create housing laws, social supports, and other structures that enable older people to live with their families whenever possible. It can abolish factory farming, for both the animals’ and the workers’ sakes.  Pandemics are social phenomena, and addressing pandemics requires attacking social inequalities head-on. Sign up for the Future Perfect newsletter and we’ll send you a roundup of ideas and solutions for tackling the world’s biggest challenges — and how to get better at doing good. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  Hundreds of demonstrators — some of them heavily armed — crowded into Michigan’s state Capitol Thursday afternoon to protest against Democratic Gov. Gretchen Whitmer’s shelter-at-home order. The demonstration began outside the Capitol early in the day in heavy rain, but later in the afternoon, police allowed several hundred protesters — many not wearing masks — inside the building itself. Protesters stood in the gallery while others attempted to gain access to the House floor, cramming themselves into the entryway chanting “Let us in!” They were held at bay by the chamber’s sergeant at arms. Protest moves inside Michigan Capitol. Crowd attempts to get onto Hoise floor. Lots of Michigan State Police and House sergeants at arms blocking door. pic.twitter.com/4FNQpimP4W While not all the protesters were armed, there were some armed men in the crowd inside. Michigan is an open-carry state, and people are allowed to openly carry inside the state Capitol, though signs and banners are banned from the building to prevent potential damage to the architecture.  Democratic state Sen. Dayna Polehanki tweeted that some of her colleagues had worn bulletproof vests to cast their votes.  Directly above me, men with rifles yelling at us. Some of my colleagues who own bullet proof vests are wearing them. I have never appreciated our Sergeants-at-Arms more than today. #mileg pic.twitter.com/voOZpPYWOs Journalist Anna Liz Nichols of the nonprofit news organization Michigan Advance tweeted that she was hit by the butt of a protester’s rifle, later clarifying that she’s “completely fine.”  As the protests progressed, chants of “lock her up,” and “heil Whitmer,” broke out inside the Capitol building. At the MI Capitol pic.twitter.com/IuYoBhstIg The “American Patriot Rally” was organized in response to a vote being debated in the state legislature Thursday on whether to continue Michigan’s state of emergency, which was declared on March 10 to address the coronavirus pandemic.  The Republican-held legislature ultimately voted to revoke the emergency declaration Thursday as protesters looked on. Republican state legislators are now preparing to sue the governor over her shelter-at-home order, despite a state court ruling Wednesday that said the order was constitutional.  As of April 30, Michigan has over 41,300 confirmed coronavirus cases and over 3,700 deaths, according to state government data.  Whitmer’s shelter-at-home order has been in place since March 23, but she loosened the order’s breadth in her latest extension last Friday, allowing landscapers, lawn-service companies, plant nurseries, and bike repair shops to reopen under strict social distancing measures. The order also allows some outdoor recreational activity to be resumed. According to NBC News, a group called Michigan United for Liberty (MUFL) organized Thursday’s rally. The same group organized the first protest against social distancing in the state on April 7.  MUFL’s Facebook event group for Thursday’s protest was taken down by Facebook last week, according to VICE News. Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg told Good Morning America on April 20 that groups organizing social distancing protests classify as “harmful misinformation” and said the company would take down posts promoting such events. Michigan has been a hot spot for right-wing protests against the governor’s social distancing policies. On April 16, a different conservative group, Michigan Conservative Coalition, along with the Education Secretary Betsy DeVos-linked group Michigan Freedom Fund, organized “Operation Gridlock” to protest against Whitmer’s executive actions. Operation Gridlock was initially supposed to consist of protesters driving around in their cars and trucks, honking their horns, and creating noise to protest against the shelter-at-home order.  But some protesters eventually left their vehicles, snarling traffic, and preventing health care workers from getting to work on time, turning the event into a makeshift political rally. Some attendees wore “Make America Great Again” gear while others displayed confederate flags. As with Thursday’s protest, some armed men gathered on the steps of the state Capitol. The next morning, President Donald Trump tweeted in support of the protest. LIBERATE MICHIGAN! The Michigan protests are part of a larger series of conservative protest campaigns against shelter-at-home orders and other social distancing policies that have spanned multiple states. Many of the protest groups rely on a small pool of conservative financiers; organizers of the actual protests are typically locally-based.  As Vox’s Jane Coaston explained, these protests in Michigan and elsewhere are partly about the specifics of the lockdowns put in place in the various states and the economic hardship they’ve created. But, Coaston says, “many of those involved in the protests are connected not by mere concern” over these policies, “but by their efforts to reelect the president.” “Trump’s political gambit requires that the coronavirus becomes a pandemic of Democratic governors and the fault of blue states while other states get right back to business as usual,” Coaston wrote. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Observers of American politics sometimes wonder why White House reporters don’t do a better job asking President Donald Trump questions that expose his obviously false claims for what they are. An exchange on Thursday showed why it isn’t so simple. During a White House press availability on Thursday, CNN’s Jim Acosta asked Trump to explain how it makes sense to blame former President Barack Obama for testing problems pertaining to a virus that didn’t even exist until nearly three years after he left office. “The last administration left us nothing. We started off with bad, broken tests, and obsolete tests,” Trump asserted, prompting Acosta to jump in and ask: “You say ‘broken tests’ — it’s a new virus, so how could the tests be broken?” 
    Related
   Acosta’s question succinctly revealed the fundamental absurdity of Trump’s ongoing efforts to pin blame for coronavirus testing problems on his predecessor. Trump, however, just plowed forward with variations of the same false claim over and over again. “We had broken tests. We had tests that were obsolete. We had tests that didn’t take care of people,” Trump insisted, before pivoting to bashing Obama and former Vice President Joe Biden for their handling of the 2009 H1N1 flu outbreak, which killed about 12,500 Americans. (As of April 30, the coronavirus has killed more than 61,000 people in the US.) Trump never answered Acosta’s question. Watch: .@Acosta: You say you had "broken tests" from Obama -- the coronavirus is a new virus, so how could the tests be broken?TRUMP: "We have broken tests. We had tests that were obsolete. We had tests that didn't take care of people." (None of this makes sense.) pic.twitter.com/r7oobJNFU2 Trump has been using this particular “Pants on Fire” lie for weeks now, even though anyone with a basic understanding of how time works can easily see how absurd it is. The novel coronavirus that causes Covid-19 didn’t even exist until late 2019, and didn’t arrive in the US until January. So barring some sort of time travel, it was not possible for Obama to develop a test for a virus that didn’t exist until nearly three years after he left office. It’s total nonsense, but for those not paying close attention, it perhaps sounds plausible enough. And so Trump keeps saying it again and again and again in his efforts to distract from his government’s failure to develop and mass-produce a reliable coronavirus test during a crucial period in January and February, when the virus was spreading across the country in a mostly undetected manner. "We inherited obsolete tests" -- Trump ludicrously tries to blame Obama for the fact that the CDC he oversees failed to develop a functional test in January and February. Pence then takes the podium to try to clean up the mess. pic.twitter.com/cQ5JSOq3AU While it wasn’t possible for Obama to leave coronavirus tests for Trump, his administration did leave behind a detailed pandemic response playbook put together by Obama’s National Security Council in 2016. But instead of using it, Trump fired the government’s pandemic preparedness team in 2018, and later spent six weeks after the coronavirus arrived in the US downplaying it at every turn. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The evening before her DC-bound flight on April 26, Libby L. called American Airlines to inquire how full the plane would be. The 29-year-old New York City resident, who declined to share her last name for privacy reasons, wanted to know if she would have another passenger sitting beside her and if the airline would seat travelers according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s social distancing guidelines. She was heading to the DC metropolitan area to stay indefinitely with her mom, who’s recovering from severe laryngitis.  “I was told American Airlines was doing their best to social distance passengers, and it sounded like people would be seated in every other row or seat,” Libby told me of her customer service call. “The representative did say someone would be sitting beside me, but that I could ask the gate agent to change my seat because my flight wasn’t sold out.” The coronavirus pandemic has triggered a historic slowdown in air travel: Airlines are reportedly flying planes with much smaller passenger loads, decreasing the number of available flight routes, and offering absurdly affordable fares. More than 300 million people in 42 states are under state or local stay-at-home orders, and yet every day, hundreds of thousands of travelers like Libby are still flying in the United States. That number is a drop in the bucket compared to the 2 million-plus travelers the Transportation Security Administration used to screen daily before the coronavirus pandemic, but flights are still filling up — some close to capacity, according to passengers. Libby approximates her own was about 85 percent full.  JetBlue announced on April 28 that the carrier would require all passengers to wear a face covering or a mask and is continuing to thoroughly disinfect its aircrafts. Within a few days, several other airlines — including Alaska, American, Delta, Frontier, Southwest, and United — announced they will implement similar requirements in May. Alaska, Delta, and United have also been keeping their middle seats vacant. American Airlines was criticized in late April for operating flights that appeared to be nearly at capacity, with passengers forced to sit close to each other. A Twitter video of a North Carolina-bound flight from New York showed almost every seat in the main cabin occupied. The woman who posted the clip was sitting in a middle seat and wrote, “I’ve never felt less safe or cared for in my entire life.” Another American passenger, who recently flew from Miami to New York City, told the New York Post that nearly half the people on her crammed flight were not wearing masks. Well silly me thinking that an airline would adhere to social distancing guidelines. Currently abroad a nearly full @AmericanAir flight and I’ve never felt less safe or cared for in my entire life pic.twitter.com/sx5STfHKBI Since late March, the US has been the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak and recently surpassed 1 million confirmed cases. In these circumstances, the most responsible thing to do is stay where you are and travel only if you have to. People across the country have been fleeing high-density cities for rural areas, a phenomenon that has potentially contributed to community spread in smaller towns. However, most of the recent travelers I spoke with considered their flights essential: Libby was helping take care of her sick mom; a couple was returning home to New York after being stuck in Florida for several weeks; and a Denver-based author was visiting a relative undergoing emergency surgery. They assured me they took the risk of coronavirus seriously by wearing masks and gloves on flights, wiping down their personal spaces, and trying their best to distance themselves from others. Some felt, though, that the airlines didn’t do enough to promote safety and social distancing among passengers and crew members. When Libby arrived at her terminal in LaGuardia Airport and found her flight fairly full, she wasn’t able to change her seat. “I travel frequently, and this was one of the calmest boardings I’ve ever seen,” she said. “Most of the rows ahead of me were two people per side of the aisle and were full, and I had a person sitting next to me.” As a passenger, Libby “felt misled” by the conversation she had with the American Airlines, adding that if she was shown a photo of the final seating arrangement, she “wouldn’t have boarded the plane.”  Curtis Blessing, an airline spokesperson, didn’t directly respond to my question about whether American was implementing social distancing guidelines or specifically capping the number of passengers on its flights. “On flights through May 31, American is limiting the number of passengers on each aircraft,” Blessing wrote to me via email. “As part of this limit, American will not assign 50 percent of main cabin middle seats or seats near flight attendant jump seats on every flight, and will only use those middle seats when necessary.” He added that gate agents are continuing to reassign seats to create more space between customers, and passengers are offered “options to create more room, including rebooking on other flights.”  A senior couple who’d been residing in West Palm Beach, Florida, for the past couple of months had booked multiple Southwest flights trying to get back home to Long Island, New York, according to their daughter Caroline, who I spoke with on Twitter. Several of their earlier flights had been canceled, and they were finally able to fly in on April 28. Caroline, who didn’t travel with her parents, posted on Twitter to complain that Southwest didn’t comply with social distancing measures on her family’s flight. What was even more egregious, in her opinion, was that flight attendants were not masked or requiring passengers to wear masks. “I understand my parents made the risky decision to fly, but the conditions are beyond unsafe and do not comply with what the CDC has required,” she told me. Brian Parrish, a Southwest spokesperson, responded via email that flight attendants are encouraged “to invite customers to space out at comfortable distances” if empty seats are available. He added that the carrier has an open seating policy that makes social distancing easier, and customers have been asked to not occupy the first or last three rows to separate themselves from crew members.  “We haven’t announced plans to limit capacity at the present time; although, our CEO did mention in today’s earnings call that the measure is under consideration to support social distancing,” Parrish wrote, adding that passengers are boarding in smaller groups so they can maintain distance. Flight attendants are also allowed to wear face masks and are offered personal protective equipment by the airline, according to Parrish. US airlines decreased their commercial flight routes by more than 60 percent by late April, according to global travel data provider OAG. With reduced service, it’s possible there are now fewer options travelers can choose from, which could lead to more crowded planes. Two Delta passengers I recently spoke with, however, said that the carrier did a good job in spacing out passengers on their flights. Tone Frink, a 28-year-old Atlanta resident who was visiting his daughter in Orlando, Florida, said that after settling in on the plane, he felt relaxed since most passengers were taking precautions. “I chose to travel over the health risk at hand, but I did feel safe and comfortable enough to return home,” Frink told me over Twitter. Almost everyone on board was wearing a mask, and he felt that Delta had “a safe layout plan” for travelers. Angie Cavallari, an author and Denver resident, took a Delta flight on April 16 to be with her aunt in Atlanta, who was undergoing emergency surgery. Cavallari told me there were only 25 to 30 people on her first flight, and Delta allowed her and other passengers seated in the back rows to board early. While on board, she was given a plastic bag with pre-packed snacks, a water bottle, and anti-bacterial wipes, and Cavallari added that “this was the cleanest” plane she’d ever been on. Flight attendants and about half of the passengers were wearing masks. “I thought Delta did an excellent job,” Cavallari said. “My assigned seat, whether it was deliberate or not, happened to be at the back of the plane and I was beyond 6 feet away from anyone else. The majority of the people were also seated at the front of the airplane.” While her return flight on April 20 was more crowded, Cavallari told me she was seated far away from anyone else and wasn’t worried.  “I don’t want to speak to the other airlines, but I do want to say that if a company follows the guidelines put forth, people should be able to travel safely,” she said. While most people are isolating in their homes, Cavallari acknowledged that in certain situations, some people still need to travel. “I wouldn’t advise anyone sick or with a compromised immune system to fly, but if I really had to fly tomorrow, the pandemic wouldn’t deter me from doing so.” Update May 1, 2020: This article has been updated with information about how most US airlines are requiring passengers to wear masks. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.In early April, President Donald Trump’s job approval reached 46 percent in FiveThirtyEight’s poll aggregator — its highest level since January 25, 2017, and a 6-point increase since early November. It has since drifted back down to 43 percent. If Trump received any bump from his handling of the coronavirus outbreak, it was unusually small and short-lived.  International comparison is useful here. Leaders in most peer countries saw big increases in their Morning Consult polling numbers by mid-April compared to a month earlier, when the World Health Organization declared Covid-19 a pandemic. Canada’s Justin Trudeau has seen a 16-point bump; Scott Morrison of Australia a 25-point increase; even the largely unpopular French Prime Minister Emmanuel Macron has seen his job approval rise 8 points.  These across-the-board increases are examples of what political scientists call the “rally-round-the-flag effect,” a term used to describe the temporary boost in popularity that leaders get during a crisis. But it’s not only heads of state who have seen their citizens rally around them — Democratic and Republican state governors across the US have seen big increases in popularity as well, many upward of 15 points in various polls, compared to a Morning Consult baseline at the end of 2019.  This raises an important question: Why has Trump’s approval bump been so small relative to most other leaders at home and abroad?  One theory is that the Trump administration’s late and botched response to the coronavirus has dragged down the president’s popularity. There’s some data behind this intuition: According to two recent polls, 65 percent of Americans say either that Trump did not take Covid-19 “seriously enough at the beginning” or that he was “too slow to take major steps” to address the situation. But plenty of other leaders have had huge popularity boosts despite their own flailing responses. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s overall favorability is up 27 points despite criticism for his hesitance to push for more drastic measures early in the crisis. The UK’s Boris Johnson, who came under fire for his government’s infamous “herd immunity” strategy in mid-March, has seen an 18-point bump. Even Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte, whose initial response has been viewed as a cautionary tale of what other countries should avoid, saw his administration’s approval rating shoot up from 27 to 71 percent.  As my colleague Matt Yglesias points out, “If anything, European data seems to suggest bigger bounces for leaders with less effective responses.” (One major unknown is Spain, for which there is currently no good polling data.) However, it does seem to matter how long that ineffectiveness lasts. A common thread among Cuomo, Johnson, and Conte: Despite fumbling their initial responses to Covid-19, they quickly changed course and began implementing clear, focused public health measures informed by scientific consensus. Voters might forgive an initial display of incompetence in the face of a novel threat if their leaders quickly adapt and steer the ship in the right direction.  Trump, it seems, has not earned much forgiveness. After denying the severity of the outbreak well into March, Trump looked as though he was beginning to change course. But then he reversed once again. He began saying that the cure of social distancing was “worse than the problem itself,” claiming the country would reopen by Easter, and endorsing unproven (and possibly dangerous) therapeutics. Last week, he even suggested that injecting people with bleach might be a potential treatment (seemingly prompting hundreds of calls to poison centers seeking guidance). "The disinfectant, where it knocks it out in a minute, and is there a way we can do something like that by injection inside, or almost a cleaning. It gets in the lungs" -- Trump seems to suggests that injecting disinfectant inside people could be a treatment for the coronavirus pic.twitter.com/amis9Rphsm Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis offers a useful point of comparison here. As the Tampa Bay Times reports, DeSantis has pushed unproven coronavirus therapeutics, dismissed advice from health experts, spread misinformation, refused to schedule regular public briefings, and shut down his state unusually late. So far, voters have treated him the same way they’ve treated Trump: DeSantis has also been denied a pandemic bounce, with different surveys ranging from a 5-point drop to a 1-point bump in his job approval. “I can’t tell you what will happen in November,” Vanderbilt political scientist John Sides says. “What I can tell you is that Trump’s failure to get a large approval bump means that Republicans have left a lot on the table. That’s probably going to hurt them.”   Behind the polling bumps that leaders get in times of crisis is the support of political elites who normally oppose them. During a war or after a terrorist attack, opposition party leaders will often join with the president or prime minister in a show of national unity — and that’s a signal to their voters to get in line, too.  We live in a polarized political era, but structural polarization is probably not the primary factor driving down Trump’s approval bump. A new nationwide survey found that residents in all 50 states thought their governors were doing a better job of handling the coronavirus outbreak than Trump. And governors in deeply divided purple states — like Gretchen Whitmer in Michigan, Tony Evers in Wisconsin, Roy Cooper in North Carolina, and Mike DeWine in Ohio — have seen some of the largest surges in popularity.  “Governors do tend to be seen through less partisan lenses than presidents, which could explain some of the difference,” said Patrick Murray, the director of the Monmouth Polling Institute. “However, the amount of movement [in approval ratings] we’re seeing for governors no matter what state they are in suggests the lack of movement for Trump is unique to him.”  What’s been striking about Trump’s political response to the coronavirus is how little he has done to try to foster any sort of unity. Since the coronavirus outbreak, Trump has called House Speaker Nancy Pelosi a “sick puppy” and lashed out at Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer. He’s initiated Twitter spats with state governors. He’s blamed former President Obama for the testing failures and shortage of medical supplies. He’s insulted reporters who dare to ask him basic questions at press briefings as “third rate,” “horrid,” and “a disgrace.” He’s called Whitmer “Half Whitmer” and said she’s “way in over her head.”  I love Michigan, one of the reasons we are doing such a GREAT job for them during this horrible Pandemic. Yet your Governor, Gretchen “Half” Whitmer is way in over her head, she doesn’t have a clue. Likes blaming everyone for her own ineptitude! #MAGA LIBERATE VIRGINIA, and save your great 2nd Amendment. It is under siege! After the passage of the bipartisan CARES Act, Trump broke with both traditional and accepted political best practice and only invited Republican leaders to the signing ceremony. Given a chance to visually take credit for bringing both sides together to deliver much-needed help to unemployed Americans and struggling businesses, he chose to construct a visual that omitted any Democratic backing for the bill he was signing. “The vast majority of what is causing the lack of movement in Trump’s approval rating comes down to who Donald Trump is,” Murray told me. “You can’t imagine any other person who could have gotten up day after day playing so strongly to his base or criticizing in schoolyard terms other officials around the country.”  There’s been a lot of focus on how the Trump administration was technically and strategically unprepared for this crisis — and that’s true. But there’s also a way in which Trump himself was not temperamentally or ideologically prepared for it either. Trump built his political career atop fracture, conflict, and polarization. But he’s just collided with a crisis that demands solidarity, unity, and mutuality. “If there’s any president I would expect no rally effect for, it would be Trump,” said Adam Berinsky, a political scientist at MIT whose research focuses on public opinion during wartime. “I would bet a considerable amount of money that if we had Marco Rubio as president, things would look differently.” Economic collapse tends to be a disaster for incumbent presidents, especially if it occurs in an election year — and we are witnessing a pace of economic disintegration so staggering that only the Great Depression can compare.  There is some evidence that the link between the economy and presidential approval has become “increasingly untethered,” as a study by several political scientists put it last year. But that’s the case in ordinary times — and what we are living through is anything but ordinary.  “When we’re in normal economic times, it’s easy for partisans to engage in motivated reasoning about political and economic performance,” Ellen Key, a political scientist at Appalachian State University and one of the authors of the aforementioned study, said in an email. “However ... when the economy is performing unambiguously well or unambiguously poorly, it’s a lot harder to engage in these biased evaluations.”  Experts forecast that GDP could fall 30, 40, even 50 percent this quarter, any of which would be unprecedented in the history of the measurement. In a conversation with my colleague Ezra Klein, Scott Gottlieb, the former Food and Drug Administration commissioner, made it clear that even if we do everything right — from scaling up mass testing to surging health care capacity and more — the best we can hope for is an “80 percent economy” until a vaccine emerges. That sounds like a hopeful number, but it still represents an economic downfall of Great Depression-like proportions — the political implications of which could be devastating.  The fact that Trump has received such a small bump at the outset of this crisis — when approval ratings tend to rise most rapidly — will make a later recovery, amid a worse economy, difficult. “This doesn’t mean Trump will for sure lose” in November, Sides says. “But we will be able to say he had an opportunity to change a historically low approval rating — and he failed to do that.”  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Millions of newly laid-off Americans are now wondering how to access government unemployment benefits as they scramble to cover rent, groceries, and other daily necessities. Vox is here to help readers navigate the bureaucracy.  Congress has significantly expanded unemployment insurance as part of its historic $2 trillion CARES Act, signed into law by President Donald Trump. Laid-off or furloughed Americans who file for unemployment through their states will see an extra $600 per week added on to that existing state benefit. The average benefit in the US is about $385 per week, but some states are more generous than others.  There are a few key things to know about this new law, as my colleague Dylan Matthews recently explained. First and foremost, it adds $600 to every weekly unemployment check. Second, more people now qualify for unemployment insurance than before. The law creates a new program called Pandemic Unemployment Assistance for freelancers, independent contractors, or gig economy workers who previously were ineligible for unemployment insurance.  The law also makes benefits easier to access by waiving some states’ requirements for people to look for work. These programs will provide people the increased assistance for four months — late March until July. And with many states still setting up their Pandemic Unemployment Assistance programs, benefits will be paid out retroactively. That means even if workers can’t apply for benefits until May, they will ultimately still receive what they are owed from the time they were laid off. 
    Related
   “The UI provisions in the CARES Act were some of — if not the — strongest provisions of the act,” said labor economist Heidi Shierholz of the Economic Policy Institute and formerly part of the Obama administration. “It will alleviate the hardship of millions of people.” People who have already filed for regular unemployment benefits because they were laid off from a job should be starting to see the expanded benefit show up in their checks. The process could be a bit more complex for contract or self-employed workers who need to file for Pandemic Unemployment Assistance and are waiting for states to set up these programs. But because so many people are filing for unemployment all at once, it is causing frustrating delays. Many are experiencing jammed phone lines, and many state unemployment websites have crashed with the high demand, including states like New York, Florida, and Michigan.  “The system’s a little clogged up right now,” said Michele Evermore, a senior policy analyst at the National Employment Law Project. “People should keep trying.” Evermore noted that even if some workers are being told they’re not eligible immediately, that could change in the coming weeks as states start receiving the federal money and set up the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program.  “The states need resources in order to administer the UI,” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi told Vox recently. “Some are much better prepared than others or just have a different timetable. So one of the things we may have to do is get more resources to the state agencies that do this.” Vox crowdsourced common questions from readers and contacted experts to answer them. Here’s our guide on how to access unemployment benefits, who is covered, and much more.   Here’s a chart that shows each state’s minimum and maximum weekly unemployment benefit, as well as a link to each state’s unemployment office. People can apply online or over the phone, though many states are recommending online applications due to busy phone lines.   Each state has its own guidance, but due to high demand, some states are advising people to call on certain days or at certain times depending on the alphabetical order of their last names or order of their Social Security numbers. Check your state’s website to find out if there are specific guidelines. The CARES Act opened up unemployment benefits to a range of people who weren’t eligible before, including gig economy workers like drivers for Uber or Lyft, freelancers, and independent contractors. Part-time employees who lost their jobs due to coronavirus will also be covered, as will people who had to stop working to take care of a sick member of their family or homeschool their children. Bottom line: If coronavirus is responsible for your layoff, furlough, or drastic reduction of your hours — or is preventing you from looking for work because fewer employers are hiring — you have a good chance of getting these expanded benefits. It’s worth applying even if you are unsure if you’ll be covered.  People who are working from home but still getting a full wage are not eligible for benefits. Undocumented immigrants are not eligible; neither are new entrants into the workforce, like recent college graduates, because they don’t have a long enough work history to apply for benefits.  States ask for some basic information during the application process, including: This means keeping documentation about your previous income and wages is key. This information can be found on your W-2s, paystubs, or invoices if you are a freelancer or independent contractor.  This will vary state by state, but the extra money should have started to appear in people’s weekly checks — it could longer for those still waiting for their applications to go through. It takes time for the US Department of Labor to coordinate with state unemployment agencies to get the money flowing. While some states have their Pandemic Unemployment Assistance programs up and running, others are still setting their programs up. Depending on what state you live in, it could take longer for freelancers and independent contractors to get their benefit.  “The disaster benefits, they’re going to take a little time to develop the intake,” said Andrew Stettner, a senior fellow at the Century Foundation.  All told, the extra $600 per week will add up to around an extra $10,000 over four months. If there is a delay in it showing up in people’s paychecks (which there likely will be), people will be getting retroactive pay in their first paychecks to make up for the lag time.  “That is a way to get a lot more money to people who really need it,” said Stettner. “It has the ability to prevent some of the real damaging parts of unemployment: reducing your savings, food security, having trouble maintaining your housing.” Unlike a more permanent layoff, a furlough is a temporary period of unemployment — with a promise that the employee will return to work when economic conditions improve. But the big difference here is that while furloughed employees forgo their wages, they keep other benefits like health insurance. Employees who have been furloughed due to coronavirus will be eligible for expanded unemployment insurance. Freelancers, gig economy workers, and independent contractors will file for unemployment insurance from a new program called Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, which is still being set up by the Labor Department and states and could take longer to be ready in some states (Washington state, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and other states have announced their programs will be ready to take applications by the end of April, while other states like Ohio and Arizona will start accepting applications by mid-May). When the program is available, it can be accessed on state unemployment websites where people apply for regular UI. Check your state’s website for guidance on when and how you should apply, if you fall into this category. “Gig workers will need to file for PUA first, and then they will get the $600,” said Stettner. “This is the new program part of the law and will take the longest to set up — the pandemic program for gig workers et al.” Keeping documentation about your previous income and wages as a freelancer, independent contractor, or self-employed worker is important and will help you when filing for unemployment. Keep documentation both about how you get your money and how much you have been paid per month in the past (old tax returns and invoices are good examples). “Whatever documentation they have about how they get their money would be helpful,” Evermore added. If people are lacking documentation, they can file good-faith attestations about their wages to unemployment offices, but documents are preferred. Though part-time workers are eligible for expanded benefits, the answer to this question depends on whether the weekly earnings from the second job erase the partial benefit credit you’d get from unemployment, Stettner said.  “In simplest terms, the closer the pay of the second part-time job they have is ... to the first part-time job they lost, the less likely they are to get benefits. The bigger the difference, the more likely to get benefits,” he said. Again, you are eligible for the expanded unemployment benefits. Having documentation here is also important if you can get it; for instance, having both your offer and a written statement rescinding or postponing that offer that you can send to your state’s unemployment office can be helpful when filing for unemployment.  “However you found your offer was rescinded, keep that handy,” Evermore said.  Yes. Anyone who has exhausted their regular unemployment insurance can get a 13-week extension on their benefits. Once that extension is exhausted, workers can apply for Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, Evermore said. “That can go up to 39 weeks total,” she added.  People who are close to graduation and looking for jobs are in more of a bind because of their limited work history. There’s a provision in a bill from House Democrats that would allow recent college graduates to qualify for something called a “job seekers allowance,” about half of the benefits available for the rest of workers. But unless Congress passes a provision to allow this, recent college graduates are in a tough spot.  In many states, congregations don’t pay unemployment insurance and employees aren’t eligible for unemployment. So unless the specific employer has decided to voluntarily participate in unemployment insurance, employees of churches, synagogues or mosques likely won’t be eligible in most states.  However, Stettner and Evermore said it depends on how the US Department of Labor interprets the language of the CARES Act. If the new pandemic program is treated like a standard disaster relief program, church, synagogue, and mosque employees could be covered — but that won’t be determined until Labor provides more information about how the program is being implemented.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Under a new bill from Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-MA) and Rep. Jan Schakowsky (D-IL), a new federal agency would take responsibility for eliminating protective gear shortages and other supply scarcities critical to the coronavirus response. The legislation, to be released on Thursday and shared first with Vox, seeks to remedy the critical supply shortages reported in some Covid-19 hot spots. It also serves as a counter to President Donald Trump’s reluctance to exploit the full power of the Defense Production Act  (DPA) to address those problems. The bill would set up a new Emergency Office of Manufacturing for Public Health within the US Health and Human Services Department. That agency would be charged with guaranteeing “an adequate supply of drugs, devices, biological products, active pharmaceutical ingredients, and other supplies necessary to diagnose, mitigate, and treat COVID-19 and to address shortages in products used to treat non-COVID conditions and illnesses,” according to a summary of the bill. The office could enter into contracts with private manufacturers to produce those supplies or it could assume responsibility for manufacturing itself. The bill text authorizes the federal government to construct manufacturing facilities if necessary to perform that work. Separate from addressing supply needs, the bill would also authorize the government to construct facilities that could produce vaccines and other therapeutics as soon as they become available. If the bill were to become law, the office would be required to begin its work within one month of its passage. Once supplies are produced, the government must provide them to federal, state, local and Native American health programs at no cost. They could be sold to private or international entities at a fair price. The office would also be charged with replenishing the national strategic stockpiles that have been depleted during the Covid-19 outbreak. “We need to radically increase our supply of personal protective equipment and other medical supplies to attack the coronavirus crisis head-on. We have an Administration that is failing to lead and failing to ensure health care providers and patients have the resources they need,” Warren said in a statement. “Our bill will rapidly produce the equipment and supplies Americans are counting on. The president won’t act, but Congress should. Our bill needs to be included in the next relief package.” The odds of the bill being enacted seem low. Previous legislation from Warren and Schakowsky that shared many similarities, which authorized the federal government to produce generic drugs in the case of shortages or egregious price hikes, did not attract any co-sponsors. Republican Senate leaders have been ambivalent about providing funding for state and local governments; giving the federal government the authority to manufacture supplies itself, circumventing the private market, seems very unlikely. Nevertheless, the Warren-Schakowsky proposal represents an aggressive vision for harnessing the federal government’s authority to address the supply shortages seen in some parts of the country during the coronavirus crisis. The bill would authorize the government to assume the intellectual property rights to patented products (such as pharmaceuticals) in order to perform its duties, with the patent holder to be compensated with royalties or a one-time payment. Mask shortages, in particular, have plagued the Covid-19 response in some hard-hit areas. In mid-March, Premier Inc., a major supplier to US hospitals, reported it had seen demand for surgical masks double from what they usually see: 55 million versus the typical annual demand of between 22 million and 25 million of the N95 masks that are the standard for health care workers. Health care workers at several major health systems told Vox in the early days of the pandemic that they feared for their safety because of lax protocols put in place at their hospital because of supply shortages. “They’re not protecting us. They’re taking away our masks,” one nurse said. “The one thing we are all worried about is we are shedding the virus to the most vulnerable populations.” Certain medications have been in short supply during the crisis: drugs for patients being put on ventilators, for example, as well as some drugs that have been hyped by the White House and conservative media as possible treatments for Covid-19. America’s efforts to ramp up its testing capacity have been hampered by shortages of swabs and other materials necessary to conduct and analyze those tests, as Vox’s German Lopez has written. Trump has at times been hesitant to exploit the full power of the federal government to address those shortages, offering confusing and flat-out wrong justifications for not doing more. The DPA isn’t about wholesale nationalization, but rather a temporary fix to an urgent problem. As Vox’s Alex Ward explained last month, states often wound up competing for the same equipment without clear federal guidance. Warren and Schakowsky are proposing a plan to address these shortfalls without relying so directly on the president’s prerogative.  Their legislation is targeted to the coronavirus pandemic specifically. Warren’s office said that if this bill and their generic drug manufacturing bill were to become law, “the infrastructure would continue to exist for the federal government to leverage its manufacturing capabilities to respond to future emergencies.”In the week or so after my 5-year-old’s Washington, DC, school closed, my wife or I used to take him sometimes to the playground across the street so he could ride his scooter to burn some energy. He was prohibited from using the climbing equipment, but with appropriate disinfecting, I would let him swing on the swings. Anytime we went, we would see other kids scooting, biking, running, or swinging.  We’d also see adults using the perimeter of the soccer field as a running track, while on the interior some parents kicked or tossed a ball around with a child. The benches were mostly used by grown-ups as ersatz gym benches for a variety of workouts.  We could also from time to time see people behaving irresponsibly at the park — either parents allowing small children to play on the climbing structure, which was riskier than I was willing to do, or else younger kids or teens playing basketball, which involves too much physical contact to follow social distancing guidelines. In response to this kind of activity, the mayor ordered the parks and playgrounds run by the city government to close and worked with the federal government to close some but not all of the numerous federally managed parks in DC.  As an emergency measure, these kinds of broad closures may be the best the US could do. But as America settles in for a long haul of social distancing during the coronavirus pandemic, it doesn’t seem to be well-grounded in the evidence. Transmission of the virus from runners or people walking around outside looks to be unlikely and possibly even less likely in the warmer days to come.  The risk that people recreating outdoors will behave irresponsibly is a problem, but the country doesn’t have systems in place to prevent irresponsible indoor behavior, so it’s not clear why closing outdoor spaces would exacerbate the situation. The US also isn’t trying to prevent people from going outside at all, so closing parks may make other spaces like sidewalks or the random parking lot where my kid now does his scootering more crowded.  What’s more, while much about the science of the SARS-Cov-2 virus and Covid-19 is somewhat uncertain, the science about the benefits of outdoor activity is clear, and it makes sense to lean more heavily on the more certain aspects of our knowledge.  It’s time to give people more freedom outside.  The well-known examples of large-scale coronavirus spread have involved big groups of people being cooped up in confined indoor spaces — whether that’s cruise ships, nursing homes, prisons, or Singaporean migrant worker housing. The other major known vector of transmission relates to prolonged direct contact with sick people. Lots of health care workers get infected because they are taking care of Covid-19 patients. Lots of households see one family member get sick and then the infection spreads to the rest of the house.  Picking up germs from a chance encounter with a stranger outdoors is theoretically possible, but infectious disease experts consider it unlikely.  None of this is to say that it’s advisable to get together with 27 of your friends in the closest park, sit in a tight circle, and chat unmasked for four hours. The initial concern about basketball games where sweaty, heavily breathing people are shoving and bouncing off each other for an extended period of time seems valid. But to the best of the available knowledge, there is little risk that a person behaving responsibly will become infected via someone briefly passing inside their 6-foot perimeter. And there’s decent evidence from the tuberculosis and flu studies that risky activities are less risky when done outside.  As with most other aspects of this pandemic, unfortunately the knowledge base is not as solid as one might like. And we have to admit it’s possible this could turn out to be wrong and some idiosyncratic features of this virus make it highly prone to outdoor transmission. But the balance of evidence thus far says that’s not the case. Experts caution that it’s still important to maintain 6 feet of physical distance from other people but are broadly supportive of the idea that outdoor spaces are less risky places to be. And we need to weigh the uncertainty of our knowledge about this with the well-established fact that it’s healthy for people to go outside and move around.  More than 1,000 park and public health organizations have signed a letter supporting outdoor recreation with appropriate safeguards during the pandemic.  You have probably heard that it’s healthier to go take a walk in a park than to sit on your couch watching television.  I am not at all an outdoorsy person and rarely take this advice. It is, however, pretty well-supported. Indeed, not only is exercise healthy in general, but it appears to boost immune system function. In normal circumstances, most people have sufficient vitamin D levels, but they are boosted by spending time outside and may aid in immune functioning.  As Zeynep Tufekci writes in the Atlantic, going outside can also mitigate some of the psychological downsides of prolonged isolation: Mental health is also a crucial part of the resilience we need to fight this pandemic. Keeping people’s spirits up in the long haul will be important, and exercise and the outdoors are among the strongest antidepressants and mental-health boosters we know of, often equaling or surpassing drugs and/or therapy in clinical trials. Stress has long been known to be a significant suppressor of immunity, and not being able to get some fresh air and enjoy a small change of scenery will surely add to people’s stress. We may well be facing a spike in suicides and violence as individuals and families face significant stress and isolation: The Air Force Academy initially imposed drastic isolation on its cadets due to the coronavirus, but had to reverse course after two tragic suicides. Domestic violence is another real concern: Not having a place to go, even for an hour, may greatly worsen conditions in some households. None of these effects are so enormous that they’d be worth running major risks of infection over. But as far as we know, the actual risk is low, while the benefits, though modest, are clear. What’s important is that people behave responsibly, which closing parks does not necessarily encourage.  The concern about opening parks appears to be driven by viral images shared on social media of occasionally overcrowded beaches, park-adjacent parking lots, or other outdoor venues.  In those cases, it’s correct for officials to disperse crowds or shut down facilities that are being misused.  But photographic evidence of outdoor misbehavior doesn’t mean outdoor settings are unusually prone to rule-breaking, and we don’t know what’s happening inside people’s houses. Even though it’s against most guidelines, the US is not in a practical sense doing anything to stop people from visiting their friends or throwing dinner parties.  People seem to be mostly following the rules due to a healthy mix of self-preservation, concern for others, and shame. If large numbers of people choose to willfully disobey public health guidance, it’s not really clear what the government could do about that. So far, though, it hasn’t been a big problem. And opening up more parks and beaches doesn’t change the fundamental calculus.  
    Related
   One government official expressed concern to me that if the information that outdoor transmission is less likely is publicized, then people will become more likely to meet up with their friends in a low-risk outdoor venue and the net effect will be counterproductive.  But nothing about the relatively low risk of outdoor transmission changes the fact that it’s safer to avoid your friends than to hang out with them. And the odds seem low that the government is going to successfully suppress accurate public health information in order to manipulate people. More fundamentally, closing parks doesn’t make it impossible for people to go outside; it just makes outside spaces more crowded. As long as people are allowed to go outside, the best way to minimize crowding may be to open up as much space as possible.  Selectively closing perceived overcrowding hot spots — beaches in most jurisdictions, the National Arboretum and Kenilworth Aquatic Garden here in DC — may feel like an effective way to reduce crowding, but it tends to squeeze people into fewer and fewer places.  Governments should make rules and try to enforce them, not close all public spaces. State parks in Maryland, for example, have done a good job of shutting down indoor facilities and play structures while keeping trails and open spaces available for recreation. There’s been a gentle but clear police presence at every state park I’ve visited over the past month, which seemed sufficient to keep the vast majority of people following the rules. Yet even within that framework, Maryland has closed the beach portions of its parks, though all the same considerations should apply.  And what works for state parks and national parks could also broadly work for city parks. Specific unsafe activities can be prohibited without closing down public spaces. The basic coronavirus problem is not going away anytime soon, and we need to find ways to make living with it tolerable.  On some level, the outdoors question comes down to officials’ level of trust in the public.  If we let people play tennis, can we count on them to keep their distance and avoid playing doubles? If we let families go for picnics in the park, can we count on them to avoid turning them into play dates? If we let people swim in the ocean or sunbathe on the beach, do we trust them to not go throw wild parties? The skepticism is somewhat understandable.  From a public communication standpoint, there is something appealing about the unambiguous notion of ordering people to stay home. At the same time, millions of Americans aren’t staying home because they’re working the essential jobs that keep society running. Can we really tell someone who spends all week working in a drugstore or delivering food for a restaurant that we can’t trust him to push his kid on a swing (disinfected with wipes, of course) on the weekend? In a world where some people have huge backyards or vacation getaway houses, does it make sense to tell working-class people they have to spend all summer stuck inside? Fundamentally, the process of digging out from the effects of the coronavirus pandemic isn't going to work unless we can count on people to be reasonably good about adhering to public health advice. That’s important to do at parks and beaches, but it’s important everywhere. And if people go outside safely, it’s a healthy and sanity-boosting way to spend time that helps make extended quarantine more endurable. It’s time to open up the great outdoors.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. It’s long been the consensus of experts that more Americans are dying in the coronavirus pandemic than the official figures indicate. But exactly how many? This week, the first estimate of how many more people have perished was published in the Washington Post, using one of the best methods commonly used by researchers: measuring excess deaths. And it was a grim one. The Post, in partnership with researchers from the Yale School of Public Health, estimated that 15,400 more people died between March 1 and April 4 than would ordinarily have been expected, a substantially higher toll than the 8,128 coronavirus deaths that were reported over that time by government agencies. Ordinarily, the researchers project the US would have had a little more than 50,000 deaths in the studied period, but the actual deaths were more than 60,000. Not all of those excess deaths were necessarily directly a result of Covid-19. As the Post reporters wrote, mortality in a pandemic is a complicated recipe: The excess deaths are not necessarily attributable directly to covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus. They could include people who died because of the epidemic but not from the disease, such as those who were afraid to seek medical treatment for unrelated illnesses, as well as some number of deaths that are part of the ordinary variation in the death rate. The count is also affected by increases or decreases in other categories of deaths, such as suicides, homicides and motor vehicle accidents. But in any pandemic, higher-than-normal mortality is a starting point for scientists seeking to understand the full impact of the disease. “Determining the cause of death is more of an art than a science, and guidelines can change,” Daniel Weinberger, who led the Yale School of Public Health researchers, told me. “There are likely many more people who died of coronavirus-related causes than who have ‘coronavirus’ listed as a cause of death on the death certificate.” Then again, you also have to account for how many of the people who died from Covid-19 might have died anyway, given poor health, as well as the lives saved because, for example, fewer people are driving automobiles during a period of nationwide lockdowns.  “One way to avoid these biases is to look at what happens to rates of death due to any cause,” Weinberger said. His team created a regression model that adjusts for the seasonal variations in mortality and changes in mortality over time. They accounted for flu activity as well. The bottom line, according to Weinberger: “With all those complexities, we still see that there were about 15,000 excess deaths from March 1 to April 4. This is about 1.5 to 2 times higher than the reported number of Covid-19 deaths at the time.” And if anything, that is probably the floor. Experts including Weinberger agree the death counts are likely to be revised upward as more reporting come in. Tallying deaths always takes time because of inconsistent reporting across states. “As we gain more detailed information on the causes of death, we will learn more about whether Covid-19 caused them directly, or whether the many disruptions, both to health care, and economic disruption, could have caused many of the excess deaths,” Ellen Meara, a health economics professor at Harvard, told me over email. “What is remarkable to me about the sheer number of excess deaths is that this spike in deaths has occurred despite some trends that we expect to lower deaths during Covid-19.” More than 58,000 Americans are confirmed to have died from the coronavirus as of midday on April 29. As the Yale study suggests, that number is likely low. In some respects, it is no mystery why more people have died during the coronavirus pandemic than the government figures indicate. The officially reported number of Covid-19 deaths generally comes from hospitals. People who die at home may not be counted if they are never tested for the coronavirus. Instead, they may have a pulmonary embolism or heart attack listed as their cause of death, even if Covid-19 was the catalyst for their passing. “People who die at home are least likely to be counted, particularly since we are seeing some people dying of pulmonary embolism or other clotting,” Natalie Dean, a biostatistics professor at the University of Florida, said. “It would be hard to identify COVID-19 as the cause of the death there unless they are doing postmortem testing,” she said. “I assume there is more postmortem testing now than there was earlier, but when tests were in really short supply, I have to imagine postmortem testing was very rare.” New York City has already revised its death count upward to account for nearly 4,000 people assumed to have died of Covid-19 but who were never tested for it. The city is now up to 17,700 reported deaths, as of April 29. Future official revisions may be made, but this is one advantage of the approach taken by Weinberger and company: it simply counts how many people are dying overall, of any cause, and compares it to a hypothetical reality with no Covid-19. Undercounting coronavirus deaths isn’t only an American problem. The Financial Times analyzed data from 14 countries and found 122,000 excess deaths above what would be expected. Spain has seen 27,600 more deaths than usual in March and April; Italy is up to 21,500, and France 16,500. A separate FT analysis of England and Wales estimated that Covid-19 is killing twice as many people as the government has attributed to the crisis. And these numbers are really a baseline. “Revisions AAAAALLLLLWAAAAAAAYS go up,” Lyman Stone, an economist and adjunct fellow with the American Enterprise Institute who has studied mortality rates, told me over email. Using a methodology to account for expected revisions, he is preliminarily projecting that excess deaths could exceed 60,000 or more in March and April. I didn't want to be the first one to publish a US excess death number because I thought it was reckless at this point buthey since we're doin' ithere's a better estimate than what's shown there pic.twitter.com/nCo6NW7F1v You get the point. The coronavirus’s toll is likely worse than we know right now. The big question is why. In all likelihood, some of the 15,400 excess deaths measured in the Yale study were not the direct result of Covid-19. So why else are so many more people dying in a pandemic? One of the most obvious candidates is the strain on the American health system from coronavirus, which is leading people to die from causes they might otherwise not have — think of a mild heart attack or a complication if somebody with a chronic condition runs short on medicine and can’t see their doctor to get a prescription filled. This was a fear from the start, as medical facilities revamped their operations to focus on Covid-19, and emergency responders were inundated with a record number of calls. “It‘s possible that emergency response teams, hospitals, and nursing home facilities overburdened with coronavirus have been unable to effectively prevent deaths from other causes they would ordinarily have been able to,” Jessica Ho, a USC sociologist who studies mortality, said.  The interruptions to routine care for people with chronic conditions could also be to blame, with primary care practices postponing many outpatient services and furloughing staff. As I wrote recently on the dramatic downturn in primary care visits during the outbreak: “Within my lifetime, I have not seen anything of this magnitude,” Ateev Mehrotra, a professor at Harvard Medical School who led the study, told me. He also said that “our real concern is those patients who might have deferred a visit and they’re going to have a flare-up of their chronic illness.” In a worst-case scenario, that could lead to patients dying at home — a person with heart failure, for example — who might not have if they’d been able to see their regular doctor. This will add to the death toll of Covid-19, but it will be hard to fully measure. Dania Palanker, an assistant research professor for the Center on Health Insurance Reforms at Georgetown’s Health Policy Institute and a chronic care patient herself, worried about people recently diagnosed with diabetes or heart disease who won’t be able to get that critical first appointment with a new doctor. “You can’t delay those appointments for a few months.” The mental health toll of the current economic crisis caused by the coronavirus and accompanying lockdowns could also be driving up deaths, several experts told me. (There are indications domestic violence is increasing during the pandemic, though it’s not clear if that is translating to a rise in deaths.) “We know that reported levels of anxiety and depression are rising, and claims for unemployment insurance are at historic highs,” Meara said. “All of these could contribute to increased death from suicide, as prior economic downturns suggest.”  On the other hand, other causes of deaths might be down because of the pandemic and stay-at-home orders. Car accidents are one obvious candidate. Pollution is down, and that could be a boon for health. Some people with physically demanding jobs are working less, which could also be resulting in fewer deaths than would otherwise occur. Throw all these ingredients together — uncounted Covid-19 deaths, other preventable deaths from a health system overload, the health toll of record unemployment, and then saved lives because people are driving less and other behavioral changes — and you get a fuller picture of the coronavirus’s toll. The Yale researchers provided a preliminary figure; Stone’s personal estimates anticipate excess deaths will continue to mount. This data is a reminder that a pandemic can take a toll beyond the damage caused by the pathogen itself. But first and foremost, when excess deaths are twice as high as the official coronavirus death toll, it’s a clear indication that we are not doing a good job of counting all the deaths that are the direct result of this virus. As Josh Michaud, associate director for global health policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation, told me: “In all likelihood, many of these excess deaths can likely be attributed to Covid.” This story appears in VoxCare, a newsletter from Vox on the latest twists and turns in America’s health care debate. Sign up to get VoxCare in your inbox along with more health care stats and news.  Get our newsletter in your inbox once a week. Are you interested in more discussions around health care policy? Join our Facebook community for conversation and updates. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  About half of US households have lost income due to the coronavirus pandemic, according to a new poll, but the same survey found that a majority of Americans nevertheless want to keep most social-distancing practices in place. To be sure, the new NPR/PBS Newshour/Marist poll (conducted April 21 through April 26) found that the economic devastation is only increasing as the pandemic continues. The number of adults who said that they or another member of their household had either lost their job or seen their hours reduced because of the pandemic (50 percent) more than doubled from 18 percent in last month’s poll. The polling data of 1,008 US adults backs up the hard statistics showing the the sudden collapse of the economy due to the virus. Over the last five weeks, over 26 million Americans have filed initial claims for unemployment, throwing family budgets all over the country into chaos.  In response to the job losses, many conservative politicians, governors, and President Donald Trump have either begun calling for states to reopen, or actually lifting shelter-at-home orders, effectively reopening individual state economies, albeit with restrictions. Georgia, South Carolina, and Tennessee were among the first states to begin the reopening process, and several more, like Colorado, were close behind. In Iowa, Republican Gov. Kim Reynolds has moved to partially reopen 77 of the state’s 99 counties on May 1, and the state government has said that any employee not returning to work because of the pandemic will be cut off from state unemployment benefits. According to the NPR poll, and another new survey from Morning Consult, most Americans seem to be weighing their lives versus their livelihoods a little differently. Protests against individual state shelter-at-home orders have drawn widespread media coverage throughout the country, however it seems those pushing for lifting such order represent a small minority of Americans. Polls have consistently shown that the majority of people in the US do not want to relax social distancing guidelines or lift shelter-at-home orders until more is done to combat the effects of Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus. Eighty percent of those responding to the NPR poll said they do not want schools, restaurants or large sporting events to start taking place again until there is more testing. Nearly two thirds (65 percent) said they do not want to go back to work without more thorough testing. A Politico/Morning Consult poll of 1,991 registered voters conducted April 24-26 showed that nearly three in four (73 percent) voters said the US should continue social distancing measures even if it further damages the economy. Just 15 percent of voters said social distancing measures should be lifted even if it means further spreading the virus. Beyond the immediate policy concerns. however, most voters expect the pandemic to continue. Seventy-nine percent said a second wave of the virus is likely or somewhat likely, and only 9 percent said it is unlikely. Despite the fact that Trump and the White House have released a plan for states to ease restrictions and many states are beginning to reopen, just 19 percent of voters expect social distancing guidelines to end within the next two months. And that’s probably a correct prediction — and a safer path — based on what countless experts have said about the continued lockdowns. In places like Germany, where a second wave may have hit shortly after it began reopening, caution has been prioritized. Dr. Deborah Birx, one of the White House coronavirus task force’s top public health officials, said Sunday that Americans should expect to practice social distancing through the summer. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.The Apple-Google coronavirus exposure notification tool is one step closer to its planned mid-May release. On Wednesday, the companies announced that a beta version of the application programming interface (API) is being released to developers for the public health authorities who will be incorporating the tool into their digital contact tracing efforts. As contact tracing becomes an increasingly hot topic in the Covid-19 pandemic, details of the new tool built by Apple and Google are coming into focus. In late April, the companies offered updates that included a closer look at how the tool will work on smartphones, information about additional privacy features, and a new name. Apparently, Apple and Google are backing away from the term “contact tracing.” Their tool is all about “exposure notification.”  As previously reported, the first phase of the rollout will be an API that will allow iOS and Android devices to exchange anonymized proximity keys using Bluetooth. Apple and Google have now revealed that the Bluetooth metadata from the devices will be encrypted, so it can’t be used to try to identify a device. Public health authorities will then be able to build their own contact tracing apps using this API, and they will set the exposure length, the amount of time the two devices need to be near each other in order to exchange keys. The maximum allowed exposure time will now be 30 minutes. Again, this will make it harder to link a rotating key to a specific user.  Additionally, app developers will be able to provide users with some general details about their exposure and their risk of catching the virus, based on their distance from and how long they were in proximity to an infected person. Public health authorities will be responsible for determining the parameters of those exposure risk levels on their respective apps. Apple and Google have not yet revealed which public health agencies they are working with, but the companies did say the API will only be available to them.  The public health authority apps in phase one will be opt-in, meaning users will have to download the apps and give them permission to access certain data. Once the app is installed, the user’s device will generate a daily key every 24 hours as well as keys that change every 10 to 20 minutes and broadcast from the device for contact tracing. These keys will also be randomly generated, Apple and Google have said, rather than derived.  As the companies already explained, the keys make it possible for someone who tests positive for Covid-19 to quickly alert their recent contacts. They just report their positive test results to the app, which will then inform everyone with whom they’ve recently exchanged keys that they were potentially exposed to the virus. Apple and Google also revealed new details of the second phase of the tool’s rollout, which involves baking the contact tracing feature into the operating systems of iOS and Android devices. We already knew that this next iteration of the tool, which will be available in the coming months, will allow contact tracing features to run in the background of any device, whether it has a public health authority app installed or not. Now Apple and Google say that alerts about possible exposure will appear in the device’s notification center. There will also be a new interface that will allow the user to turn the Bluetooth beaconing on or off.  In order to prevent abuse and encourage use, Google and Apple have repeatedly said they designed the tool with privacy, transparency, and user control in mind. The tool was already mostly earning praise from privacy advocates for these measures — with a few exceptions — and these updates seem to solve some of the remaining concerns. One of these concerns is related to public health authorities being able to add their own privacy-compromising elements to the apps they build using the Apple-Google API. Company representatives said on a media call that they’re still creating guidelines for public health authorities but that their apps would be subject to the same terms of service as every other app on their platforms, and that features such as location tracking would require user consent, just as is true for all other apps.  It does seem as though Apple and Google’s privacy-first mindset isn’t meshing with some of the countries they hope to serve. France has asked Apple to allow its contact tracing app to run in the background (as in, constantly broadcast and collect Bluetooth keys even if the app isn’t actively being used) while sending that data back to the French government. But the Apple-Google API will only allow this to happen for apps that keep that data on devices, for privacy reasons.  Contact tracing has emerged as part of many countries’ visions for how to safely scale back isolation and social distancing efforts. While traditional contact tracing involves employing people to talk to infected individuals and then trace down those they’ve been close to, digital contact tracing using devices like smartphones is seen as the most efficient way to track the spread of the virus. Different nations around the world have tried different methods to accomplish this, some more privacy-preserving than others. Apple and Google’s tool is widely seen as one of the better efforts here from a privacy perspective, and that’s an attractive selling point for an opt-in feature that works best when everyone is using it. Oh, and about that terminology. Apple and Google have replaced the “contact tracing” label with “exposure notification.” The companies said they believe it better describes what the tool does, and that it’s only part of a public health authority’s contact tracing program. This seems a bit trivial, but it’s actually a good reminder that these apps and their deployment are run through public health authorities, and it’s up to those authorities to make sure positive test cases are properly vetted. Meanwhile, it’s essential that populations that may not have access to iOS and Android devices are included in their contact tracing programs. Apple and Google aren’t doing this alone. Update, April 29, 1:00 pm: This article has been updated with news that a beta version of the API has been released. Open Sourced is made possible by Omidyar Network. All Open Sourced content is editorially independent and produced by our journalists. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   President Donald Trump’s latest comments about the United States’ coronavirus testing problem come straight out of the playbook he used to downplay the coronavirus problem in January and February. That’s not a reassuring thing. Trump seems to be in denial about the reality that experts say the US needs to more than double its daily coronavirus testing capacity in order to safely relax stringent social distancing. To hear him and other White House officials like Jared Kushner tell it, states already have more than enough testing resources to get on with reopening schools and businesses. (Governors disagree.) Trump’s dismissiveness of the testing problem was demonstrated by his most recent press conference on Tuesday. The president responded to questions about the state- and private sector-centric testing plan he unveiled the day before — one that, even if executed properly, would fall far short of what’s needed — with a mix of brazen lies, nonsensical deflection, and wishful thinking. “We are the best in the world in testing. We’ve tested much more than anybody else, times two. Or every country combined — we’ve tested more than every country combined,” Trump said, falsely, as the US has not even come close close to doing more testing than all other countries combined. “We inherited a very broken test, a broken system, and a broken test,” Trump continued, seemingly trying to blame his predecessor — President Obama, who left office in 2017 — for his own government’s costly initial failure to develop an effective test for a virus that didn’t even exist until late last year, let alone reach the US until he had been in office for three full years. REPORTER: Experts say the US needs to do 5 million tests per day to safely reopen. Why doesn't your testing plan go that far?TRUMP: "We inherited a very broken test." (The coronavirus didn't even exist until nearly 3 years into his term as president) pic.twitter.com/XjlIxbmMjg As illogical as his responses might be, Trump’s effort to shift blame is meant to obfuscate from the fact that while the raw numbers of tests completed are piling up thanks to the passage of time, the per-day numbers continue to fall short. According to the Covid Tracking Project, the US is currently conducting about 220,000 coronavirus tests a day. Experts broadly agree that at least 500,000 per day is needed, and some think as many as 5 million daily tests are necessary to adequately identify and contain Covid-19 outbreaks. The testing plan Trump unveiled on Monday would only get the US up to about 260,000 tests a day by the end of May — a slight improvement over the current state of affairs, but one that still falls far short of what’s needed.  
    Related
   But when Trump was asked on Tuesday if he’s confident that the country can do 5 million tests a day soon, his response bordered on the delusional. “We’re going to be there very soon. If you look at the numbers, it could be that we’re getting very close,” Trump said, ignoring that 260,000 is nowhere near 5 million — and that such a sharp uptick would require the sort of increase in the production of test materials that’s proven impossible so far. “We’re gonna be there very soon.” Trump says the US is "getting very close" to conducting 5 million tests per day (the US is currently conducting about 200,000 tests per day, so this is a lie) pic.twitter.com/1IrUboariP Those comments were troublingly reminiscent of what Trump was saying about the coronavirus back in February and March, when he was insisting everything was under control and the virus would go away on its own, “like a miracle.”  Those claims were obviously false at the time, and look even worse 1 million confirmed US cases and nearly 60,000 deaths later. Trump’s claims about testing are likely to also age poorly, and even more so if he keeps pushing for states to reopen businesses and schools without the testing capacity needed to keep the virus under control. Trump, however, made it abundantly clear on Tuesday that he’s still engaged in wishful thinking. Pressed by a reporter about how he can be so confident that the worst of the pandemic is behind us even as deaths continue to mount and no vaccine or effective treatments are available, Trump expressed blind faith, then pivoted to talking about his hopes for a sharp economic rebound in time for November’s election. “I think what happens is it’s going to go away. This is gonna go away,” Trump said, adding later: “I really believe that fourth quarter is gonna be, maybe tremendous.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell’s suggestion that maybe states and cities should just go bankrupt amid the coronavirus-induced economic crisis they’re facing has not been particularly well-received. A big part of the issue: As the law stands right now, states can’t declare bankruptcy. But the controversy points to a broader problem states across the country are facing — their costs have skyrocketed and their revenue has plummeted, and unlike the federal government, they can’t run a deficit. They’ve got to balance their budgets so that they take in what they put out. And right now, a lot of states are sounding the alarm that they’re going to need to make deep spending cuts unless the federal government steps in. New Hampshire Gov. Chris Sununu, for example, warned his state could need to make $500 million in cuts next year. Missouri Gov. Mike Parson estimated he’ll have to cut $700 million and has already put a pause in $227 million in state funding. Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti has said he plans to furlough thousands of city workers. The problem — at least with most states and cities — isn’t that they’ve managed their finances particularly poorly. It’s that they’re in the midst of an unprecedented crisis.  “States have balanced budget rules to keep them from doing things that are fiscally imprudent. In practice, when we’ve hit recessions that’s led to difficulty,” explained Kim Rueben, director of the state and local finance initiative at the left-leaning Urban Institute. States are able to raise more tax money when the economy is doing well, not when it’s doing poorly, even though that’s often the time when it needs money for things like unemployment and health care most. Many states have rainy day funds to cover downturns — the 50-state total recently hit $75 billion. “Not all of the states were good, but on average, they had actually put money away to try and handle what is your normal economic cycle,” Rueben said. “What we are entering into right now is not normal in any way, shape, or form.” States and cities are coming under an enormous amount of financial pressure amid the coronavirus crisis, and while the federal government has provided some relief, many leaders and lawmakers are calling for it to do more in follow-up legislation after the $2.2 trillion stimulus package signed into law in late March. And last week, McConnell offered an alternative to support: Perhaps states should just declare bankruptcy. “I would certainly be in favor of allowing states to use the bankruptcy route. It saves some cities. And there’s no good reason for it not to be available,” he said in an interview with conservative radio host Hugh Hewitt. “My guess is their first choice would be for the federal government to borrow money from future generations to send it down to them now so they don’t have to do that. That’s not something I’m going to be in favor of.” The reaction to his comments was swift. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo called McConnell’s remarks one of the “saddest, really dumb comments of all time” and emphasized the dark message this would send to the markets and to the world about the state of the American economy. “You want to send a signal to the markets that this nation is in real trouble? You want to send an international message the economy is in trouble? Do that,” he said. But under federal law, states can’t declare bankruptcy. So McConnell would have to change the law. Municipalities have been allowed to declare bankruptcy since 1937, but the only option for states is just to not pay their debts. Jim Saska at Roll Call explained: In casual conversation, “bankrupt” and “broke” may be interchangeable terms. But bankruptcy is a legal process in which a person, company or municipality reorganizes its debts. It happens when an entity is insolvent — when there isn’t enough money to pay everyone what they’re owed. Companies also have the added option of shutting down and selling assets to pay off as much of the debt as possible. One reason for bankruptcy to be unavailable to states is that they have the ability to raise taxes, and thus get the money to pay their debts. State bankruptcy thus risks being used for political purposes. States defaulting on their debts is rare — the last time it happened was Arkansas in 1933 during the Great Depression. McConnell has suggested that federal money to the states right now would be used to “bail out state pensions.” And while pension funds are indeed a chronic challenge in some states, that’s not what’s going on right now. What’s happening right now is we’re in a pandemic. “Trying to blame the current need for federal assistance on things like public pensions seems dishonest to me and is sort of laying the blame of where are right now at the feet of the wrong culprit. There are long-term issues that states are going to have to deal with, but now is not necessarily the time to do it,” Rueben said. “We need to put out the fire before we rebuild the house.” To be sure, McConnell’s suggestion that states go bankrupt could be more of a political play than an actual policy proposal. The Kentucky Republican has begun to talk about wanting to avoid a “blue state bailout” and cast this as a Democratic state issue. As Vox’s Dylan Matthew notes, he has also seemingly rediscovered he’s worried about the deficit. And it’s not just McConnell who is using city and state aid as a bargaining chip — President Donald Trump wants to use it as leverage to get cities and states to change their immigration policies.  While the state bankruptcy conversation isn’t great, a conversation about what balanced budgets require could be helpful. To back up a bit, the first state to put in place a balanced budget amendment in its constitution was Rhode Island in 1842, and other states followed. As of 2015, 46 states plus Washington, DC, have some sort of balanced budget requirement, which basically means they can only spend as much revenue as they’re bringing in. How stringent these requirements are varies by state; some experts say the only state that doesn’t have to balance its budget is Vermont, as Matthews explained: Virginia doesn’t require the legislature or governor to pass or sign a balanced budget, for example, but bans deficit carryover, which de facto requires a balanced budget. Arizona and Indiana ban taking out debt altogether, also de facto requiring a balanced budget. Colorado and Nebraska also ban taking out debt, and at least 12 other states require voter approval of new debt, greatly limiting legislatures’ ability to borrow. The concept at the core of balanced budget amendments is generally a sound one — you don’t want to be dealing with 50 states in varying levels of financial distress and health. But they become an issue in times of crisis. “In order to effectively manage our finances, we need both to have our expenditures lining up with our revenues, as a country, but we also need to have the ability to spend more than we’re taking in a year because there are certain times when ... if you don’t deal with the immediate crisis, a recession is going to get worse,” said Michael Leachman, director of state fiscal research at the left-leaning Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (CBPP).  He added, “We need the fed government to be able to have the capacity to do that. But at the state level, we don’t need states to also have that capacity, and having states be required to have balanced budgets, it assures that their finances are in order.” States can’t print money, but the federal government can. The options states are left with: They can cut their spending, or they can increase revenue, or do some combination of those things. The problem right now is that the ways states usually generate revenue — sales and income taxes — have fallen off of a cliff, and spending on responding to the crisis in areas such as health care and unemployment has skyrocketed.  And so states wind up making cuts where they can: They lay off and furlough public employees, meaning teachers, police officers, and firefighters; they make cuts to K-12 and higher education; and they scale back infrastructure spending, among other mechanisms. That creates an even bigger drag on the economy, making the downturn worse and the recovery slower. “It’s the worst possible time for that to be happening, to have another round of layoffs. It’s just going to make the recession worse, and that’s why it’s so crucial for the federal government to step in,” Leachman said. States do have some budgeting maneuvers to try to push certain expenses into different fiscal years (most state budgets run on fiscal years from July 1 to June 30), explained Josh Goodman, state economic development officer at Pew Charitable Trusts. So, for example, a payment to a school district slated for late June can be made in the first week of July. “There are things like that that states can do — that budget is still balanced on paper,” Goodman said. “In thinking about balanced budget requirements, it’s important to acknowledge that they have a very real impact on how states make budget decisions, especially compared to the federal government, but they aren’t these ironclad limitations, at least in most states.” States and cities, whether they are blue or red, translate to businesses and to people. And state and local governments can only do so much to keep their finances in check right now. The more cuts they make, the worse the economic downturn becomes, and the longer the recovery will take as well. California and Alabama, New York and Iowa, they’re all America. As I recently explained, Congress and the Federal Reserve have provided some assistance, but it is going to need to do more if it doesn’t want to make the US economy — and many people’s lives — worse: The $2.2 trillion CARES Act provides $150 billion to state, tribal, and local governments. The package also includes $30 billion for education, $25 billion for mass transit systems, $5 billion for community development block grants, $3.5 billion for child care, and $400 million for elections. And it has the Paycheck Protection Program, the $349 billion loan program to small businesses meant to support them and keep their workers employed. The Families First Coronavirus Response Act, which was signed into law in March, temporarily increases federal funding for Medicaid. The United States has a system where many of the country’s priorities are handled at the state and local level — the local school systems, colleges and universities, infrastructure, prisons and jails, the health care systems. The federal government is supposed to work in partnership with states and cities by design, the idea being that they’re closer to the ground on understanding the needs and wants of their citizens. “You want the financing of them to be solid,” Leachman said. “It’s in the national interest to make sure that that happens, and it’s another reason why it should be a no-brainer for the federal government to provide the fiscal relief that states and localities need right now.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Is the United States of America a failed state?  Looking at the American government’s response to the coronavirus, it seems that, at the very least, Americans have a failed government: This administration did not adequately assess the threat despite having at least two months to map out a plan, and it botched its response once the crisis was full-blown. We’ve paid a high price for that failure. The incompetence of Donald Trump’s administration has almost certainly cost lives. Whether this counts as a “failed state” is a more slippery question. The term comes from political science, where some people take it to mean a state that has lost its monopoly on the use of force and others define it more broadly, as a state that can no longer provide the basic services you’d expect of any sovereign government — like protecting and educating citizens.  A recent essay in the Atlantic by George Packer, author of the 2013 book Unwinding: An Inner History of the New America, makes the case that America is, in fact, a failed state. Or, to be more precise, Packer argues that we’re watching the state fail in real time. But what does that mean? And can we fix whatever is broken? Some conservative writers, like National Review’s Michael Brendan Dougherty, have quibbled with Packer’s failed state thesis, so I reached out to Packer to talk about what he really wanted to say in that piece. I’m sympathetic to his underlying argument, but I wanted to focus less on whether America meets some arbitrary threshold for failed statedom and instead discuss what’s wrong and whether the system is salvageable in his mind.  I also asked him about how the failures the US is witnessing predate Trump, and why he thinks Sarah Palin’s nomination for vice president in 2008 was a real sign that things had gone off the rails. It showed, Packer told me, that the Republican Party had become a “machine for keeping itself in power at all costs,” and the long-term consequence of that approach has been the destruction of the idea “that there’s a common good and that government can solve problems.” A lightly edited transcript of our conversation follows. “Every morning in the endless month of March,” you write, “Americans woke up to find themselves citizens of a failed state.” A failed state? Really? No, America doesn’t meet the textbook definition of a failed state. I have reported from a number of failed states — really failed states — like Sierra Leone and Ivory Coast during their civil wars, Iraq after the invasion, Somalia. Those are failed states. Here, things are still working. The police are patrolling. Ambulances are answering 911 calls. Government checks are arriving in the mail.  I was speaking figuratively, or writing figuratively, when I said that we’re living in a failed state. So what were you thinking when you wrote that? I had this terrible memory of those days in March when everyone was trying to figure out what to do about this pandemic. Do we keep riding the subway? Do we go to work? Do we send our kid to school? And there was no instruction or guidance coming from the authorities. In fact, there were lies, there were fantasies, there were dangerous musings, and I remembered thinking this is what it must be like when citizens have to take matters into their own hands in a situation where normally you would be looking to government for guidance. And in that sense, the state had failed. It was not there. It was absent. The piece is not really about a failed state — it’s about failures of the state, and that’s a different matter. I think most people can recognize a distinction between being a failed state and acting like one, and the case that we’re acting like one right now is strong — And this was a case where only the government could make certain decisions. Only the government could organize certain responses, could figure out the supply chain, the distribution network, locate the materials and the gear, coordinate with the private sector to turn to production that we needed in an emergency. Only the federal government could do those things, and it was not doing them. And in that sense, yeah, it was failing.  But in a lot of ways, civil society reacted well. People made pretty good decisions. People were deciding on their own to do what was necessary. This office is going to close down. This school is going to close down. And people were taking it seriously when they began to realize how serious it was. So I’m actually heartened by the reaction of a lot of our society, but we couldn’t do it without a federal government leading, and it failed miserably. I thought it was alarming. I still think it’s alarming. Let’s set aside the academic discussion about what constitutes failed statedom — no one really gives a shit about that anyway. Tell me one big, consequential thing that you think is fundamentally broken in America. Most immediately, what’s broken is the presidency. We have a failed president, if not a failed state. And I remember talking to a big corporate type during the 2000 election who told me, “You know, it doesn’t really matter who’s president because we have this incredible economy, we have this very advanced society, he’ll have good advisers, whoever he is.” In other words, the person at the top is like a figurehead and the rest of it will run itself.  And we sort of found out that wasn’t true very quickly in George W. Bush’s first term. But we really found out it’s not true now. The president is enormously important, and if his character is as wretched as this president’s character, and if his values and impulses are as miserable as his, then it has consequences of life and death. People are dead. Thousands of people are dead because of the character of Donald Trump.  There are, of course, lots of other things that are broken in America. Obviously, Congress, for years and years, has been unable to come to compromises and decisions about basic, chronic, serious problems from climate change to economic inequality to infrastructure decay. Interestingly, Congress has been able to spend a couple of trillion dollars very quickly in the middle of this because it’s an emergency, and senators and congresspeople understand that the public will not stand for the usual polarized mess. But it’ll come back quickly, and it’s been there for a long time. What I tried to describe in my book Unwinding is how institutions in this country are failing the people who look to them for support, how they’ve been failing them for a long time and continue to fail them today. The ground keeps shifting beneath the feet of a lot of Americans, and the federal government is not able to help.  Is it possible that we might be overreacting to Trump, that this is an anomaly that reflects a seriously compromised system but not necessarily an unsalvageable one? I’ve been asking myself that, too, because I don’t want to overreact to the emergency of the moment or get carried away with rhetoric that isn’t really sustained by reality. And yet I keep coming back to the realization that this presidency has just exposed things that were already broken and were just buried or half-hidden. Trump is this horrible accident but also a reflection of deep, chronic problems. What problems? Where do I start? It’s so damn hard to support a family in this country, to care for old parents, to raise and educate children, to get sick leave or time off, to maintain health care. We’re talking about the basic goods of life, and people across this country, people who work hard, can’t reliably count on them. These were problems long before Trump appeared. This pandemic has brought all this out in such stark ways. The workers we count on to keep us alive are showing us that they have very few rights and very little power and are disposable. They’re both essential and disposable. That’s the paradox of the new category of essential workers. The more essential they are, the more disposable they are. To me, that’s a long-term failing that weakens all kinds of bonds and connections that we can’t really afford to lose. That’s all true, and we all know it’s true. The question, which I’m not sure you really answer in your essay, is who failed here? Who or what brought us to the brink? You really lean into the big questions, don’t you? It’s part of my charm, George. I have to start with the Republican Party, which over the years has become more and more a machine for keeping itself in power at all costs. At the cost of voter enfranchisement, at the cost of transparency and clean government, at the cost of trust in government. The Republican Party has done incalculable damage to people’s idea that there’s a common good and that government can solve problems. They’ve become a nihilistic party.  It kind of began in the ’90s with Newt Gingrich and it accelerated with the Tea Party, and with Trump it’s reached its full fruition. And Jane Mayer had a pretty potent profile of Mitch McConnell in the New Yorker just the other week that really revealed what we’re talking about. If you listen to what people who know McConnell say, they’re telling you what he and the GOP have become: a party devoted to nothing but staying in power, which now means making sure that lots of people who ought to be able to vote can’t vote, which is such a destructive tactic.  We could dish out a lot of blame in other places, but I want the Republican Party at the top of the list. I’ve long thought that Sarah Palin’s nomination was a kind of Rubicon-crossing moment for the country, which in retrospect was so much more revealing than so many of us recognized at the time. You called Palin Donald Trump’s “John the Baptist” in your piece. What did you mean? I remember being in Ohio in September 2008, just after McCain picked her and she made her sensational debut at the Republican convention, and I was sitting in a diner with some Ohio women who were saying how much they liked her and how she reminded them of themselves and she could fit right in here with us, and she’s just like us.  And I remember thinking, “Why do you want to be led by someone just like you who knows no more than you do, who has no more expertise than you? Would you want your heart surgeon to be someone just like you?” It told me that there was a sense that government, among some voters, was no longer something that required expertise or qualification or excellence, but rather it was more like a show. People just wanted someone to stick it to the other side. Partisanship isn’t new, it’s as old as the republic, but partisanship leading to the collapse of standards to that degree felt new.  Trump has so many of her qualities, her love of attention and celebrity, and her willingness to say anything and her contempt for people who have an education or who sound like experts. All of that was foreshadowed by Sarah Palin. But I also thought the country had rejected it in 2008 with Obama. It turned out that didn’t really happen. We were still moving in that direction. We just weren’t quite ready for her yet. Something like 62 million people voted for Trump, and that was a vote for chaos, for disruption, and it was a vote against expertise, against experience. Now, I know there are a lot of reasons why people voted for Trump and it’s complicated, but we also can’t deny this part of the story and we can’t pretend that a lot of people didn’t want to break the government. I think you’re right. And one thing that struck me about Trump’s rallies was that they had very little positive content, very little uplift. Even a fascist demagogue needs to give his people a vision that inspires them, that makes them willing to work long hours and to sacrifice and possibly die. That was not Trump. And I also don’t like the word fascist in the context of Trump because he’s something else altogether. Trump was a showman who brought out people’s lowest instincts and made them acceptable, made them desirable.  I remember in 2015, before the primaries began, I was interviewing some striking steelworkers in eastern Ohio and I wanted to talk to them about politics, and they were on a picket line and so they were willing and able to talk, and it turned out none of them were for Jeb Bush, who was the frontrunner, and none of them were for Hillary Clinton, who was the frontrunner. They were all for either [Bernie] Sanders or Trump. And that had something to do with their general disgust with things as they are. And I asked one of the guys about Trump, and he said to me something like, “He is like a mirror that reflects back the way they see us.” And the “they” was people like me and you, people who were going to vote for Clinton, who talked about the “deplorables.” And they [the steelworkers] knew Trump was a buffoon, but they also had this feeling of, “Okay, you want deplorable, I’ll give you deplorable.” And Trump was a vehicle for that feeling, a nihilistic vehicle, and there was just no vision of any good society behind any of it.  At the same time, and this is something you document in your book, a lot of this bitterness and cynicism is justifiable. Globalization and automation have ripped apart so many communities across the country, and people feel that they’ve lost any agency at all over their lives, and that the spoils of this new order have gone to people behind desks and computers, people on the coasts and in the cities. That’s all a long wind-up to a question looming over this conversation and your essay: Is it possible that liberal capitalism has just run its course, that it’s produced a world that’s grossly unequal and grossly unrepresentative, that’s destroyed our environment, and that perhaps the “failure” we’re witnessing is the interregnum between the death of liberalism and the birth of whatever comes next? Man, that’s a huge question. I don’t consider myself a global thinker or a futurist. I’m not very theoretically minded; I didn’t get a degree in political theory or philosophy like you did. It’s hard for me to think in such large terms.  What can I say? Is this the end of liberal capitalism? It’s certainly been declared moribund many times over the last century. And it keeps on rebounding like a virus. It just seems unkillable. It also produces good things and has been incredibly successful in this country for a long time. But right now it’s not answering our needs and it’s not solving our problems.  I think we’re at a point where people should be asking big questions. People should be really thinking about transformational changes. I hope that’s the one thing that can come out of this disaster that might be good. You wrote: “If 9/11 and 2008 wore out trust in the old political establishment, 2020 should kill off the idea that anti-politics is our salvation. But putting an end to this regime, so necessary and deserved, is only the beginning.” If that’s the beginning, what do you hope comes next? What I hope happens is that we start to rebuild with laws and policies and projects that are based on a realization that we are in it together and that when the country’s as divided as it’s been, it really is unhealthy and dangerous for all of us. That we really can’t escape each other and that we need a sense of what it means to be part of this country that doesn’t simply dismiss half the population, whether it’s the half that is in the service worker class, or the half that is of a different political party, or the half that’s a different color.  It’s as if we began to think that we will be able to move on by forgetting about that half of the country, and we can’t, because we’re all tied together. That’s what a virus does. It shows us the incredible network of bonds. It does it in a really terrible way, but it might not be so bad to realize that those bonds still exist, that we still need each other. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. There is no political debate in the US more important right now than the fight over how the federal government should spend to help the economy recover.  Currently, Republican Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell is setting the pace of stimulus and the terms of the debate. Democrats are being baited into negotiating “victories” that consist of measures every reasonable economist agrees is necessary. Efforts to secure even those basic measures are being denounced as hostage-taking, and Democrats in the House, forever attendant to their skittish purple-district “moderates,” have proven typically easy to scare. “We’re terrified that we’ll look like obstructionists,” one Democratic Senate aide told Politico reporter Michael Grunwald.  The fear, like most Democratic fears, is overblown. There is an enormous amount of bluffing going on among Republicans, who need stimulus measures just as much as Democrats. Sooner or later, if Democrats don’t want to get steamrolled, played, and blamed for the next six months, they are going to have to call some of those bluffs. At Slate, Jordan Weissmann captures the sense of dismay with which the left greeted the phase 4 (or is it 3.5?) stimulus passed last week.  The Paycheck Protection Program, the primary vehicle for getting money to struggling small businesses, had run out of money (after being poorly administered). Republicans needed it renewed; it was their headline stimulus achievement.  Democrats had leverage. They used it to “win” more money for hospitals and coronavirus testing. Having done so, they had none left over to win funds for cash-strapped states, help for the US Post Office, or any number of progressive priorities. As Weissmann says, “what’s frustrating about this deal is that it seemingly consists of things any rational person should want.” Aid for hospitals and ramped-up testing are obvious, glaring national needs. Why on earth should they be something Democrats push for and Republicans resist?  Republicans know such aid is necessary just as well as Democrats. They say in the press that these are concessions, things they are giving up, but why should anyone else adopt that absurd framing?  By theatrically “conceding” money for hospitals, Republicans get the optics of a bipartisan achievement while ensuring that they define the limits of the possible.  Now House Speaker Nancy Pelosi is saying that it wasn’t a concession at all to give up funding for states, that governors are just being “impatient,” and that the next stimulus bill will contain state and local aid “in a big way.” She envisions a thoughtful, phased approach, based on demonstrated need. But there’s little reason to think Republicans will cooperate. Think back to the debt ceiling fight of 2011. Raising the debt ceiling was also something every independent analyst agreed was necessary to keep the economy healthy. But Republicans framed it as a Democratic ask, something for which they could extract enormous concessions. They were entirely willing to gamble with the economy. With each successive stimulus bill in the coronavirus crisis, there will be a little less fear and urgency within the GOP caucus and Democrats will have a little less leverage. Republicans dragging their feet, treating obvious necessities as concessions, prevents any true progressive priorities — expanded health care, paid sick leave, higher wages, green infrastructure investment, postal banking — from entering the conversation. Republicans define the playing field, and Democrats dutifully play on it. McConnell is leading the GOP stimulus messaging effort, which consequently consists mostly of gaslighting. It seems to be the role for which he was born. Anyone who wants to understand McConnell should read Jane Mayer’s extraordinary profile in the latest New Yorker and Alec MacGillis’s 2014 biography, The Cynic. Both are in-depth examinations that find very little depth in their subject. Meyer writes that the introverted McConnell got “hooked” on “the respect that comes with holding elected office” while he was still in school. (He was student council president.) He set out in pursuit of power and has been pursuing it single-mindedly ever since.  That’s the beginning and end of it. There are no consistent ideological principles, conflicted motivations, or lingering reservations. McConnell says and does whatever is necessary to secure power for the conservative coalition he helps lead, especially the big-money donors.  When Democrats pushed for state aid and McConnell suggested that it was a “blue state bailout,” an attempt to rescue fiscally irresponsible blue-state governors who had let their pension obligations get too large, he knew full well that it was bullshit. There is no moral hazard in a pandemic. There’s no point means testing states. It’s not a reward to states to bolster their budgets when consumers are literally being told by the government to stay home. It’s one reason the federal government exists.  And red states need money too — there are, after all, red-state governors pleading for help.  It makes no sense, but McConnell’s not trying to make sense. He’s just trying to put Dems on the defensive and force them to fight for the basics. He wants to frame state aid as a concession to Democrats and send a signal to the right-wing base that Democrats are up to something shady. He doesn’t give a rat’s ass about pension obligations. This is a 1,000 percent cynical maneuver. (Now Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin has picked up this nonsense and run with it.) The same goes for McConnell’s sudden concern that stimulus spending might raise the deficit too much.  Oh, please. More than almost any other purported GOP principle, deficit concern comes and goes depending on the party’s immediate interests. It was nowhere to be found in 2017 when McConnell’s own Congress passed a giant tax cut for corporations that will add $2.6 trillion to the deficit over the next 10 years. It was nowhere to be found when Trump ran up the deficit, or when George W. Bush, George H.W. Bush, or Ronald Reagan ran up the deficit.  Reagan took the deficit from 70 billion to 175 billion. Bush 41 took it to 300 billion. Clinton got it to zero. Bush 43 took it from 0 to 1.2 trillion.Obama halved it to 600 billion. Trump’s got it back to a trillion.Morons: “Democrats cause deficits.” “The deficit” is a way for conservatives and centrists to fight against social spending, in almost all cases. In this case, as Vox’s Dylan Matthews argues, it is particularly ludicrous. There is little credible economic justification for avoiding deficit spending in the first place, but even the most dedicated deficit scold accepts that stimulative federal spending is appropriate during a historic demand-side recession in which a substantial fraction of the economy’s resources have been deliberately idled. There is no conceivable economic circumstance in which deficit spending could be more obviously justified. Growth is the only way forward; austerity will make the recession into a depression.  McConnell knows this as well as anyone. He doesn’t care about the deficit either. He’s just trying to make it look like any spending he signs on to is a magnanimous concession. He’s getting the deficit story into the media so that conservative Democrats — the suckers who actually believe the deficit myths — will start getting gun-shy, pushing to limit spending from within the caucus, doing McConnell’s work for him.  And he’s setting up the next confrontation. When the crisis passes, Republicans will use the deficit they created as an excuse to attack spending on Medicaid, Medicare, and Social Security.  If Joe Biden wins the 2020 presidential election but Republicans keep the Senate — a not-unlikely outcome — McConnell will immediately block further meaningful stimulus. Just as he blocked every bit of Obama stimulus that he could to hurt Obama, he will the same to Biden. And he will use deficit concern as his cover story.  On Monday, McConnell showed his hand. He will demand that the next stimulus bill include liability protections for business owners that reopen after (or, if their governors allow it, during) the pandemic.  Protecting bosses from lawsuits, allowing them to put front-line workers in danger without fear of repercussion, really is a wish-list item — from a corporate wish list. It is nakedly partisan in a way state and local aid is not. Nonetheless, as Bloomberg reporter Steven Dennis says, McConnell is setting himself up for a trade: aid to states in exchange for liability protections. Pelosi, meanwhile, has said the next bill WILL have state and local aid as her must-have.Kind of sets up a trade here. It would be utterly bananas for Democrats to accept these terms. State and local aid is a necessity and something Republicans are going to sign off on eventually, unless they want to answer for a procession of laid-off red-state teachers and firefighters.  But protecting corporate executives from worker lawsuits is just a crude bit of corruption, nothing Democrats would ever agree to in normal circumstances. It’s not a fair trade; it’s McConnell manipulating the playing field, trying to get something for his donors in exchange for something he would have to do anyway. When it comes to McConnell, the most cynical interpretation is usually the correct one. Whatever words may be coming out of his mouth, what he is doing it trying to maximize partisan advantage. Many people (myself included) have pointed out that it is in the best interests of Republicans, especially Trump, to maximize stimulus spending. The faster they put a floor beneath the cratering economy and begin building it back up, the better for Trump’s electoral prospects. All things being equal, a depression ravaging the country is not going to help the incumbent.  Nonetheless, for the last 15 years, McConnell has heard pundits tell him that it’s risky to obstruct too much, attack too hard, violate norms too flagrantly, or act too openly against the national interest for partisan gain. Pundits wring their hands endlessly about such things.  Democrats have heard and internalized those messages. They worry about how they look to the media and political class. But McConnell has completely ignored them, and it has redounded to his benefit again and again.  When he refused to hold confirmation hearings on Obama’s Supreme Court nominee Merrick Garland in 2016, everyone in the political ecosystem (outside of conservative media) warned him of the dangers, the grave risk to comity and tradition and institutional integrity. He blew them all off. For his troubles, he got Brett Kavanaugh.  (Last month, McConnell said that he would happily hold a confirmation vote on a Trump Supreme Court nominee, even in the last year of a Trump presidency. Critics accused him of hypocrisy. He didn’t care.) McConnell used the filibuster to block everything Obama tried, and then when Democrats killed the judicial filibuster, he used that to pack the federal bench, winning on both sides. He bottled up bills, worked to open up politics to unlimited dark money, and presided over a farcical, witness-free show trial of an impeached Donald Trump.  And it keeps working. Leaning into ruthless power politics in the face of elite media and political opinion won Republicans a fateful midterm landslide in 2010. It gave them the Senate in 2014, Trump in 2016, a giant tax cut in 2017, and hundreds of right-wing federal judges, ongoing.  Ignoring critics — not just ignoring them, but smirking at them, placidly thumbing his nose at them — has proven wildly successful for McConnell. The maximal-partisan-warfare approach for McConnell going forward would be to keep stimulus spending just high enough to prevent a total crash, channel as much of it as possible to GOP constituencies, block attempts to secure fair access to voting, block any funding of progressive priorities or Dem-aligned industries (like clean energy), relentlessly attack Democrats for obstructionism, and then try to squeeze out another narrow, Electoral College-based victory in November.  That is, from the point of view of decency or good government, the worst thing that McConnell could do. And it also seems highly risky — if the economy suffers too much, Republicans could pay for it in November. But McConnell has made a career out of betting on the worst thing and winning. There’s every reason to believe he will continue.  At every stage of the stimulus negotiations, McConnell is going to push for partisan advantage, defining basic recovery policies as Democratic so that he can limit discussion and prevent progressive priorities from being heard.  McConnell also warning against what he called left-wing daydreams. The only way Democrats are going to secure those priorities is to push back.  To do that, they need to think like McConnell. They need to realize that no amount of words — no op-eds, sharp comments on Meet the Press, eloquent arguments, or thoughtful proposals — will make any difference. There’s now a library’s worth of essays from non-conservatives about how America “must” meet this crisis, but all that “must” adds up to nothing in the absence of power.  McConnell doesn’t care about Democrats’ opinions, or Washington opinion, or even popular opinion. He is fighting for conservatives, and through right-wing media, he has their unstinting support. All he cares about is vote counts.  The only real power Democrats have, their only true leverage, is in their votes. Specifically, they can withhold them. No bill can pass the Democratic House unless Democrats vote for it.  It is Democrats’ choice to make state and local aid their baseline demand, thereby setting themselves up to declare victory if that necessary and inevitable policy is passed. They could choose to demand more, to demand something as ostentatiously in the interests of workers as McConnell’s liability shield is in the interests of executives.  They could demand universal access to postage-paid mail-in ballots, to ensure a free and fair election in November. (And they could pay for electric mail trucks to deliver those ballots.) They could demand more money for unemployment programs and ongoing direct payments to all families, of the sort that went out with the first stimulus bill, only bigger, ongoing, and better administered. They could demand universal paid sick leave or a better program to cover small-business payrolls or a multi-trillion-dollar green infrastructure package. That’s what Joe Biden, sounding newly fiery, says he wants: a stimulus plan “a hell of a lot bigger” than the $2 trillion CARES Act. He wants more forward-looking investments that include, uh, “dealing with environmental things that create good-paying jobs.” But talk is cheap. If Democrats really want to fight, they will have to obstruct — to take hostages, in the argot. They will have to show that they are willing to withhold their votes if they don’t get what they want. When they do so, or even threaten to do so, McConnell and Trump will attack them and the political media will be filled with pundit hand-wringing about the risks.  Again, Democrats should do what McConnell does: ignore the doubters and scolds. Stay focused on objectives. Treat political media like a game; say what needs saying to win the next news cycle. It is fluff, vapor, to be gone and replaced with some other story within 48 hours. Only legislative outcomes matter.  Democrats don’t like this kind of power politics. They are accustomed to trying to win the approval of referees, trying to get points for being reasonable and responsible and open to compromise. They are so accustomed to it that they haven’t noticed there are no refs anymore. The pundits and talking heads they fear have no power. There’s no one to judge their arguments superior or award them a sportsmanship trophy.  There is only power; there are only outcomes. Behind all the rhetoric, Democrats have one real point of leverage: they can vote for or against. It gives them some power if they are willing to use it. McConnell will do and say whatever is necessary to serve his donors. He is willing to risk his political future on it. Democrats should be just as ruthless and unromantic in their service of the public interest.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. President Donald Trump is reportedly planning to force meat processing plants to stay open, despite hundreds of employees who have tested positive for coronavirus at such facilities across the country.  Meatpacking plants across the US have been closing as their employees get sick, and their executives have warned that shortages are likely to result. Bloomberg News reported that Trump will sign an executive order invoking the Defense Production Act (DPA) to avert closures of plants operated by companies such as Tyson Foods Inc., whose chairman John Tyson warned on Sunday that the “food supply chain is breaking.” The federal government will provide protective equipment to employees and issue additional guidance, according to Bloomberg.  The executive order, which would classify meat processors as “critical infrastructure,” was prompted by concerns that Tyson was planning to close 80 percent of its facilities, Axios reported.  It would go against calls from local officials and labor unions to close the plants, given the health risks for workers and their communities. And some food supply experts are skeptical that the supply chain is truly breaking — even if consumers might have more trouble finding the cuts of meat they prefer. “The supply chain is struggling in a variety of ways, but the most vulnerable members of the supply chain in terms of livelihood and health are the farmers and the factory workers, not the consumers or grocery stores,” Julie Niederhoff, a supply chain management professor at Syracuse University, told Vox. “There is enough meat to sustain the American consumer market for some time even at the currently reduced production capacity. The decision to reopen the factories could help the farmers, but it is worrying if it is done without significant improvements to protect the workers and their communities first.” The DPA offers the president broad powers to order domestic manufacturers to make necessary products in times of war or crisis. For more than a month, crisis response experts and lawmakers alike have been calling on the Trump administration to use the DPA during the coronavirus pandemic to order the production of critical medical equipment including face masks, protective gloves, ventilators, respirators and coronavirus tests. Trump has so far only invoked the law to increase production of swabs needed for coronavirus testing. Now, he’s poised to use it for an entirely different purpose: to keep meat production up as concerns about potential shortages mount.  Meat processing plants have become coronavirus hotspots.  Earlier this month, more than 640 workers tested positive at a processing facility in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, operated by Smithfield Foods, one of the United States’ largest pork producers. And on Wednesday, Tysons shut down its biggest pork processing facility in Waterloo, Iowa, after more than 180 workers tested positive.  Dozens of other processing facilities, from Colorado to Pennsylvania, have similarly ceased operations across the country.  The workers in these plants are often low-income — one Smithfield employee reported making $17.70 an hour, though workers have been offered a $500 bonus if they don’t miss any shifts in April. Nearly half of them are immigrants, according to the left-leaning think tank New American Economy. Their work is physically taxing even in the best of times as they lift and slice through heavy cuts of meat. Now, it’s also potentially life-threatening: A 64-year-old Smithfield worker was among the reported industry deaths. The rapid spread of coronavirus through meat processing plants is particularly concerning given that, even under normal circumstances, these kinds of facilities are highly sanitized and contained due to federal requirements for pathogen control and food safety. Julie Anna Potts, president and CEO of the North American Meat Institute, said there is complete disinfection of the facilities every night after the last shift. Workers have to wear hard hats, safety goggles, frocks, and boots. Now, they’re also wearing masks and face shields, at least when the plants can obtain them, and they have been practicing social distancing where possible in cafeterias and places where the workers put their protective equipment on. Tyson Foods said it has also started taking employees’ temperatures either by hand or through infrared scanners. But on the processing floor, they’re standing shoulder to shoulder. Employees have protested the lack of safe working conditions. Dozens of workers at a Perdue Farms facility in Kathleen, Georgia, staged a walkout in late March. An anonymous employee at a Smithfield plant in Milan, Missouri, also filed a lawsuit against the company claiming that it had not provided enough protective equipment to its employees and that they were discouraged from taking sick leave. (The company has denied the allegations.) “[M]anagers never blatantly asked me to risk my life just by showing up — until this pandemic,” the employee wrote in an April 24 Op-Ed in the Washington Post. “Now just coming to work puts us at risk of exposure to a virus that’s killing thousands of people every single day.” Executives at the nation’s largest meat producers have warned that the meat supply chain is on the brink of collapse. But supply chain experts remain skeptical that consumers will see anything but spot shortages of certain meat products. Kenneth M. Sullivan, Smithfield’s president and CEO, said in a statement earlier this month that the closure of processing facilities is “pushing our country perilously close to the edge in terms of our meat supply.” And on Sunday, Tyson claimed that “millions of pounds of meat will disappear from the supply chain” even if the closures only last for a short period of time.  “There will be limited supply of our products available in grocery stores until we are able to reopen our facilities that are currently closed,” he wrote.  Their statements have concerned lawmakers, including Sens. Amy Klobuchar and Mike Lee, who called for an investigation of the root causes of the disruptions to the meat supply chain on Monday.  “During this worldwide pandemic when unprecedented numbers of families are standing in food lines, we cannot afford to waste available food resources that could be utilized if only there were available options for processing and packing,” they wrote.  But even in spite of these challenges, industry analysts say the US is still producing large amounts of meat. Consumers might have to pay more for meat, and their preferred cuts, package sizes and brand names might not be available temporarily. But they won’t see entirely empty refrigerators if they shop shortly after a grocery store restocks.  The developed world has gotten used to the idea of being able to walk into the grocery store and pick up anything — but that’s a luxury, Yossi Sheffi, a supply chain expert and the director of MIT’s Center for Transportation and Logistics, told Vox.  “I don’t see any danger from temporary (and they are) closures of a few plants,” he said. “You may not get the cut you like or have to eat chicken instead of pork for a week or two in a few parts of the country. Really, this is not a national disaster.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   In an authoritarian twist, President Donald Trump signaled Tuesday that he’s looking to condition coronavirus economic relief for blue states on complying with the administration’s immigration policy goals. In remarks to reporters at a White House event with Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, Trump said he’d be willing to give economic aid to Democratically controlled state governments, but he wants them to do something for him first — bend their sanctuary city policies to align with the administration’s desired policy. Trump said he was only open to helping some states financially cover losses related to the coronavirus pandemic.  “I think there’s a big difference with a state that lost money because of Covid and a state that’s been run very badly for 25 years,” he said. He then mentioned sates with sanctuary city policies.  “We’d have to talk about things like sanctuary cities, as an example. I think sanctuary cities is something that has to be brought up where people who are criminals are protected, they are protected from prosecution,” he told reporters, despite sanctuary city policies having nothing to do with the pandemic. “I think that has to be done. I think it’s one of the problems that the states have. I don’t even think they know they have a problem, but they have a big problem with the sanctuary situation.” Later in the day, Trump reiterated his sanctuary city comments while taking questions from reporters at an East Room event to promote the success of the Payroll Protection Program. “If it’s Covid-related, I guess we can talk about [aid], but we’d want certain things also, including sanctuary city adjustments,” he said. Trump says he wants blue states to give him "sanctuary-city adjustments" in exchange for federal financial relief pic.twitter.com/wY2edZifPQ The ACLU responded to Trump’s comments on Twitter Tuesday, saying, “We cannot allow the Trump administration to exploit a public health crisis to further their anti-immigrant agenda.” Federal aid for states themselves has quickly become a divisive issue on Capitol Hill. Several lawmakers from both sides of the aisle condemned Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell’s (R-KY) suggestion that states with massive Covid-19 related budget shortfalls should just declare bankruptcy. Conservative lawmakers have made no bones about trying to use the coronavirus pandemic to their own political advantage. Several conservative states, like Texas, Ohio, Mississippi, Alabama, and Tennessee, along with a few others, tried to ban abortion care while their states were under shelter-at-home orders. The Trump administration has not been an exception. The administration has used the economic upheaval produced by the pandemic to roll back regulations that it has long had in its crosshairs. It rolled back Obama-era automobile fuel economy requirements and eased enforcement of several EPA pollution regulations. It’s also considering undoing many small business regulations. On immigration policy, the administration announced on April 23 that it would suspend immigration to the US, though it exempted many farmworkers from the rule. It should come as no surprise then that Trump would try to leverage coronavirus relief toward pushing states to dump sanctuary city rules. The Trump administration has long battled against the policy, which it claims shelters undocumented immigrants from prosecution by US Immigrations and Customs Enforcement and creates more criminal activity. However, studies have shown that sanctuary city policies don’t actually result in higher-than-average crime, as explained by Vox’s Nicole Narea: Sanctuary policies don’t appear to make a city more dangerous. While there isn’t a huge body of research on sanctuary policies’ impact on crime rates, studies have found that they either slightly decrease crime rates or have no effect. A study published in the journal Urban Affairs Review in 2017 found that cities with similar characteristics but for their sanctuary policies had “no statistically discernible difference” in their rates of violent crime, rape, or property crime. Using data from the National Immigration Law Center and the FBI, researchers compared crime rates before and after cities passed sanctuary laws, finding that they had no effect on crime. Though sanctuary city policies have nothing to do with the Covid-19 outbreak, Trump apparently views the crisis as an opportunity to force blues states to reshape their immigration policies in a manner favorable to his base. In that way, the quid pro quo he’s trying to set up is reminiscent of the dealings with Ukraine that resulted in his impeachment. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. More than a month since the first pandemic stay-at-home orders in the United States, people are getting antsy.  The median distance Americans travel each day began to tick up in the past couple of weeks, well before a handful of states have officially begun to reopen their businesses and public spaces and others started talking about reopening. The stay-at-home orders meant to stop the spread of the novel coronavirus brought many economies grinding to a halt, and these reopening efforts represent an attempt to put people back to work. However, they could also cause a resurgence of coronavirus cases, as health experts warn that there’s not nearly enough testing to know whether or not it’s safe to reopen businesses. These warnings haven’t stopped some people from increasingly leaving home in the past couple of weeks, potentially in defiance of those stay-at-home orders. According to aggregated anonymized data from geospatial analytics company Orbital Insight, the median distance people traveled hit a low point on April 12, which was Easter Sunday, of about a half a mile. However, that distance nearly doubled to a mile the following Sunday, April 19. To come up with median distance, Orbital Insight used anonymized cellphone location data for 12 million devices, specifically creating a radius from the various locations people visit each day. The company reports its units of distance as degrees of latitude or longitude, which are displayed on the y-axis of the graph above. That Easter Sunday low follows several weeks of declining median distance traveled, as cities and states across the country enacted shelter-in-place orders beginning in March. For context, in February, people typically traveled between about 2 and 3.5 miles each day (or .03 to 0.05 degrees of distance in latitude or longitude per day).  You can see the increase in the past couple of weeks on a county level in the map below. More yellow and orange on the map means a higher daily distance traveled and, therefore, presumably less social distancing. The image on the left side of the slider shows the week beginning April 10 while the map to the right shows the week of April 17. Data from a second location-data tracking company, Unacast, follows a similar trend, with average mobility as well as proximity to others increasing after Easter. Unacast data also shows that foot traffic in retail stores is also starting to pick back up as stores in a number of states reopen.  Traveling farther or being nearer to people, of course, does not necessarily mean that people are violating social distance orders or going places they’re not supposed to go. In Florida and in more rural states, for example, where more people travel by car, it’s possible to more safely socially distance than in, say, parts of New York. But it does mean it’s less likely they are staying home. The increased movement is also not happening in a vacuum. Death rates in many states began declining in mid-April, though social distancing likely contributed to those declines. Around the same time, governors started discussing plans to ease restrictions. President Trump, famously, hoped church pews could be packed by Easter.  The data also suggests the increase in movement began happening before official reopening dates, suggesting that the promise of reopening was enough to get people moving again. The relaxation is different for each locality, and some businesses were allowed to open before others. Tennessee and Georgia allowed many businesses to open April 27, for example, while South Carolina began incrementally opening public spaces a week before. With the possibility of reopening seeming more real, it’s also possible people simply got restless or felt more comfortable venturing out after safely sheltering. The nicer spring weather certainly encouraged more than a few to get out of the house. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Vice President Mike Pence visited the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, on Tuesday — and notably did so without wearing a mask.  In a since-deleted tweet, the Mayo Clinic said it informed Pence of its policy requiring visitors to wears masks before his visit. Pence, however, didn’t follow it. In choosing not to wear a mask, Pence not only ignored the Mayo’s policy, he ignored the recommendations of his own government, which has advised Americans to wear face coverings in public to slow the spread of Covid-19.  A press pool video of Pence’s visit shows everyone in Pence’s entourage wearing a mask, with him being the notable exception.    pic.twitter.com/rlfA1hNaP1 As the footage circulated on Twitter, the Mayo’s verified Twitter account tweeted that Pence was warned about the policy but nevertheless persisted. That tweet, however, was deleted a short time later. In response to questions about why Pence wasn’t wearing a mask, the Mayo Clinic tweeted this earlier. Then they deleted it. So that’s normal. pic.twitter.com/7peNxMxx7t Later Tuesday, the Mayo’s Twitter account posted a tweet blandly expressing gratefulness for Pence’s visit. We are grateful that @VP and @GovTimWalz visited Mayo Clinic today to hear about our work fighting the #COVID19 pandemic. We look forward to continued collaboration to develop essential testing and treatment for our patients and communities. CNBC reports that a Mayo spokesperson reiterated the since-deleted tweet by saying the clinic “shared the masking policy with the VP’s office,” but did not respond to a question about why the tweet was scrubbed. Pence’s office didn’t immediately respond to an email from Vox seeking comment. The Mayo Clinic’s website indicates that, as of April 13, all patients and visitors were required to wear masks. “Patients and visitors are asked to bring their own face covering or mask to wear. If a patient or visitor does not have a mask, Mayo Clinic will provide one,” it says. The Minneapolis Star Tribune reports that “Pence ignored the clinic’s request that all visitors don face masks to prevent transmission, including [Minnesota] Gov. Tim Walz and others on the tour.” Pence and President Donald Trump appear to be on the same page when it comes to masks. Notably, when Trump announced the administration’s mask guidance during a news conference on April 3, he said he wouldn’t follow it. “I just don’t want to wear one myself, it’s a recommendation,” Trump said at the time. “Somehow sitting in the Oval Office behind that beautiful Resolute Desk, the great Resolute Desk, I think wearing a face mask as I greet presidents, dictators, kings, queens, I don’t know, I don’t see it for myself.” REPORTER: Why are you opposed to wearing a mask?TRUMP: "I just don't want to wear one myself ... I'm feeling good. I just don't want to be doing-- somehow sitting in the Oval Office behind that beautiful Resolute Desk. The great Resolute Desk ... I don't see it for myself." pic.twitter.com/7dWmQQY3Aw White House aides recently told the New York Times that Pence doesn’t feel like he has to wear a mask in public because he is regularly tested for the coronavirus. But that argument is flawed for a variety of reasons, including that coronavirus tests are occasionally inaccurate and Pence could contract (and spread) the virus between tests. By refusing to wear one at the Mayo Clinic, he could have unwittingly spread the virus to patients and workers there; and should he have become infected with the virus, he could be a source of community spread at the White House. Trump and Pence’s aversion to masks stands in contrast to other world leaders ranging from Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe to French President Emmanuel Macron to Austrian Chancellor Sebastian Kurz, all of whom have been photographed wearing masks in public. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.The United States has surpassed 1 million confirmed Covid-19 cases, just a few months after the novel coronavirus first arrived in America. The confirmed number of cases, based on the Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center’s tally, is almost surely an undercount. The US’s initial response to the outbreak was stifled by undertesting and, while America’s testing capacity has increased in the last month, experts say there are still likely many more cases than are actually included in the official counts. Various attempts to roughly capture the share of the population that has been exposed to the coronavirus through serological testing seem to confirm that the US has not fully measured the extent of the outbreak within its own borders. And within a matter of days, the US is also likely to pass another ominous milestone: more than 60,000 confirmed deaths from Covid-19. The current total sits north of 55,000 and more than 1,000 Americans are dying every day from the virus.  President Donald Trump once claimed that such a toll would count as a victory, given the projections of millions of deaths if there were no social distancing measure put into place. The ultimate cost in lives of the coronavirus remains to be seen, and, again, experts believe the actual number of people to die from the disease or because the health system has been overstretched is likely much higher than the official count. The US has by far the most confirmed Covid-19 cases (Spain is second with about 230,000) and deaths (Italy is next, with about 27,000), though many countries have the same issues with undertesting and asymptomatic cases make it difficult to track the virus. China has also acknowledged initially undercounting its cases and outside reporting suggests the pandemic has been deadlier there than the official numbers suggest, though it is difficult to assess whether it has been worse than in America. Regardless, at this point, the United States has been and will continue to be the clear epicenter of this global pandemic. The US health system was less prepared for a pandemic than those of other wealthy nations. A high uninsured rate, high out-of-pocket health care costs, and low medical system capacity combined to make the country more vulnerable to a pathogen before the coronavirus ever came to our shores. America’s lax response in the early days of the outbreak only compounded those structural problems. “Everyone working in this space would agree that no matter how you measure it, the US is far behind on this,” Jen Kates, director of global health and HIV policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation, told Vox in mid-March of the initial coronavirus response. As the US implements dramatic measures to control the spread of Covid-19, with schools and businesses closing and general social distancing underway, the country is still struggling to understand the full scope of the outbreak because of the slow start of testing. It has undeniably hindered the US response. “The testing failure is putting additional strain on our already challenged health system,” Cynthia Cox, director of the Peterson-Kaiser Health System Tracker, said in March. “The combination of all of these factors will make the US worse off than similar countries.” Testing is not only important because it gets people diagnosed and appropriate treatment if they have an infection, it also establishes how widespread a virus actually is. Experts know the size of the problem, they know the rate at which people are being hospitalized or dying, and they can follow its movements. But the United States faltered in rolling out coronavirus tests, initially putting America behind its economic peers in tracing the outbreak. A manufacturing problem with the test kits that were initially sent out in the field, and a delay in approving commercial tests, set the nation back in stopping or slowing down Covid-19. Even as testing capacity has ramped up in the US, as of April 27, America is still lagging behind other places in the world hit hardest by the virus in the share of its population being tested. The US has tested about far fewer people per million residents as Italy, a focal point of Europe’s outbreak, and Germany, considered a model of rapid and widespread testing.  There have been nearly 5.4 million tests conducted in the US for its population of 329 million, but the number of tests per capita conducted varies greatly by state. The US has finally started to catch up to the rest of the developed world in responding to Covid-19. But as case numbers and deaths continue to increase, we’re still learning the full scope of the crisis. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Adarra Benjamin, a 26-year-old black home care worker in Chicago, lacks the luxury of staying home during the Covid-19 pandemic. She assists several elderly patients. Her work demands travel by public transit. Her duties — picking up groceries, running to the post office, counseling clients — have, amid the news of death and disease, devolved into a series of anxiety-inducing tasks.  “I am afraid because my job consists of me not only going in and out of someone else’s home, but shopping for other people,” she said. “It just feels like panic.” Adarra remains at risk as an essential worker. Chicago stands flush with coronavirus. Cook County, which includes Chicago, has the sixth-most cases of all counties in the country, according to a New York Times tracker, as of April 27. The virus continues to ravage the city’s predominantly black South Side, where Adarra lives with her mother. Recently, when Adarra’s cousin exhibited symptoms of Covid-19, particularly difficulty breathing, he struggled to obtain a test, going to the hospital twice before he received one testing positive.  The situation rattled Adarra. “It has honestly, like, put me into fear,” she said. “To know he went there and that they didn’t have a test to take immediately pushes me back, like, ‘Okay, maybe I could do more harm by going to get tested than I would just staying away.’” “So now I am really confused as to should I get tested,” she said. “Do they even have enough tests?”  Local activists, politicians, and city data echo the concern about equitable access in Chicago. According to the Chicago Department of Public Health, black people in Chicago make up a majority of Covid-19 deaths, at 56 percent, as of April 26. Yet for weeks, some black neighborhoods on the South Side of the city with the highest number of cases were tested at a lower rate than the whiter wealthy areas in the city center. It is a problem reflected statewide, and increasingly nationwide. Available data from the state of Illinois shows that even though black residents make up 37 percent of the state’s Covid-19 deaths, they only received 13 percent of the state’s tests, as of April 23. It wasn’t supposed to be this way. Chicago serves as the model city of what the White House christened a month ago as an “extraordinary” and “historic” public-private partnership to offer free, accessible coronavirus testing across the country at retail pharmacies and grocery stores.  With three current sites (one recently closed), the Chicago area is among cities with the most retail testing sites in the nation. But a Type Investigations and Vox analysis shows the sites are largely inaccessible for residents in the hardest-hit areas: the city’s predominantly black neighborhoods. The closest retail drive-through testing site to Adarra is at least 18 miles away.  At a press conference on Monday, President Trump touted the testing program, saying, “These private sector leaders along with others have been exceptional partners in an unprecedented drive to expand the states’ capabilities and our country’s capabilities.”  But more than a month after the program’s debut, the sluggish rollout and locations of the retail drive-throughs participating in the White House’s partnership have left cities and states scrambling to find solutions for testing, especially in majority-minority neighborhoods, where residents of color have been disproportionately impacted by the pandemic.  On March 13, the Trump administration announced its partnership with Walgreens, Walmart, Target, and CVS to provide a portion of their parking lots across the nation for free drive-through testing. The administration asserted that the plan would “meet the needs of the American public,” with Trump emphasizing that “we have many, many locations” and that “we cover very, very strongly our country — stores in virtually every location.”  White House coronavirus response coordinator Dr. Deborah Birx said the plan was expected to be so efficient that after scaling across the United States, “we want to bring this across the continent.” Moreover, partner stores professed a focus on the hardest-hit communities. Walgreens declared testing would focus on “our most vulnerable citizens,” and CVS said it would scale to quickly serve “the most vulnerable members of our communities.” The stock market rallied after the announcement. Rite Aid and Kroger joined the effort soon after. Yet the ambition of this project is overshadowed by its failures, as Covid-19 infections increased exponentially in America’s urban centers. As of April 16, there were only 17 retail locations open. (Just a few days prior, on the 13th, NPR characterized retail drive-through testing as “largely nonexistent.” ) All of those stores, save three, are located in predominantly white areas. Between April 17 and 27, 43 more retail testing sites opened, but only five of those are in predominantly black areas.  A Health and Human Services spokesperson said the department is working with pharmacy and retail companies to “expand rapidly to areas that are under-tested and socially vulnerable” and that the department is “using data to locate sites in counties that are under-tested and socially vulnerable, especially those with high populations of black, Hispanic and rural Americans.” They noted that “as of April 24, 63 sites are testing Americans in 24 states.” However, of the 63 testing sites operating, or announced to open as of April 24, only eight — about 13 percent — are in predominantly black neighborhoods. Black Americans make up 30 percent of Covid-19 patients, according to preliminary nationwide data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. On the South Side of Chicago, the heart of the city’s black community, the retail testing centers are essentially a nonfactor. After watching the president’s store-based testing announcement, Illinois state Sen. Robert Peters said “it came off like this is more about highlighting all these people in this business space with no real concrete plan — it’s a pipe dream.” Peters is one of the many black politicians and activists who, in recent weeks, have pushed for a South Side testing center to fill the gaps. Accessible testing is needed on the West Side, too. This month, Illinois state representative and board member of Loretto Hospital LaShawn K. Ford joined in a press conference outside Loretto to decry the lack of testing in the West Side community of Austin, Chicago, where about 80 percent of residents are African American.  “On the West Side of Chicago, the demand for testing is very high, and the supply is very minimal — that’s the problem,” Ford said. “When we hear the governor of Illinois and the president of the United States talk about bending the curve, what we’re going to find is we really can’t talk about raw numbers when we’re not testing a large segment of our population, and that’s the black community. There are no major test sites in the black community.” (One initial retail site is in the city limits, in a neighborhood adjacent to Austin but not predominantly black.) Ford said he’s been under pressure from his constituents, who are “frustrated because they see other communities with these huge test sites set up by the government, and Walmart, and other facilities with big drive-ups. Yet a large segment of the population is ignored. And it’s been recently noted that the segment that has been ignored is the segment that’s been the hardest hit with deaths and positive cases.” According to public data, black Chicago residents are dying of Covid-19 at four times the rate of white residents. Statewide, black Illinoisans are testing positive at twice the rate of their white counterparts. All the while, black Illinoisans have received about half as many tests. Assessing the White House retail testing plan from its inception, Rutgers professor Naa Oyo A. Kwate argues that centering stores as testing points compounds issues of access because of retailers’ segregated location patterns, generally away from black neighborhoods.  Kwate said a more equitable option could have been chosen, such as post office parking lots or schools, which are more equally distributed throughout communities. “Trying to respond to the pandemic by partnering with private retail sites, that doesn’t really make sense,” said Kwate, adding that the few testing centers in the Chicago area aren’t strategically located relative to the population density and the city’s hardest-hit communities. With half of the Chicago region’s retail testing centers at a Walgreens and Walmart in far-flung suburbs, Kwate said, “if you’re on either on the South Side or in a predominantly black suburb, you have to go a really long way — you’re driving on the expressway for at least half an hour, paying tolls to get there. It’s nowhere close to where you are.” Struggles with the White House’s rollout of its retail plan have been coupled with rhetorical efforts to shift responsibility and blame. Initially, the White House took the lead. On March 13, standing in the Rose Garden alongside store CEOs, White House officials described retailers playing an integral role in the coronavirus task force’s “new partnership with the private sector to vastly increase and accelerate our capacity to test for the coronavirus.”  Later, stores reinforced the White House and federal government’s leadership role. CVS noted that “we are partnering with the federal government to support this effort,” and Walgreens announced that locations had been chosen “in collaboration with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.”  According to reporting from the Chicago Tribune, Walmart’s testing centers in the Chicago area were “privately managed under federal contracts.” Yet despite the federal government announcing the retail plan, choosing the retail locations, and managing the retail contracts, the president placed the onus of shortcomings on the states. On April 14, after reports of sputters in retail testing, Trump distanced himself from the plan. He asserted that if states wanted retail testing centers, they should find a way to direct it themselves. “Washington shouldn’t be doing that,” Trump said during a briefing. “We can’t be thinking about a Walmart parking lot that’s 2,000 miles away where we’re doing testing, but a governor of a state can, and a mayor can, and right down the line.”  The next day, Trump once again framed the initiative as a responsibility of state governors and companies, and threatened to punish these local leaders if they poorly implemented it. Asked when retail testing would be broadly available to more Americans, Trump replied that “the companies will determine that, and the governors will determine that,” adding, “if we’re not happy, we’ll take very strong action against a state or a governor.” Explaining why the public-private partnership has not reached a wider scale, reports in Business Insider and the Washington Post cited retailers’ struggle to gain access to enough tests and testing materials, and manage the large demand. The White House addressed concerns of scale and equity in a recent press briefing. “I want you to know that we’re building on the public-private partnership that the president rolled out with pharmacy and retail companies like CVS, Walgreens, Rite Aid, and Kroger to accelerate testing for more Americans in more communities across the nation. We’re going to be increasing access to testing for undertested, underserved, and minority communities,” said Surgeon General Jerome Adams last Wednesday, mentioning companies that have joined the effort since the initial announcement. Amid federal dysfunction, under pressure from advocacy groups and politicians, and in light of emerging racial disparities, many governors have moved to fill the void of the president’s testing plan in minority neighborhoods. This month, Illinois Gov. J.B. Pritzker announced that he would be launching new testing centers in black communities. Louisiana Gov. John Bel Edwards said he would be doing the same in rural areas. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced his administration would provide pop-up testing sites in “minority communities downstate” in New York City. And partnering with the Urban League, Florida recently opened walk-up centers to reach black communities in Broward County. The White House’s inability to facilitate widespread free public testing through private sector retailers fits within a broader critique of the administration’s market-based response to the coronavirus.  Earlier this month, New York Times Magazine writer Nikole Hannah-Jones criticized the posture, tweeting, “I never want to hear that the government should be run like a business. This crisis has laid bare the dangers of gutting our public institutions & services, depending on companies dedicated to profit rather than government-mandated to work for the common good. Death is the result.” The Times editorial board expressed similar sentiments, describing the White House coronavirus response as an “embrace of markets so extreme it might seem farcical if it wasn’t resulting in unnecessary deaths.”  The market-based failure resonates particularly for black Americans, who have previously suffered under marquee failed federal public-private partnerships. In her book Race for Profit, Keeanga-Yamahtta Taylor explores how reliance on private sector solutions to provide access to services like housing has traditionally left black communities woefully underserved.  “There is a reason why African American organizations, community groups, have always called for a greater role of the state, because of the ways that racism and discrimination run rampant and unchecked in the private sector,” Taylor said last year in an interview with Chris Hayes. Moving forward, establishing a national coronavirus testing plan remains crucial for both managing spread and tracking inequity. This month, medical professionals continue to criticize the racial disparities in testing, particularly among African Americans. Though Trump has been reluctant to engage on testing failures, he has acknowledged Covid-19’s impact on African Americans has “been disproportional.”  Yet as retailers like CVS and Walmart continue to slowly scale up, they are facing problems in reaching people without access to cars, or who live in segregated neighborhoods where these stores are not as accessible. The Trump administration has long opposed the consideration of disparate impacts in policymaking. It remains to be seen whether the federal government will be able to implement a testing system to fully address the racial inequities — and stymie the coronavirus’s disparate impact on black Americans.  This article was reported in partnership with Type Investigations. Correction, April 28: An earlier version of this article misstated Adarra Benjamin’s job title, and a graphic misstated the number of deaths for certain demographic groups. CREDITSType InvestigationsReporting editor: Alissa FigueroaData editor: Taylor EldridgeFact-checker: Hannah Beckler VoxStory editor: Kay SteigerGraphics: Christina AnimashaunPhotographer: Olivia Obineme for VoxVisuals editor: Kainaz AmariaCopy editors: Tim Williams and Tanya Pai Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.As early as January, the burgeoning novel coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan, China, was frequently highlighted in the president’s daily intelligence briefing, according to a Washington Post report. Several current and former US officials told the Post’s Greg Miller and Ellen Nakashima that details about the virus — including updates on its spread throughout the world, information about China seeking to hide its death toll and rate of infection, and warnings that the virus may have serious political and economic consequences — were included in the President’s Daily Brief in January and February. Over that same time, President Trump and senior administration officials were still publicly downplaying the virus’s threat. As of Monday, more than 55,000 people in the US have died of Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, and there have been nearly a million confirmed US cases, according to the Johns Hopkins tracker. But the repeated warnings didn’t appear to catch the president’s attention. Trump routinely skips reading the PDB and even ignores the oral summaries he receives from intelligence staff two or three times each week, according to the officials, who spoke with the Post anonymously. The Office of the Director of National Intelligence, which is responsible for putting together the PDB, denied the story but refused to elaborate further. “The detail of this is not true,” an official from the office told the Post. Acting Director of National Intelligence Richard Grenell took to Twitter Monday evening to deny the story, again not going into more specifics. This isn’t true. And we told you this before you wrote. And you put the DNI denial of your premise in paragraph 9. https://t.co/kVYJvGxL0r But it’s not clear that a denial makes the situation any better. That opens the door to several possibilities: Information about the virus was in the PDB and the president ignored it; the coronavirus information in the PDB wasn’t good enough for the president to take action; or coronavirus information wasn’t included in the PDB.  Any of these three scenarios would represent a failure of the president, the intelligence community, or both. The Post’s reporting begins to shed light on when Trump first learned about the serious risks of the novel coronavirus. If it’s true that the PDB presented accurate information in January about the virus, then several of Trump’s early public statements look particularly bad. On January 22, Trump told CNBC that the administration had the situation “totally under control.” Two days later, he praised Chinese President Xi Jinping over his country’s handling of the virus in a tweet. China has been working very hard to contain the Coronavirus. The United States greatly appreciates their efforts and transparency. It will all work out well. In particular, on behalf of the American People, I want to thank President Xi! On February 2, Trump officially banned anyone who had been in China over the previous 14 days from traveling to the US, telling Fox News’s Sean Hannity, “We pretty much shut it down coming in from China.” Eight days later, Trump said that the situation was under control at a campaign rally in Manchester, New Hampshire. “Looks like by April, you know, in theory, when it gets a little warmer, it miraculously goes away. I hope that’s true. But we’re doing great in our country. China, I spoke with President Xi, and they’re working very, very hard. And I think it’s going to all work out fine.” Throughout February, Trump repeatedly said that people in the US were not in danger from the virus.  The Coronavirus is very much under control in the USA. We are in contact with everyone and all relevant countries. CDC & World Health have been working hard and very smart. Stock Market starting to look very good to me! It wasn’t until a March 16 press briefing that he introduced social distancing guidelines. “My administration is recommending that all Americans, including the young and healthy, work to engage in schooling from home when possible,” he told reporters. “Avoid gathering in groups of more than 10 people. Avoid discretionary travel. And avoid eating and drinking at bars, restaurants and public food courts. If everyone makes this change or these critical changes and sacrifices now, we will rally together as one nation and we will defeat the virus. And we’re going to have a big celebration all together. With several weeks of focused action, we can turn the corner and turn it quickly.” At this point in the pandemic, the US has more confirmed cases — and deaths — than any other country, and earlier action by the Trump administration could have helped prevent the worst of it. Testing for the virus still lags behind other comparable countries, and the nation’s food and medical supply chains are strained. The administration could have taken steps in January and February to shore up these weaknesses, as Vox’s German Lopez explained:  Even after it became clear that the coronavirus outbreak was becoming a global threat in January, the Trump administration has been slow to prepare and react. The common refrain among experts is that other countries’ actions, such as China’s draconian measures, gave the US a bit of time to do something, but the federal government has failed to get even the basics right in that time. That begins, first and foremost, with testing. But as report after report has confirmed, the US has done a bad job in this area — falling behind its developed peers in Europe and Asia. While the US has dramatically scaled up testing in recent weeks, health care workers and patients still complain that they still sometimes can’t obtain tests even when symptoms are present. Not all of this is necessarily the Trump administration’s fault. When the CDC rolled out its tests, a component in them turned out to be faulty. That was unfortunate, but it put a big spotlight on the CDC’s decision to use its own test kit instead of test kits other countries have used, reportedly in an effort to create a more accurate test. Since then, as Olga Khazan explained at the Atlantic, the Trump administration consistently failed to make things better, with reports of infighting making it harder for the administration to get its act together. But this is exactly the kind of situation that proper preparedness, well, prepares federal agencies for. If the Trump administration had prioritized outbreak prevention before the coronavirus pandemic, it might have used the time prior to Covid-19’s appearance — or even January and February, when the global threat was increasingly clear — to establish contingencies in case something went wrong. House Intelligence Committee Chair Adam Schiff has called for an independent commission to investigate the administration’s early actions in response to the coronavirus pandemic. That investigation could unveil what Trump and senior administration officials knew and when. A similar investigation of the George W. Bush administration’s handling of 9/11 resulted in the declassification and release of PDBs from August 2001 indicating that officials were aware that Osama bin Laden was “determined to strike within the US.” The official coronavirus US death toll is now the equivalent of almost 19 9/11s; given the outbreak’s ongoing severity, an investigation is sorely needed. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  Seattle was the first place in the US to go into lockdown over the coronavirus, after an outbreak at a local nursing home woke Americans up to the threat the virus presented. Now, the city and Washington state are starting to plan for an eventual, gradual reopening.  Public health experts credit Gov. Jay Inslee and local leaders for taking the dramatic steps necessary to get the Covid-19 outbreak in the state under control. And the curve there is flattening, with new cases and deaths down from their earlier peak. But the economy has endured the same shock felt across the country. Officials have begun to discuss how to restart the economy, without risking a sudden resurgence in infections and deaths. With global giants like Microsoft and Starbucks headquartered in the state, Washington could be a model for the rest of the country on the best way to climb out of the coronavirus hole. The hard truth is no matter how cautiously reopening happens, Covid-19 is going to continue to spread. “I don’t think it’s possible to prevent all transmission. We need to keep the number of cases manageable,” Jeffrey Duchin, who leads the epidemiology division of the King County health department, told me. “We want to see something like a slow burn, where it doesn’t evolve into an uncontrollable raging fire.” The goal will be to relax some of the social distancing restrictions without overwhelming the health care system. The first small step came late last week, when Inslee announced that ongoing construction projects could resume, so long as they follow certain safety protocols. The next step may not come for some time; Inslee has already said the state’s stay-at-home order will extend beyond its current May 4 expiration date. Local public health experts expect the state will wait to see weeks of declining cases and deaths before taking more significant steps to restart its economy. Duchin told me that he wants to see “way more” progress before social distancing policies are changed. And once they are, just a few restrictions may be lifted. “It’s essential that we go carefully slowly and in a stepwise fashion. After each step, we’ll evaluate the impact,” Duchin said. “That will take two or three weeks. We need to stop and observe. Unfortunately we can’t figure this out in a few days. It will take a few weeks.” Washington state’s reopening plan is likely to share many features of the White House’s reopening guidance, which suggests a phased approach, local experts told me — except the state is likely to adopt a more cautious timeline than the Trump administration’s guidelines, which are more like a bare minimum.  “There’s a continuum, from people who really just care about making sure people don’t get sick and then to the other side, who don’t want the economy to be tanked,” Hilary Godwin, dean of the University of Washington’s school of public health, told me. “I would put the White House more on the end of caring more about the economy, though obviously they care about the people. What we’ve seen so far in Washington state is obviously Inslee cares deeply about the economy, but he has been a conscientious actor.” Overt caution worked for Washington in clamping down on the coronavirus. Now, the state sees it as the safest path to resuming normal life. The first known case of Covid-19 showed up in a Seattle suburb in mid-January; a man walked into a clinic complaining of fever and a cough. His doctors quickly learned he had recently returned from Wuhan, China, the original epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak. A month later, on February 29, the first reported death from coronavirus occurred at a Washington nursing home — a man whom, as the New Yorker reported, had had many family members come in to visit him shortly before his death. Local health officials soon petitioned Microsoft to ask its employees to work from home, which the company did on March 4, hoping it would set an example for other firms capable of remote work. One week later, on March 11, Seattle’s schools were closed. They have not reopened. Though Inslee did not issue a stay-at-home order until March 23, much of the state had already started to shut down before then. As Dow Constantine, the King County executive, told the New Yorker, local leaders believe the preliminary steps — closing schools, having Microsoft and Amazon employees working from home — had communicated the severity of the situation to most people: Constantine thought that announcing school closings was a potent communication strategy for reaching even people who weren’t parents, because it forced the community to see the coronavirus crisis in a different light. “We’re accustomed to schools closing when something really serious happens,” Constantine told me. “It was a way to speed up people’s perceptions—to send a message they could understand.” A month later, the results speak for themselves. Washington has tallied about 13,700 coronavirus cases and 760 deaths as of April 28. Adjusting for population, the state ranks 19th in cases per capita and 15th in deaths — despite being the first place to suffer a known outbreak and having to deal with uncontrolled spreading from the Kirkland nursing home. The daily highs for new cases and deaths came in late March. The state has seen several weeks of halting but evident decline. “When people ask me why things are going so great, I say, ‘We were on the front end, we reacted quickly, and we got lucky,’” Godwin said. “We are the public health model for doing things right.” But that success has come at a cost, Godwin added. “If I cared a lot about economics, I wouldn’t be as thrilled.” Like the rest of the country, Washington’s economy has ground to a halt because of the lockdowns put in place to limit the spread of the coronavirus. Nearly one-quarter of Washington households said somebody in their home had lost a job because of the economic downturn, according to data provided by the Downtown Seattle Association. About 650,000 jobless claims had been filed as of mid-April. Daily restaurant sales in Seattle were down nearly 80 percent; hotel revenues in the city have dropped by more than 90 percent. The expected cancellations of conventions in Seattle are projected to lead to economic losses exceeding $170 million. “I think realistically it’s a few years before we have something approaching the economic activity we had pre-pandemic,” Markham McIntyre, executive vice president of the Seattle Chamber of Commerce, told me. “That’s how we’re thinking of this, a multi-year campaign.” That toll is why these reopening conversations have begun to pick up. Government leaders are holding routine phone calls with businesses and their representatives to communicate their thinking and discuss the gestating plans to start easing social distancing. Officially, there is no plan yet for reopening. Inslee tweeted last week that discussions are ongoing, and Washington joined California and Oregon to formulate a roadmap for the entire West Coast. The Seattle area has one advantage over some other parts of the country: the presence of Microsoft and Starbucks headquarters, companies that have already undergone a partial reopening process in their locations in China. Microsoft is representative of a white-collar office setting and Starbucks has experience in retail. They’ve been sharing their lessons with the people and businesses working on a reopening plan, according to McIntyre and Jon Scholes, president and CEO of the Downtown Seattle Association. Microsoft, for example, has been suggesting some ideas about how to strengthen office culture, to set expectations for managers and workers about their productivity in an unusual environment. They’ve also covered basic sanitation, how to set up socially distant protocols for using elevators, and how to best arrange people’s desks to decrease the chances of airborne spread. Seattle businesses have also been working with software developers to come up with a “personal protective equipment wizard.” It would be a program into which companies could enter their industry, number of employees, operating square footage, and other key criteria. An algorithm would tell them how many masks and other protective equipment they should keep on hand at all times. Business leaders I spoke with emphasized the need for flexibility on the part of the government. New safety protocols will look different for a coffee shop than a factory or an office building. They floated the idea of setting “performance goals” — certain standards businesses should strive to meet — and then allowing businesses to figure out the best way to achieve them. “It will be very hard for the government to have a highly regulated response to this,” McIntyre said. “They don’t have the bandwidth or the interest in trying to manage a massive regulatory framework to check and enforce how businesses are reopening.” But businesses are also realistic about the pace of reopening — and the possibility social distancing restrictions would need to be put back into place if there is a surge in Covid-19 cases and deaths. As McIntyre said: “Any reopening is gonna be a dial, not a switch.” The uncomfortable truth is there’s no way to know when the right time to reopen an economy is. There is no evidence right now that the summer months will lead to a sudden decline in Covid-19 spread, and federal health officials are already warning of a second wave in the fall. No proven treatments for people who get infected exist nor do any vaccines to prevent people from becoming infected in the first place.  If public health were the only consideration, the solution to the coronavirus would be to keep everything shut down. It has been the only proven intervention. But it is also a blunt instrument, and there are other considerations. “The other side of the equation is the economic and personal financial costs of shutting things down,” Joel Kaufman, a UW professor who studies environmental and occupational health sciences and epidemiology, told me. “I think were it not for that, the answer would be to continue to stay at home. But that appears not to be a realistic option for the other parts of our country which are influenced by economic activity.” That being said, public health experts in Washington told me they expected the state to broadly follow the guidelines recently released by the White House — but with a few important exceptions and a higher threshold for when it’s safe to relax more restrictions.  The Trump administration has said states should wait until they see 14 consecutive days of declines in flu-like and Covid-like symptoms. Washington is likely to wait longer than that before taking any more significant steps to relax social distancing. “We have already passed that for the state of Washington, and I don’t think any public health experts would say today is the day,” Godwin told me. “I expect to be more protective of public health under our government.” It’s also unlikely Washington will fully embrace every bullet point in the White House plan. Godwin scoffed at the idea of large gatherings, which would be permitted with some restrictions in Phase 2 (out of 3) in the Trump administration outline. Washington has put a ban on gatherings of more than 250 people and experts expect that to be among the very last of the restrictions lifted, a sharp contrast to the federal guidance. “The thing that makes me say what was the large venues. I wouldn’t expect us to do that,” Godwin said. “The reason they were the first thing put into place is statistically if you have a large group of people and you have Covid-19 circulating, the chances you have somebody who is asymptomatic and they’ll pass it along are high.” But opening restaurants, with social distancing guidelines, and some retail locations might make sense, Godwin said. Factories and offices need to take certain precautions, but they could also probably start to resume activities soon. Inslee has already announced that schools would not reopen before the end of the academic year, though Trump recently suggested that might be possible. But the belief now is they will start back up in the fall. The success of social distancing depends not only on sound government policies but on individuals behaving responsibly. Since it appears the coronavirus may be more transmissible by air than by touch, Kaufman said he hopes that mask-wearing will remain commonplace when people go back to work. “When you’re out of your own house and have any opportunity to interact with other people, you are wearing a mask to prevent you from spreading the virus to other people,” he said, adding that it should be communicated that not wearing a mask is “an act of incredible selfishness.” Maybe most critical to the reopening plan will be the government’s ability to conduct contact tracing: the tedious work of identifying people who have the coronavirus and then getting in touch with everybody they’ve recently had contact with and either testing them or making sure they self-quarantining.  It will require a massive ramp-up: Johns Hopkins researchers estimate that, nationwide, the US has only a fraction of the trained staff necessary to do this work. Phone apps could automate some of the work “disease detectives” do, but a major expansion of the public health workforce will be necessary.  “Even a few cases if unrecognized will spark an outbreak that will spiral out of control. You have to be able to identify almost all the cases. If you miss a few, those little sparks can set off a forest fire,” Duchin said. “We’re not absolutely sure that we’re gonna be able to do it.” The coronavirus is a particularly challenging pathogen to track because symptoms don’t appear for several days after a person has been infected. “The rapidity with which this work has to be done is really unprecedented.” But everybody, even Duchin, is anxious for some degree of normalcy to resume. He’s looking forward to getting back out with his cycling friends (he’s feeling out of shape these days). He also has a daughter, a senior in college, hoping to visit with friends before the summer comes and goes. The public health experts who are urging caution feel the same kind of pressure as the rest of us. But this process will require patience. That will be the first, second, and third principle of Washington’s reopening plans. “This disease isn’t gone. One of the misperceptions is it’s going to go away if we suppress it and we can go back to normal. But it’s lurking. We’re just as susceptible,” Duchin said. “The potential for this to spiral out of control will be with us for many months.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  New York City is still battling America’s worst Covid-19 outbreak to date. And now, even as some states begin to consider reopening, many sparsely populated areas of rural America are seeing a worrying uptick in cases.  “The epicenter of this outbreak really has shifted into the smaller rural areas,” said Angela Hewlett, associate professor in infectious disease at the University of Nebraska Medical Center, in a recent Infectious Diseases Society of America briefing. And that’s a major problem, given that the health systems of many of these places are the least equipped to deal with a sudden surge in cases.  Testing in many less-populous areas has lagged even further behind the already-low national average, obscuring the extent of transmission in more sparsely populated areas. As protests in largely rural states show, some people assume rural areas might be spared the worst of Covid-19 outbreaks. Yet many people in rural regions work in large-scale industries, such as food processing, where social distancing is challenging and they’re at higher risk. “Part of the reason that we’re seeing such dramatic increases in rural communities” is because the virus is running rampant through workplaces like factories and farms, says Hewlett.  “These are not places where typically people can work from home,” she notes. Instead, “there are often lots of people working in very close contact in these essential jobs — which really is a setup for perpetuating a disease like this.”  This deadly combination will lead to longer, more sustained outbreaks in rural regions, “making reopening much more challenging,” Andrew Pavia, chief of pediatric infectious diseases at the University of Utah School of Medicine, said at the IDSA briefing. “I think we’ve oversimplified this idea of peaks. We’re not seeing one epidemic nationwide, or even statewide — we’re seeing different outbreaks, thousands of them playing out in different parts of the country.”  Rural can mean many things. The US census definition, for example, is any spot with a population of fewer than 50,000 people. But depending on what federal definition you use, some 17 percent to 49 percent of people in the US live in “rural” areas.  Additionally, otherwise-rural regions can have small and even fairly large metropolitan areas. According to a new Covid-19 map from the Dartmouth Atlas Project, the top 10 regions with the fastest growth rates in cases are primarily metropolitan areas with blue-collar industry, located in largely rural states.  Because they are small, many rural counties have few cases, giving the impression that broad regions of the country are still unaffected. A more accurate picture of what is happening with Covid-19 across the US emerges when the data are aggregated to larger geographic areas defined on where people get health care. “Both counties and states fail to reflect how and where people get care,” explains Elliott Fisher, a professor of health policy and medicine at the Dartmouth Institute. Fisher and his colleagues’ maps show the current status of the Covid-19 epidemic through 306 US “hospital referral regions.” (They used data collected by the New York Times and the US census, and they will be updated every weekday.) In addition, unlike many of the maps which just show total case numbers, the Dartmouth Atlas Project shows population-based rates of the virus’s prevalence and the average growth rate. Since hospital referral regions draw from multiple counties or even different states, Fisher hopes that the atlas may be able to provide “early signals about new outbreaks,” which may otherwise be missed. For example, Houma, Louisiana, a town of around 32,000 people in the Atchafalaya Basin — live oak and Cajun country — has almost as many cases per capita within its hospital region as Chicago. Greeley, Colorado, where there is a large JBS meatpacking plant, has more cases per capita within its hospital region than Washington, DC.  That kind of case reporting is particularly critical given the ongoing shortage of testing. In areas of Utah, very few people are getting tested. “Does that mean there’s no disease? Absolutely not,” Pavia says. “It means we don’t have a good spotlight on what’s going on. And so we’re missing things.”   Testing scarcity is a reflection of the general unequal distribution of medical resources, which extends far beyond Covid-19. According to the Chartis Group, 63 percent of rural hospitals don’t have ICU beds. Many rural hospitals have only a month’s worth of cash on hand and have lost a substantial part of their income due to the reduction of outpatient services during the pandemic. This leaves them even less equipped to handle the crisis.  Most epidemiology models predict that initial peaks in less-densely populated states may still be weeks away, making understanding these kinds of nuances — and not relaxing social distancing prematurely — critical. According to new federal guidelines, states should wait for a sustained decrease in cases over 14 days before easing restrictions. But these recommendations aren’t mandatory, and some states are behaving more cautiously than others — creating what Fisher terms a “natural experiment.”  Here’s a closer look at how communities in Central California, Alaska, South Dakota, Missouri, Nebraska, and Georgia are handling the uncertainty, and threat, of Covid-19.  Salinas, California, in Monterey County, is sometimes called the “Salad Bowl of the World.” Around 70 percent of the country’s lettuce — and a substantial amount of other produce — is grown here. As of April 28, the county had 185 confirmed cases, many of which were connected to the local farms. An employee at one of the largest local lettuce companies, Tanimura and Antle, for example, tested positive on April 22.  Health experts say more farmworkers around the country could be hit hard by the epidemic. “My fear is that once Covid-19 enters the farmworker population, it will be very difficult to prevent the spread, regardless of what is happening in the workplace,” Heather E. Riden, manager of the Western Center for Agricultural Health and Safety at the University of California Davis, told Inside Climate News.  Many of the nearly 888,000 people in the US who harvest produce work in Central California. The US Department of Agriculture estimates that around half are undocumented immigrants, who have been excluded from the federal Covid-19 stimulus relief. The front line for the nation’s food supply, these jobs have been declared “essential,” but workers have had trouble accessing protective equipment like masks, and companies have been slow to institute measures that would enable social distancing. Masks in this environment are needed not just to prevent Covid-19; farmworkers are also regularly exposed to pesticides and chemicals. As spring ramps up the growing season, farmers would normally be hiring additional workers, many of whom travel based on the season, adding another level of logistical difficulty and potential for disease spread.  California’s approximately 400,000 farmworkers are considered essential, but many, as immigrants, are exempt from the CARES package, nor do they have access to benefits like paid sick leave — or in some cases, even running water to regularly wash their hands. Some of those are at higher-risk work picking crops like strawberries, tomatoes, peaches, grapes, and apples. “Strawberries and other harvesting like that, the workers are in rows, so that kind of forces people to be close by one another,” says Lauro Barajas, vice president of the labor union United Farm Workers, who previously worked on farms in California. To add an additional hardship, H2A visas for foreign workers, like those strawberry season workers rely on, are also expected to be delayed due to the pandemic. Nor do many farms have much financial cushion if the season goes poorly; due to President Trump’s trade war, farm bankruptcies increased by 20 percent in 2019. In the 100 counties with the most farmworkers, $590 million in recent trade bailout payments were recently distributed without requiring improving conditions for farmworkers.  Barajas says, “The fear and the unknown, and a lot of different information — all these create a monster.” He notes that people working in agriculture are trying to protect themselves, but given their critical role in feeding the country, the government should do more. “Vegetables don’t grow in stores,” he says. “Farmworkers are always essential.” When the sockeye salmon run arrives in Alaska’s Bristol Bay in May, the population of the small town of Dillingham usually triples. “Thousands of fishermen travel from 48 states to work in the fishery,” says Andy Wink, executive director of the Bristol Bay Regional Seafood Development Association.  But due to the high risk of imported coronavirus cases, the town of Dillingham, which has only 16 hospital beds, recently asked Gov. Mike Dunleavy to consider closing the season. “We cannot foresee ANY plan that would avoid a significant impact to our community,” wrote Mayor Alice Ruby in an open letter. But the state of Alaska considers commercial fishing essential. Dillingham is now just one of many Alaskan towns bracing for an influx of travelers for commercial fishing — or a loss of the jobs that fuel the region’s economy. Gov. Dunleavy relaxed shelter-in-place restrictions on April 24, allowing restaurants, nail salons, and retail stores across the state to reopen. He has released state guidelines for commercial fishing vessels, requiring workers to self-quarantine for 14 days after arriving in Alaska, as well as screening before getting on a boat.  Even with statewide social distancing measures, the state’s daily case rate has still been almost doubling. While Alaska currently has some of the fewest confirmed Covid-19 cases in the country, it’s unclear how well the health care system — in a state where many towns can only be accessed by air or boat — will be able to cope with any kind of surge. The state’s chief medical officer has received a fraction of the supplies she’s requested, including inadequate numbers of personal protective equipment and test kits. Wink says that even as the state reopens, “Getting enough tests is a challenge.” Seafood companies in Dillingham have been working with a regional small laboratory, Northwest Pathology, to increase testing availability for the fishing season. The lab can now analyze 10,000 tests a day, but its efforts have been hamstrung by a continued lack of critical supplies, like reagents, as well as the CDC seizing supply orders.  Given Alaska’s limited health resources, as industries like commercial fishing — and normally, tourism — potentially bring new infection sources into Alaska, there’s a critical need to be able to identify and control new outbreaks before reopening. Minnehaha County, South Dakota, became a Covid-19 hot spot when almost 1,000 people became sick at a Smithfield Foods plant, a major pork processing center. Even as Covid cases in the state rise, Republican Gov. Kristi Noem has so far resisted issuing a statewide stay-at-home order.  A Smithfield Foods spokesperson tried to blame the outbreak on “living circumstances in certain cultures” in an interview with Fox News. But a BuzzFeed investigation showed that the company “did little to inform or protect employees during the critical two weeks after the first case at the plant surfaced.” Less than a week later, families were organizing a drive-by tribute for people to pay their respects to a former Smithfield Foods employee who had died of Covid-19.  It’s not just South Dakota. Investigate Midwest reports that as of April 22, there have been at least 2,700 reported Covid cases tied to 60 meatpacking facilities in 23 states.  An anonymous employee at a Smithfield Foods plant in Missouri has filed a lawsuit on April 24, saying that on the line, workers can’t even cover their mouths to cough. David Muraskin, an attorney with Public Justice representing the case, says, “If you miss a piece of meat, you get fined,” so workers, sometimes literally inches from each other, can’t take appropriate precautions.  The CDC has guidelines for critical workers, which would include slowing production lines and spreading people out. “That is a possibility, but companies are not doing that,” Muraskin says.  Instead, as other plants have closed — and more than a dozen have this month — more meat is added to the lines to compensate. This makes conditions even worse. The employee filing the lawsuit knows of at least 11 people who have Covid-19 symptoms, but the company is not doing contact tracing.  People with symptoms are often not encouraged to stay home. At Smithfield, employees are not given sick leave. “They dock you a point if you stay home sick,” Muraskin says. “If you have nine points in a year, they can fire you.”  To make things worse, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration has temporarily weakened enforcement mechanisms that might otherwise catch dangerous working conditions, leaving reporting violations up to employers. As outbreaks balloon uncontrolled, some facilities have been forced to shut down. USA Today reports at least 17 facilities, including the JBS pork plant in Worthington, Minnesota, which produced 10 percent of the country’s pork, closed this week. “When you have a large outbreak associated with an industry like the meatpacking industry,” Hewlett says, “then you can have a sustained community transmission.” Politico reports that USDA meat inspectors have been told to buy their own masks because the department doesn’t have enough. So far, one inspector has died of Covid-19.  The outbreaks tied to meatpacking facilities and food processors have significant impacts beyond the community outbreaks they have sparked. As Covid-19 reduces processing capacity, hog farmers and chicken farms in other rural areas are considering euthanizing thousands of animals, with rippling effects in everything from long-haul trucking to grocery stores.  “Breakdowns in the food supply chain could have significant economic impacts for both consumers and agricultural producers,” 32 senators wrote in an open letter to Vice President Mike Pence. “It is also imperative that precautions are taken to ensure the stability and safety of our food supply.” On the Dartmouth Atlas Project tracker, some of the highest growth rates in cases are in western Nebraska. In addition to the meatpacking industries that employ many in this region, there are many other industries in Nebraska where people work in close contact, like nursing homes and correctional facilities.  Sue Krohn-Taylor is an administrator at a 72-apartment low-income senior living facility in the large town of Grand Island. She says her building is now on a self-imposed lockdown with restricted visiting rules and hours.  The facility is near a cluster of meatpacking cases and across the street from a hospital, so she says the quarantined senior residents count the Life Flight emergency helicopters coming and going. “We’re used to one to two a month, and geez, last weekend it was 13 or 15 in one day,” she says. Forty-six percent of the people tested in Krohn-Taylor’s county were positive for Covid-19. Because there have been no state-sanctioned restrictions on facilities like hers, she’s been left in the uncomfortable position of setting the rules — and not all the residents appreciate it. “We’re in the middle of a red state, so a lot of them believe this is like the flu,” she says. “It’s a battle every day to get reality into focus.”  She also feels alone in the battle. “I’m 58 years old, and I have never felt so abandoned by my government,” Krohn-Taylor says. “Maybe I just lived in a bubble, but I always thought in times of crisis, as Americans we would never have to worry. Our government would take care of things.” Instead, she’s the one telling people to wear masks that some of the residents of the senior living facility stayed up all weekend making.  “Rural communities are all experiencing the same thing — a lack of resources,” says Jody Rutledge, who is deeply concerned for her mother, who is in a nursing home in Gordon, Nebraska. At least five nursing facilities in Nebraska now have confirmed cases of coronavirus, but testing and personal protective equipment like masks remain in short supply. Krohn-Taylor says her daughter works for a correctional facility and is coughing and has lost her sense of taste. “They still want her to go to work,” she says. (Jails and prisons have also become epicenters for Covid-19.) But despite the risk of transmission, when her daughter went to the doctor, she wasn’t initially given a test, although she’s now scheduled for one, due in part to Krohn-Taylor’s urging.  “The lies are taking lives,” she says, “and that is not okay.” Due to two now-infamous funerals, the town of Albany, Georgia, has one of the highest growth rates of cases in the US. Rural Georgia was unprepared for the introduction of Covid-19: Nine counties in the state not only don’t have hospitals, but have no practicing doctors at all. Many residents have underlying health conditions, and a third of the population lives under the poverty line.  Nevertheless, Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp announced April 21 that he too would reopen some businesses. Six other southern states with Republican governors have also announced they will be reopening, although not a time frame for when they will do so.  Around the country, the lack of federal mandates and unenforceable guidelines has left business owners to create their own standards for maintaining social distance. For example, the Georgia Board of Cosmetology and Barbers is suggesting barbers wear masks and disinfect shops, but there is no enforcement mechanism in place. Hugh Acheson, a restaurateur in Athens, Georgia — a progressive university town near Atlanta — says even the state’s more metropolitan areas are bracing for the worst. As a chef, he wants step-by-step instructions on how to sanitize, and what social distancing really means before restaurants reopen. “No meal is worth dying for,” he says. A CBS poll found that 71 percent of Americans wouldn’t feel comfortable going to a bar or restaurant even if stay-at-home restrictions were lifted. Those numbers reflect the disconnect between many government responses and how people are feeling. In a poll of 1,200 rural Americans, Rural Organizing found that while approval of the federal response tended to fall along partisan lines, a majority of nonmetropolitan respondents said they didn’t believe Trump adequately prepared for the coronavirus outbreak, and 44 percent said they didn’t think the federal government had gone far enough to slow the spread of the outbreak. In the meantime, Attorney General William Barr has suggested that he may sue states in order to force reopening measures.  Across the US, Fisher says he’s worried about confusing messaging. “There’s been a major absence of federal leadership,” he says. “There is absolutely an essential federal role in managing this pandemic, from setting clear national policy guidance that doesn’t confuse people to managing and distributing resources.”  Federal health officials estimated in early April that more than 300,000 Americans could die from Covid-19 if social distancing measures are lifted. This may be a conservative estimate; some models suggest as many as 400,000 Americans may die from Covid-19 by June 1. Nor is it a safe assumption that many of these deaths will occur in cities. Pavia suggests that this next phase of the pandemic won’t have a smooth curve so much as jagged crests and valleys, like the Wasatch mountains of his home state.  “When the valleys occur, we’re going to have to be very careful about how we try and return things toward a new normal.”  Lois Parshley is a freelance investigative journalist and the 2019-2020 Snedden Chair of Journalism at the University of Alaska Fairbanks. Follow her Covid-19 reporting on Twitter @loisparshley. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Vice President Mike Pence wants people to believe that when he made an unfulfilled promise in March that “we literally are going to see a dramatic increase in the availability of testing,” he was talking about the distribution of test kits, and not the actual processing of those kits, allowing people to find out whether they have the coronavirus. That’s the spin Pence offered during Monday’s White House coronavirus press briefing in a statement that was a bit like a college student arguing they’re just obligated to do their coursework, not turn it in.  During the press conference, ABC’s Jon Karl grilled Pence about the discrepancy between what he said in March and what has happened since. “Mr. Vice President, you said [in March] we’d by at 4 million tests by the following week. We’ve just now got there in the last few days,” Karl began. “So what have you learned about what went wrong over the last month and a half or two months, and what’s going to go right now? What lessons have you learned from the mistakes?” Pence initially responded by rejecting the question. “I appreciate the question, but it represents a misunderstanding on your part and, frankly, a lot of the people in the public’s part about the difference between having a test versus the ability to actually process the test,” Pence said, adding: “What the president brought about with this public-private partnership has brought us to the point where we’ve done 5.4 million tests to date.” .@jonkarl: We sat here over a month ago and heard similar remarks from CEOs about how they were going to rapidly roll out new testing. It didn't really happen. What went wrong?PENCE: "I appreciate the question, but it represents a misunderstanding on your part." pic.twitter.com/3IRz3Z44M7 The fact is, while data from the Covid Tracking Project indicates that the number of coronavirus tests completed per day in the US has indeed started to tick up over the past week, from about 150,000 per day to 200,000, the country’s testing capacity is still lagging far behind where experts say it needs to be to safely relax social distancing recommendations.  And these numbers are nowhere near where Pence suggested they would be on March 10, when he told reporters during a press briefing that “before the end of this week, another 4 million tests will be distributed.” (The US didn’t actually hit more than 4 million tests completed until last week, more than a month later.) As I’ve detailed, Pence is in the habit of misleadingly touting the raw number of tests completed and not the number completed per day, which obfuscates the reality that per-day testing capacity was largely flat until late last week. This graph from Axios illustrates how little progress was being made for much of this month: Perhaps with this in mind, Karl followed up by asking Pence if he was really trying to make the distinction he seemed to be trying to. “So when you promised 4 million tests seven weeks ago, you were just talking about tests being sent out, not actually being completed?” he asked. “Precisely correct,” Pence replied. KARL: So when you promised 4 million tests 7 weeks ago, you were just talking about tests being sent out, not completed?PENCE: "Precisely correct" pic.twitter.com/exxdP7RnB3 Advancing the narrative that the federal government did not underdeliver with respect to testing was a major theme of Monday’s briefing, one that also saw President Donald Trump giving executives from large private companies like CVS and Walmart an opportunity to talk about all they’re doing to increase testing capacity in the country.  
    Related
   While pushing egregious lies about US testing capacity, Trump has insisted that despite its vast resources, the federal government should take a back seat to the private sector and states when it comes to efforts to ramp up testing. States, however, have struggled to source tests themselves — and companies like CVS have similarly been unable to scale up their testing programs. Even though last month’s promises didn’t really come to fruition (despite what Pence would have you believe), more were made on Monday. “According to the governors’ plans for next month, we will easily double that 4 million [tests per month] number,” said Dr. Brett Giroir, an assistant secretary of health and human services. In other words, Giroir claimed 8 million coronavirus tests would be conducted next month, or about 258,000 per day. That would be progress — but it’d still be short of the 500,000 per day experts say is necessary to safely reopen businesses. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. As the coronavirus pandemic continues to rip through the US, hard-hit areas have been facing doctor shortages, placing both patients and overworked health care workers at greater risk.  Thousands of foreign doctors who already have clinical experience and are waiting for a chance to practice medicine in the US could step in to help. But even before the current crisis, the immigration system, coupled with medical licensing requirements, have made it difficult for them to work in the US and go where they’re needed.  Graduates of foreign medical schools face the same certification requirements as any American graduate — they have to pass their medical licensing exams and obtain a highly sought-after spot in a three- to seven-year residency program.  Many foreign students, though, have already completed years of training in their home countries before they seek US certification. That experience has little bearing on their admission into residency programs, where available spots are always fewer than the number of applicants, and graduates of US medical schools are given preference.  In 2020, about 40 percent of foreign medical school graduates didn’t “match” with a residency program, compared to only 6 percent of American graduates. That means thousands of qualified doctors being effectively shut out of practicing medicine in the US. And if they want to try again next year, that comes with a hefty price tag: It can cost thousands of dollars to apply to residency programs.  Amid the pandemic, both New York and New Jersey have eased some of these licensing requirements so that foreign medical graduates can contribute to the coronavirus response. As the virus continues to spread to rural America, where there was already a shortage of doctors, other states may also have to relax their licensing requirements for foreign grads, or else face imminent shortages.  For “S,” an aspiring doctor from Canada who asked to be identified only by his first initial for fear of harming his residency applications, the decision to attend medical school abroad has put him at a disadvantage in finding a residency placement in both the US and his home country.  He had applied to Canadian medical schools but wasn’t accepted into a single program. That’s not uncommon; medical school admissions are highly competitive in Canada — the average acceptance rate is about 10 percent, compared to nearly 40 percent at US schools. At the advice of his guidance counselor, “S” opted to attend medical school in the Caribbean instead, where dozens of programs now cater to students seeking to practice medicine in the US. He chose Saint James School of Medicine, spending about 16 months in class there before moving on to clinical rotations in the US. He worked in hospitals in Illinois, New Jersey, and rural Kentucky alongside US medical students and passed his medical licensing exams.  But when it came time to apply for residency programs in the US — a process that costs between $10,000 to $12,000 a year for foreign medical students — he couldn’t get a placement. He has applied three years in a row with no luck, but he knows people who are still applying for the sixth or seventh year in a row. And practicing medicine in Canada, which also has a doctor shortage, isn’t really an option either since hospital residency programs strongly favor Canadian medical school graduates.  “It’s kind of sad, because you’re so close. You have your degree. You just need your foot in the door,” he said. “Especially with coronavirus, you really want to help. You’re in a situation where you have the training.” After he didn’t match with a residency program this year, he’s planning to work as a physician’s assistant part-time and take up a flexible gig on the side, such as driving for Uber, to help pay off his student loans. He can’t work at a hospital amid the pandemic, but he’s been working with several volunteer organizations to aid coronavirus medical research.  Still, he feels he’s capable of contributing so much more to the pandemic response, especially if he were placed at one of the rural hospitals where he did his clinical rotations, since many of them are facing doctor shortages and a lack of specialists. But instead, he’s stuck in Canada.  “I am one among many sitting on the sideline while this pandemic unravels,” he said. “I have years of training, experience, and medical knowledge but can’t do anything but watch the situation unfold.”  Even for foreign medical students who are already living in the US, finding a placement in a residency program can prove difficult.   Sana Javed, a foreign medical school graduate from Pakistan hoping to specialize in psychiatry, lives in Germantown, Tennessee, with her husband, a physician on an H-1B skilled worker visa. He was able to get a waiver for the requirement that he work in Pakistan for two years prior to applying for residency programs in the US because he’s working in a medically underserved area at Le Bonheur Children’s Hospital in Memphis. Javed can get a work permit through him, but she said she didn’t match with a residency program this year, even though she has clinical experience in both the US and Pakistan.  She graduated from Nishtar Medical College & Hospital in Multan, Pakistan, in 2011 and worked for two-and-a-half years alongside doctors treating psychiatric patients — examining their mental status, designing treatment plans, and counseling them — and also volunteered at a military hospital. When she moved to the US in 2016, she worked for a few months as a clinical extern in a psychiatrist’s office in Troy, New York, and has been volunteering for a psychiatrist specializing in addiction medicine since. Javed is planning to reapply for residency programs in the next application cycle. In the meantime, she is trying to accumulate more clinical experience in the US to improve her application, but the pandemic has made that difficult. Her clinical externship in Chicago that was supposed to start in March was canceled, but she has another one lined up in New York later this year.  She said the field of psychiatry is especially critical during a pandemic and that she’s ready to contribute — but because she doesn’t have a placement in a residency program, her ability to do so is limited. “With this whole pandemic going on, there are many mental health issues emerging — suicide rates and attempts are increasing, PTSD will be on the rise as we will be nearing the end of this pandemic,” she said. “I am hoping to contribute to the mental health of the people of the United States as much as possible now and even after matching into residency.” But even if she had more years of clinical experience, it’s not clear whether that would assure her a place in a residency program.  Rizwan Rabbani, who is from Pakistan but attended medical school in China, had over seven years of clinical experience under his belt when he applied to residency programs.  He went back to Pakistan after graduation for a one-year internship in internal medicine, surgery, and urology, and then to work as an internal medicine practitioner in a teaching hospital for five years where he instructed undergraduate medical students. When he came to the US, he did an eight-month clinical rotation in cardiology at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City and another six-month rotation in family medicine in Pensacola, Florida.  Nevertheless, he failed to match three years in a row. Every time, he had to spend thousands of dollars.  “It’s a money-making process,” he said. “They are making money every time you apply to one program.”  He decided to move back to Pakistan instead, where he’s currently working in the government coronavirus quarantine facilities at a teaching hospital in Lahore. He’s also hoping to practice in the UK instead, where he can start working immediately as a physician with the clinical experience he already has. But he also could have brought that experience to coronavirus patients in the US. “I would have contributed as a frontline doctor in US hospitals and with my experience and skills, would have been very beneficial,” he said.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Fran, a nursing aide in Georgia, has lost all but two clients amid the coronavirus crisis. She’s an essential worker, but the pay isn’t good — $8 to $12 an hour, depending on the client. Her husband was laid off from his factory job at the start of the month because of the economic shutdown, and the unemployment benefits he receives are now keeping them both afloat. She’s heard the chatter about expanded unemployment insurance being too generous, but she’s not having it. “It’s not their fault that their unemployment is more, they didn’t want to stop working,” she told me. “A lot of people are living on the unemployment because they didn’t have a choice, they were out of work. Most of the problem lies with how much essential workers were getting in the first place.” The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act, signed into law in March made a major change to the American unemployment insurance system to respond to the pandemic, which has left millions of people out of work. It tacks on an extra $600 per week to unemployment benefits through July and expands the pool of potential recipients to people who are self-employed, freelancers, and contract workers who are usually ineligible to collect. The point of the expansion is two-fold: to help people stay afloat during the economic shutdown, and to keep them at home. 
    Related
   When the $2.2 trillion stimulus package was being debated, some Republicans in the Senate argued it was being too nice to unemployed workers, noting that for many people, unemployment benefits may actually amount to more than they’d be paid if they were going to work. Indeed, in many states, beefed-up unemployment insurance is greater than the average wages being replaced. Beyond the politics of it, the situation has caused real tensions for people affected. Expanded unemployment is a source of animosity among some essential workers who realize they’re making less than they would if they were unemployed. Some would rather quit, stay at home, where they’re safe, and collect benefits, but they’re in a tough spot — unemployment is generally for people who are fired, laid off, or furloughed, not people who voluntarily leave their jobs. And as certain states begin to reopen parts of their economies, more people are going to face a similar conundrum: go back to work and put their health at risk, or stay home and bet on unemployment, even though collecting benefits is far from guaranteed. Typically, unemployment benefits were meant to replace about 40 percent of a person’s weekly earnings, explained Gary Burtless, a senior fellow in economic studies at the Brookings Institution. In February, before the pandemic took hold, the average unemployment benefit nationally was $387, though it varies a lot by state — the average in Mississippi was $215, in Massachusetts, it was $550. Adding on an extra $600 makes a big difference. “It just transforms the whole system,” Burtless said. “For people with average pay or below-average pay, it’s a very big weekly benefit if they ever receive it.” More than 26 million people have filed new jobless claims over the span of five weeks amid the pandemic and accompanying economic shutdown. Unemployment systems across the country have been jammed, meaning many people haven’t begun collecting benefits at all — more than two-thirds of jobless Americans didn’t get unemployment benefits in March. But if and when people do get the money they’re entitled to, for many, it will make a real impact. That’s the point. “Part of the way I like to frame this is there are different problems we’re trying to solve for,” said Bradley Hardy, a professor of public administration and policy at American University. “The first part of the problem providing liquidity to individuals and families so they can pay for their lives, maintain their wellbeing, economically and otherwise.” In other words, it’s meant to keep people afloat. The expanded benefits are also supposed to keep people home and allow them to social distance, helping to bring down numbers of coronavirus cases, the ultimate goal. The benefits are supposed to keep people who are laid off or furloughed in their homes instead of knocking on doors trying desperately to get reemployed so they can feed themselves or their families. And in many states, unemployment benefits — if you can get them — are a good deal, and indeed, a better deal than going to work. According to an analysis from the New York Times, workers in more than half of states will get more in unemployment benefits than their regular salaries, on average. While the CARES Act was being debated, some Republican lawmakers flagged that expanded unemployment benefits would likely be more than many people make at their jobs. “This bill pays you more not to work than if you were working,” Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-SC) told reporters at a press conference in March. The concern he and others expressed was that the expanded benefits would disincentivize people from going back to work. But part of the plan is to keep people home instead of scrambling to find a job. The expanded benefits are temporary — as it stands, they only last through July — and many people prefer to work anyway. Brandon Lee, a sanitation worker in Ohio, makes $14 an hour, which amounts to $560 a week if he’s getting 40 hours, which he sometimes doesn’t. He has a 10-month-old son and looked into unemployment so he could stay home and take care of him, but decided against it. “I’d rather be working, honestly, but I’m kind of happy I’m working,” he told me. But many workers like Lee who have been deemed essential and are still on the job have noticed that unemployment is indeed a more lucrative deal than their own situations. Many of the jobs deemed “essential” — at grocery stores, fast food restaurants, pharmacies, elder care, etc. — are also low-paying. For some parents who are continuing to go to work, their costs are actually increasing because their kids are home and they’re having to pay extra for child care. One Minnesota factory worker told me they make $16 an hour but are now paying $10 an hour for child care. “There is a tension there, and the tension is whether there will eventually be some perceived unfairness of treating people who are staying at home and trying to avoid the risk of infection while these people who are exposing themselves to that risk are not necessarily getting a pay increase,” Burtless said. Some businesses are offering hazard pay, but it’s being handled on a case-by-case basis. There are some proposals in Congress to include hazard pay for essential workers in upcoming legislation, but it’s not clear any of those proposals will become law. Many essential workers are stuck. Some of them would rather not work and put their health at risk, but generally, people who leave their jobs voluntarily aren’t eligible to collect unemployment. They can quit and apply, but there are no guarantees they’ll be able to collect benefits. Kristi, a Family Dollar worker in Georgia, told me she normally makes $10.50 an hour but has now had her pay temporarily bumped up to $12.50 an hour by the company. She’s aware that unemployment would be a more lucrative and safer option, but she’s worried if she quits and applies, she won’t be approved. “If I say, look, I want to be at home with my family, then, okay well you lost your job and you can’t collect unemployment,” she said. “I was looking into that, if there’s some loophole where I can say, look, I’m terrified to do this, and I don’t want to be exposed to these people that aren’t following the rules, that don’t take it seriously, for $12.50 an hour.” Others are taking the chance. Eva Coyle was working part-time at a local grocery store in North Carolina when the pandemic hit and grew increasingly concerned about her safety. When her store offered a leave of absence, she took it, opting to “throw myself at the mercy” of the social safety net. She’s over 65 and collects Social Security and is on Medicare, and she’s applied for food stamps and unemployment.  “You get to a certain age, and I’m not somebody who’s looking for a career anymore or a full-time job, but I can’t live on Social Security, so I have to continue to work and I’m not quite sure what the future holds for me,” she said. “I have no savings, so I’m in the boat with so many other Americans, really no backup.” Thus far, essential workers have largely been the ones experiencing this scenario of having to work when they’d rather stay home and collect unemployment, but as states begin reopening their economies, it’s something more Americans will face. Georgia began to lift some restrictions and allow some businesses to reopen on Friday. Colorado is starting to do the same. That means people are being recalled to work. Some people would, understandably, rather stay home instead of going back on the job, but it’s not clear they’ll be able to collect unemployment. As a Reuters article recently noted, people who are afraid of getting the coronavirus when going back to work may not get unemployment benefits. Being too scared to work isn’t a qualifier. Jess Clark, a self-employed tattoo artist in Georgia, would rather continue to social distance but instead is going to have to go back to work. She’s been out of work for six weeks and because of delays in the system was never able to collect benefits at all. “Many of us are being forced to go back to work because we no longer are eligible for the unemployment benefit many of us have yet to receive,” Clark said in an email. A benefits system with weeks upon weeks of delays where many people never are able to collect at all isn’t too generous, it’s not generous enough. As people are asked to go back to work, there certainly will be some who try to make a calculation as to whether they can continue to stay home and stay safe instead of putting their health at risk. Or people might look for different types of jobs. But it’s going to be difficult to tease out what is driving decisions. “To the degree that there are vacancies, how much of this is really explained by the fear of coronavirus, which is legitimate?” Hardy said. The last recession is also fresh in many workers’ memories, including how hard it was to find a job for many people. Staying at home and collecting unemployment benefits set to expire in a few months isn’t a risk-free calculation.  “You might be quite legitimately fearful that if you turn down the job from which you’ve been furloughed, it may take you a very, very long time to find another job that pays the bills,” Burtless said. “And that is a reasonable fear based on what we just went through from 2008 to 2015 or so. Those spells of unemployment were extremely long.” East Asian countries were way ahead of much of the West in adopting widespread mask-wearing as a means to reduce transmission of the coronavirus. And complaints about the Trump administration’s inability to ramp up testing to the kind of levels successfully used to curb a once-major outbreak in South Korea have been endemic for months.  But there’s something else Asian countries do to control the spread that seems almost unthinkable in the United States: centralized isolation of people who test positive for Covid-19 and their close contacts.  The implementation of these systems varies from country to country, according to local circumstances and preferences. But from China to Hong Kong to Taiwan to Korea, the broad outline is the same: You don’t tell sick people to go home where they can infect their families and roommates; you send them someplace set aside for the purpose. Since some of the people isolated end up being asymptomatic, it’s inconvenient to be forced outside of the home. But for the many people who do get sick, just not sick enough to require intensive care in a hospital setting, it’s convenient to have a safe and well-monitored place to recuperate.  Isolation is the less warm-and-fuzzy side of the “more testing and more contact tracing” mantra. But it does seem to work. Singapore, for example, had coronavirus well contained but didn’t practice centralized quarantining among its population of migrant workers — only to see their dorms become a major outbreak hot spot.  Many Americans instinctively resist this idea, or assert that other Americans would. But the fact is the US has already accepted drastic restrictions on activity to curb the pandemic, and centralized isolation measures might make it easier to shift to more freedom on other fronts. Meanwhile, the country is currently well-provisioned with vacant hotel rooms and college dorms that could be used for the purpose. And even if mandatory isolation turns out to be a bridge too far politically, a purely voluntary quarantine system could still do an incredible amount of good. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and other American public health institutions, the best thing to do if you get sick with Covid-19 and don’t require hospitalization is to try to isolate yourself at home to protect your family members or roommates.  “As much as possible, stay in a specific room and away from other people and pets in your home,” says the CDC. “Also, you should use a separate bathroom, if available.” For many people, this simply isn’t possible in practice. The New York Times reporter Dana Goldstein described her experience of getting sick only to see her husband and young daughter also succumb to infection since there was no practical way to isolate inside their New York City apartment.  11. We lacked masks, surgical gloves and a second bathroom. My husband was taking on all childcare and could not also disinfect every item I touched. In a functioning system, medical supplies would be provided to affected families, or sick patients would be cared for elsewhere. At the opposite end of the spectrum, my family owns a rowhouse in Washington, DC, that includes a basement apartment with a kitchen, washer-dryer, and separate entrance. We normally rent it out on Airbnb or use it as guest lodging when family or friends from out of town want to visit. None of that is possible during the pandemic, so right now it’s my home office. But I’ve also set it up as quarantine quarters, stocked with easily 14 days’ worth of nonperishable food and everything else I’d need in the event that I start showing symptoms.  But while this is nice for me, it’s an unrealistic at-home standard for the typical person, and it’s not even clear that isolating in the basement would work. Chris Cuomo ended up living out my hypothetical basement isolation plan when he was diagnosed with Covid-19, but his wife got sick anyway.  It’s not 100 percent clear how that happened, though after reading a preliminary study about how there’s some evidence the coronavirus could spread via air conditioning ducts, it’s possible centralized climate control systems could negate efforts to isolate at home.  Standard practice in developed Asian countries, by contrast, is to isolate the moderately — or often even just potentially — ill outside the home. Hong Kong has more metro riders than New York in a city with a similar population size and significantly fewer miles of track. And while Hong Kong has a lower overall population density than New York City, that’s because nearly 40 percent of the territory is composed of designated country parks that are free of development. The built-up portion of Hong Kong is hyper-dense, and the average apartment is smaller than 500 square feet. But despite these factors and very close economic linkages to China, Hong Kong contained the crisis — not just with tests but with centralized isolation. Mike Bird, a Wall Street Journal financial markets correspondent based in Hong Kong, describes a very different situation from what Goldstein faced. Simply because a friend fell sick, Bird was placed in a spartan but comfortable isolation camp for a 14-day spell. What real contact tracing looks like : A friend caught covid-19, so I was put in a HK quarantine camp for close contacts 'til it'd been 14 days since I'd seen them. Been out a little while now, never had symptoms of any sort. More natural light, faster wifi than my flat. pic.twitter.com/xAJwEH6MUe Korea, which simply had too many cases to isolate this aggressively, needed to adopt a tiered system. Moderately ill people are sent to an isolation center, and only genuinely asymptomatic cases are told to stay home and self-quarantine there. But people ordered to stay home aren’t left on their own. The government sends “quarantine care packages” with groceries, masks, hand sanitizer, and instructions on how to safely dispose of potentially contaminated trash. The Koreans have also been experimenting with location-tracking bracelets to enforce self-quarantine orders.  At the other end of the spectrum, case volumes in Taiwan have been persistently low enough that hospitals are the centralized isolation facilities.  In mainland China, where the outbreak raged out of control after weeks of denial and cover-up from authorities, a wide suite of tough measures was eventually brought to bear to get things under control. A large team of researchers led by the University of Southampton looked at Chinese data and determined that of everything they did, “early detection and isolation of cases was estimated to prevent more infections than travel restrictions and contact reductions.”  This is what Americans are talking about when they emphasize the centrality of more testing to getting the country safely moving again. But the “isolation” part of the strategy is important. If you test people and keep them trapped inside with their families, you’re not accomplishing nearly as much as you would if you actually isolated them. A common reaction in the United States is that while this might work fine in Asian countries, there’s no way it would fly in America. As Ezra Klein writes, “the US is a very different country, with a more mistrustful, individualistic culture.” That might be so. But it’s worth recalling that in 2017, hundreds of thousands of Koreans took to the streets in a sustained mass protest movement to get a corrupt president booted from office. The incredible protest movement that rocked Hong Kong throughout 2019 was less successful, but the courage and tenacity of those protesters showed pretty clearly that Asian authorities are not dealing with a sheep-like public or one that puts unquestioning trust in incumbent governments.  Mass publics have been willing to embrace quarantine measures in part because they make sense. The US government’s official stance is that it’s not safe for a sick person to have contact with her roommates, family, or even house pets; given that reality, it’s the failure to isolate that seems to require justification. It’s also more humane. Nobody wants to listen to a loved one suffer alone in the room next door without comfort or assistance. Even people who don’t require acute care benefit from some kind of attention and support, and that’s best provided by trained personnel in an organized setting.  Last but by no means least, stricter restrictions on the activities of those exposed allows for a less restrictive overall environment. America’s current policy restricts healthy people’s ability to access outdoor space, generates paranoia about passing encounters with runners or cyclists, and discourages people from seeking routine health care for ailments that aren't Covid-19. But actual sick people are sent home to potentially infect their loved ones. It’s not so much that the US is doing more than Asia to prioritize liberty over public health as that it’s ignoring evidence on which restrictions of liberty are effective.  Even if mandatory centralized quarantine does prove to be a bridge too far for the American political system, the striking thing about the status quo is there’s no good way for people to voluntarily isolate themselves from other members of the household.  If states and cities began to invest in quarantine facilities — like by buying out hotels, which are currently hurting for lack of customers — opening them up on a voluntary basis could do an enormous amount of good. But especially for jurisdictions with smaller caseloads that are eager to “open up,” it’s really worth thinking harder about what the plan is when new cases pop up.  Strict centralized isolation measures would likely ultimately be cheaper and less invasive than ping-ponging in and out of lockdown. It’s what the most successful coronavirus-fighting countries are doing. And since the US has already turned almost every aspect of daily life upside down, it should think about trying a similar strategy, too. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Why do some Americans react differently to the threat of terrorism than to the threat of the coronavirus?  This is a question I’ve been thinking about a lot lately, particularly in the wake of small protests emerging in opposition to state stay-at-home orders. And particularly as demands from some conservatives to “reopen the economy” continue despite the pandemic continuing to kill thousands of Americans.  On Twitter, MSNBC host Chris Hayes shared many of the same thoughts, noting that after the terrorist attacks of 9/11, “We completely transformed nearly every facet of American public life and governance” in response. Many of the same voices who urged that transformation seem to be reacting to the coronavirus pandemic — which has killed tens of thousands more than the 9/11 attacks — far differently.  Trying to imagine people going around after 9/11 saying "You know, the flu kills 60,000 a people a year so not sure what the big deal is here!" and how the people *now* making that same argument would have received it then. To be sure, while the reaction to 9/11 was transformative for millions of Americans, it didn’t have the same economic repercussions as the coronavirus pandemic, but the differing attitudes to terrorism and pandemics were obvious well before the stay-at-home orders were issued.   Researchers on how anxiety impacts our politics argue that our different responses to terrorism and disease are the result of the politicization of anxiety, an emotional reaction to a perceived threat.  Bethany Albertson of the University of Texas and Shana Gadarian of Syracuse University are the authors of Anxious Politics: Democratic Citizenship in a Threatening World. In their work, they’ve found that what individuals want most when facing anxiety is certainty and protection. “When we’re anxious, we need to put our trust in someone to protect us,” Albertson told me. In more typical disasters, the government becomes a beacon of security for many Americans, leading to the “rally round the flag” effect in which support for presidents and trust in the government rises during times of crisis. In their book, they looked at four different policy areas — public health, terrorism, climate change, and immigration — and divided them between “framed threats” and “unframed threats.” In short, a “framed threat” is a partisan one, where the “threat” level depends on your political perspective (some people are very anxious about climate change; others are very anxious about immigration levels).  An “unframed” threat, like terrorism or a public health catastrophe, is one where the threat is immediate and obvious to everyone. As Gadarian told the Niskanen Center in an interview, unframed threats are “ones where we don’t actually need politicians to necessarily tell you that you should be scared. Democrats and Republicans alike are scared about terrorism after 9/11.” Unframed threats, then, are supposed to be nonpartisan.  But the coronavirus, coupled with the federal government’s poor response and an existing lack of trust in institutions (including the media), has scrambled that response. Albertson told me that in the midst of the pandemic, “who [is] feeling anxious about this threat and who people are trusting have strong partisan predictors,” which broke with their previous research showing that response to a pandemic-level threat would be largely nonpartisan.  But Americans still want to hear from medical authorities over politicians. Gadarian told me, “They don’t want to hear as much from the political leaders, particularly when they think that their performance to date has been pretty bad.”  In this interview, Albertson and Gadarian discussed how partisanship and the actions of political elites are impacting anxiety and what reporters (like me!) and the media can do to help. This interview has been edited for length and clarity.  How do you define anxiety? You do not necessarily mean the anxiety that I feel about going to the grocery store during a pandemic. How do you think about anxiety in a political context? Well, I think actually the anxiety about getting sick is part of the politicization of anxiety. So, when we talk about anxiety, we’re talking about a kind of emotional reaction to a threat that people see in the environment — the recognition of a threat, and the uncertainty that goes around with how to protect oneself.  So in a pandemic, the kinds of things that people become anxious about may really be about becoming sick. The [anxiety] may be about dying, so that can be a source of anxiety in terrorism, as well. I think the concerns that people have, some of them are wrapped up in these concerns about physical harm. ... Now, in different parts of the book, we look at four different policy areas. We look at immigration, we look at terrorism, we look at climate change, and we look at public health outbreaks. The anxiety, the source of that anxiety, is different across those areas. But what we argue is that what people are looking for is a way to cope with that anxiety. And they want policies, and they want leaders who can protect them. How would you say the anxiety from terrorism differs from the anxiety caused by a public health threat? I think one of the variables to think about is whether the threat is coming internally or externally. In general, when we’re anxious, we need to put our trust in someone to protect us. And so you can say in general that anxious Americans put their trust in the government. When we’re anxious about the economy, though, and we think the government is at fault, anxiety makes trust in governments go down.  And so you can think about this as, when we’re anxious, like directly after 9/11, trust in the government goes up, and that’s rally around the flag. That’s “we need to believe in our government to keep us safe and feel protected.” And that gives way over time. It doesn’t last. And it takes on partisan dimensions over time.  But a public health threat, to the extent it’s external, should also prompt an increase of trust. And it shouldn’t hurt trust in government because it is supposed to be this external thing that hits us exogenous to the United States. ... It’s more complicated than that, though, because we’re getting daily updates on ways in which the government hasn’t been protecting us. And so I think that this external/internal attribution breaks down in our current context. Do you think that’s why some people have turned to conspiracy theories? When you are constantly getting news about how the government has failed, or even how medical professionals aren’t as knowledgeable, and someone claims, “I have this means to prove that this is all a hoax,” or, “I’m the person with the cure,” [maybe] people are just looking for something to trust. Yeah, I think that that’s part of it. I don’t know if you’ve talked to Joanne Miller at the University of Delaware about her conspiracy theories work. She’s got some really interesting stuff, and she’s out in the field this week with some Covid-19 conspiracy theories. She and her coauthors argue that conspiracy theories are for people who have experienced political losses. And they’re talking particularly about political conspiracy theories. Right. But I think this sense of loss and [the idea] that if the world were fair then my team would be in charge, that kind of psychology leads you to endorse theories that on their face have very little backing. And I think that sense of, “Yeah, the government has failed. No, the experts don’t know what they’re talking about” — that work has been done by political elites for a long time to try and denigrate experts. The current president is particularly good at it, but that is a long-term project, particularly of elites on the right, to denigrate expertise in government and in other professions. So you wrote this book not knowing that a global pandemic would arise. What has surprised you about specifically the American response to the pandemic, based on the research that you’ve done? I have some other work looking at fear of terrorism and attitudes about Muslims and attitudes about immigrants. And so, that kind of other-ing that happens in terrorism, it’s happening now in Covid-19, which is very disconcerting in a lot of ways. I think there’s a lot of stuff that’s surprising, but to me, it’s the way in which particularly the president and some right-wing leaders have talked about Covid-19 as a “Wuhan virus,” as a “Chinese virus.” That work that they’re doing to other it is a way of casting blame on China, and casting blame away from the government and particularly the president. And that has really bad implications for blame attribution, and then also [for] things like racist violence against groups of Asian Americans. And these protests about the stay-at-home orders are not just protests about economic anxiety, although there is part of that. I mean, it’s not surprising. We’ve seen this before. But this glomming on of anxiety about the virus and othering that’s going on about who to blame, and it’s anyone but the government, I think that is, again, it’s not surprising. It is a little depressing, though. In our book, we look at two public health crises. We look at responses to [the H1N1 outbreak] and then we look at responses to a fictional smallpox outbreak. And in both studies, we both theorized a public health threat as nonpartisan. And, empirically, we found that responses to a public health threat were nonpartisan.  Where this is different, not too many years later, in the current context we’re in now, is who’s feeling anxious about this threat and who people are trusting have strong partisan predictors. And so we thought of a public health threat as our nonpartisan issue area and climate change and immigration as our partisan issue areas where people feel anxious. And partisanship shapes who feels anxious. But now we see, people on the left are feeling more anxious [about the coronavirus]. Partisanship is shaping who’s being trusted. At the same time, we do see some evidence that some of our theories around public health crises in the book still holds. People are putting their trust in medical experts. So it’s not everything has changed. People still do want medical expertise in the face of a public health crisis.  What is the best way [for scientists and others] to respond to the completely understandable anxiety of people who are looking for information to trust, while also continuing to learn more? You’re going to have scientists who say something one week and then three weeks later look back and think, “That was incorrect,” which is part of the scientific process.  But how do you think that they could do a better job of getting that across to people who are not as versed in how the scientific method works? Part of the really big challenge here is, I think generally, as political scientists, we’re a little bit sad about how little attention people are paying to politics on a normal basis. And that’s not the case [now]. Local news consumption is up. People are paying more attention to the media. They’re picking up the phone for polls, also, at higher rates, which seems good for democracy. But the messages that they’re getting are very quick-moving. And that is hard for people to adjust to. The World Health Organization says we shouldn’t wear masks, and now we should wear masks. And I do think that’s hard for people to keep up with. We’ve recommended that the medical experts be up front and center, and the political leaders take a step back and defer to the doctors and to the head of the health agencies, because that’s who anxious people want to hear from. They don’t want to hear as much from the political leaders, particularly when they think that the performance to date has been pretty bad, which we see in the polling.  I’ve been thinking about how partisanship has impacted, in some ways, if not what the [government] response to the coronavirus looked like, the interpretation of coronavirus in the media. If you could wave a magic wand and change how I do this work, how do you think that media could better report on both the pandemic and the partisan response to it? While also getting across that, for most Americans, they’re obeying stay-at-home orders. They’re more concerned about stay-at-home orders being lifted too early rather than too late. How do you think we could do a better job of getting that across? There is this big partisan gap [that impacts] who is worried about coronavirus and [their behaviors. But while there’s still a gap, there is still more agreement than there is disagreement across the parties, in the mass public. I think reflecting that is good so that people don’t feel alone. I think part of the challenge of this time period is [that there is] so much uncertainty, and that people are looking for any kind of solution. And like you said, sometimes they’ll go to solutions that aren’t even logical, like conspiracy theories. But if we, if the media and political leaders, can provide a set of solutions for people that have some evidence, and to also call out when there’s no evidence, and very explicitly, that would be really helpful for people to know, one, they’re not alone. They’re frustrated and they want to go back to work, but they can’t yet, and it’s for everyone’s safety.  Oh, I have one more suggestion. I’ve been thinking about how the epidemiological modeling is hard for people to understand. Not because they’re numbers, but because I think counterfactuals are really hard for people. What would have happened in a different world had we not stayed home? I think that’s a hard thing to understand. I’ve thought about whether or not we can start thinking about the people who we’ve saved by staying home. To move us in the realm of gains, rather than the realm of losses, showing those people, “This person is now alive because you stayed at home.” And I think personalizing that may help people understand the value of staying home and not going back to work. That’s something I’ve been kicking around lately. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.New York state has canceled its June 23 Democratic presidential primary, becoming the first state to do so over concerns about the coronavirus. The decision came after a Monday vote by commissioners on the New York State Board of Elections. The decision will not impact primaries for congressional, state-level, and local races, which will be held the same day and largely conducted through absentee ballot.  With more than 288,045 confirmed coronavirus cases and 22,000 deaths, New York is the state hardest hit by the virus in the US. Already, the state had postponed its primary from April 28 to late June. Many other states have postponed their contests, but New York is the first to cancel its primary outright. Supporters of Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-VT) firmly opposed canceling the primary. Even though Sanders recently suspended his bid for the Democratic nomination and endorsed former Vice President Joe Biden, he stood the chance to amass delegates from the primary — which could give him more leverage over the party’s platform and rules at the Democratic National Convention. New York has a large cache of delegates; 274 delegates were up for grabs. The cancellation could hamper Sanders’s influence at the convention and add to existing distrust of the Democratic Party and its institutions from some of his supporters. Sanders’ campaign and groups supporting him put out statements Monday afternoon blasting the decision. “Today’s decision by the State of New York Board of Elections is an outrage, a blow to American democracy, and must be overturned by the DNC,” said Sanders’ campaign senior advisor Jeff Weaver. “Give that the primary is months away, the proper response must be to make the election safe — such as going to all vote by mail — rather than eliminating people’s right to vote completely.” The New York Board of Elections officials ultimately decided that with Biden already the presumptive Democratic nominee, the public health risks of holding an election outweighed the benefits of it continuing, according to the New York Times.  “What the Sanders campaign wanted is essentially a beauty contest that, given the situation with the public health emergency, seems to be unnecessary and, indeed, frivolous,” the board’s Democratic co-chair, Douglas Kellner, told the Times. The Times reported the presidential primary was the only race on the ballot for about 20 counties in the state, meaning they now will have no election at all — and poll workers and voters in those counties can stay home. No other state besides New York has yet canceled a primary election outright, but many are having to rethink how they hold elections in the midst of a pandemic. Wisconsin has been the only state so far to proceed with an in-person election during the height of the outbreak in the US, causing an outcry from voters and voting rights advocates alike. Several dozen cases of Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, have been linked to the state’s April 7 election, according to public health officials.  
    Related
   New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo issued an executive order on April 24 requiring the state board of elections to mail every New York resident an application for an absentee ballot, along with paid postage.  In addition to New York, 15 other states and Puerto Rico have pushed back the dates of their elections or switched to a vote-by-mail system with an extended deadline to get ballots in: Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Georgia, Hawaii, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, New Jersey, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, West Virginia, and Wyoming. Getting states more federal money to expand vote-by-mail ahead of November is one of the agenda items for Democrats in the next round of negotiations for a coronavirus relief package. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi has suggested she’d like to see about $4 billion dedicated to vote-by-mail efforts.  Update: This post was updated with a statement from the Sanders campaign. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. There comes a time in every recession when people, for reasons both sincere and cynical, start to get really worried about the federal budget deficit. Recessions lead to a collapse in tax revenue and increased use of safety net programs, and typically require extensive fiscal stimulus — all of which pushes up the deficit in the short run. This last arose in early 2010, when unemployment was nearly 10 percent, and Barack Obama to his discredit encouraged the shift, having presided over the massive (and still inadequate) $787 billion recovery plan the previous year. Now the shift is happening again, in the wake of the major $2 trillion stimulus bill signed by President Trump — and barely a month after mass unemployment began to set in due the Covid-19 crisis. “Record debt load poses risk of fiscal ‘tipping point’” blared a Washington Post headline, printed on the front page, above the fold, of the print edition. More ominously, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell forcefully rejected the idea of offering aid to states and local governments that are hundreds of billions of dollars underwater, saying, “given the extraordinary numbers that we’re racking up to the national debt … we need to be as cautious as we can be.”  “We can’t borrow enough money to solve the problem indefinitely,” he told reporters. This is, to be frank, an outrageous time to give a shit about the federal budget deficit, or about the debt (the accumulated total of past deficits, plus interest). The US in the very early stages of the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression, and he true unemployment rate is likely around 15 to 20 percent. In Michigan alone, unemployment claims amount to over 35 percent of total employment. Congress’s stimulus measures to date have been helpful, but clearly inadequate in the face of the crisis before us. The US needs investment on the scale of the New Deal or greater to meet this challenge, and worrying about deficits promises to strangle the recovery in the crib. To be sure, there are times when worrying about the debt makes sense. Countries like the US that print their own currency can in principle always pay their debts, but there’s a risk that doing so would involve printing so much money that hyperinflation ensues. If that were a real danger, the US should be thinking twice about massively expanding the deficit. But inflation, let alone hyperinflation, is not a real danger at this moment. According to the Fed’s preferred measure, inflation was well below its 2 percent target even before coronavirus hit. Inflation is thus too low to get unemployment to where we need it to be, as has been true for quite some time. The Fed’s preferred measure of inflation excludes food and energy, but oil prices have fallen to historic lows too.  Another way to tell if the deficit is a problem is by checking Treasury yields, or the interest rate that investors earn on bonds they buy from the federal government. If the federal government had to pay, say, 10 percent annual interest (plus inflation) on new borrowing, that could quickly force it to either eat up much of its budget on interest payments, pay the debt off by printing money (thereby risking hyperinflation), or else cut spending/raise taxes to pay off the debt the traditional way. But that is not happening with Treasury yield. For 30-year loans — the longest in term and thus riskiest of US government bonds, which force investors to predict what the federal government will be capable of paying back in 2050 —  yields are now literally negative. That means the federal government could theoretically borrow $1 trillion entirely in its highest-yield bonds, to be paid back over three decades, and have to pay back less than $1 trillion. Investors are literally paying the US governments to run deficit rights now. They are practically begging Congress to take out more and bigger loans. McConnell’s refusal to oblige will likely mean that fiscal stimulus is much smaller than it should be, gravely endangering the recovery. This happened the last time around, too, and the consequence was an austerity-provoked slowdown in growth, with mass unemployment the consequence. The same happened across Europe, and some politicians, including former British finance official George Osborne, are already urging austerity measures. Austerity is not just a bad strategy for the United States. It could — ironically — also be bad for Mitch McConnell and his party. A deep persistent depression would arguably be fatal for Trump’s and the Senate GOP’s reelection prospects. Big, ambitious stimulus could stave off that fate. Democrats are willing to work with them on it, so this really would be a self-inflicted wound if the Republicans insist on not doing more on the stimulus front.  By worrying about the deficit prematurely and not shoveling even more money to aid the recovery, McConnell and his fellow conservatives may end up hurting millions of Americans’ lives — and their own political future. You can already see a turn toward deficit scolding emerging among the usual suspects.  Robert Samuelson, a Washington Post columnist and career deficit scold, has been railing against mainstream economists’ emerging consensus that sustained budget deficits aren’t particularly bad. The coronavirus makes him want to return to Gilded Age-era borrowing practices, where debt was only undertaken to fight wars and buy Alaska. “Except for the Great Depression, this consensus generally served the country reasonably well,” he concludes. Cool! GOP senators are even blunter. “Our annual deficit this year will approach $4 trillion. We can’t continue on this course,” Rand Paul admonished. And a hard line was recently taken in a news analysis in the New York Times. “The spending surge has implications beyond the usual deficit tug of war,” wrote the Times’s Carl Hulse. “It could prompt inflation, and it also leaves the nation far less prepared in the event of another emergency.” Some of DC’s most venerable deficit hawks are, to their credit, urging deficit spending is the near term. “Combating this public health crisis and preventing the economy from falling into a depression will require a tremendous amount of resources — and if ever there were a time to borrow those resources from the future, it is now,” Maya MacGuineas of the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget (CRFB) admonished.  But groups like CRFB are already laying the groundwork for a pivot back to austerity, arguing, “just as World War II was followed by years of fiscal responsibility to restore debt to historic levels, it will be important after the crisis and recovery to ensure that debt and deficits return to more sustainable levels.” This kind of mentality, expressed so early in our economic crisis, can only threaten to cut short any recovery efforts much too soon. This all feels very familiar. In late 2008, as the US was spiraling further into its worst economic downturn since the Great Depression, Christina Romer, the UC Berkeley economist whom Barack Obama had selected as his chief economist, prepared a memo of stimulus options for Obama to review. To fully repair the economy by the first quarter of 2011, she estimated, would require a “combination of spending, taxes and transfers to states and localities … costing about $1.8 trillion over two years.” The memo did not make it to Obama. According to Noam Scheiber’s book The Escape Artists, when Romer showed her estimate to fellow Obama adviser Larry Summers, he dismissed the number as too high. She then prepared a memo where the most expensive option was $1.2 trillion. Summers still thought it too high, telling her, per Scheiber, “$1.2 trillion is nonplanetary.” That was his way of saying “ridiculous” or “out of this world.” Congress eventually passed, and Obama signed, a $787 billion package. Summers reportedly wanted the $1.8 trillion in stimulus as much as Romer did — he just thought Congress would reject it as a joke, and prevent the Obama administration from getting anything. This was his calculation when Democrats were set to have 59 out of 100 Senate seats and a big House majority. And Summers was probably right about the political prospects of a $1.8 trillion bill. Obama’s much-too-small stimulus package was roughly $100 billion smaller than it was originally going to be because Republican Sens. Susan Collins (ME), Olympia Snowe (ME), and Arlen Specter (PA) demanded it be made smaller in exchange for their votes, out of concern about the deficit. In the wake of the stimulus passing, the Obama administration went from being forced into austerity by Congress to acquiescing to austerity of its own volition. There was an internal battle between Romer and Summers, who urged Obama to focus on the recovery, and Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner and budget chief Peter Orszag, who urged him to pivot to austerity.  Geithner and Orszag won. In February 2010, Obama appointed centrist Democrat Erskine Bowles and former Republican Sen. Alan Simpson to run a commission meant to slash the deficit. The administration proposed a budget slashing deficits by $1.2 trillion over 10 years, including a freeze on domestic spending for three years. “We simply cannot continue to spend as if deficits don’t have consequences; as if waste doesn’t matter; as if the hard-earned tax dollars of the American people can be treated like Monopoly money; as if we can ignore this challenge for another generation,” Obama admonished. “We can’t.” Obama was wrong. The austerity regime augured by his budget proposal and further entrenched under pressure by the new Republican House majority in 2011 deeply hurt the economic recovery. In the third quarter of 2009, per the Hutchins Center at the Brookings Institution’s estimates, fiscal policy added 2.78 percentage points to GDP growth, fueling the recovery. All of that came from the federal government; states in the grip of austerity politics actually reduced growth.  But by the third quarter of 2011, with austerity politics ascendant at the federal level as well, fiscal policy was reducing growth by 2.15 points. Put another way, in the third quarter of 2011, the economy grew at an annual rate of 0.9 percent. If it hadn’t been for austerity, it would’ve grown by 3 percent. The recovery would have proceeded much, much faster, and millions of people would have been spared the physical and mental suffering of unemployment, without an austerity regime. We know what happens when we allow austerity to happen during a deep recession. There’s no excuse for Congress to allow this pattern to repeat itself, especially when Mitch McConnell and his party would stand to gain from additional stimulus.  In 2009, Republicans at least had the excuse of facing off against a Democratic administration — sabotaging the recovery would help them politically. That was a rational strategy to take then. It’s not a rational strategy to take now. Forget the deficit, Republicans. The economy and the people who make it run need help now. Who knows — taking bold action now may even help you in November.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The value of getting a coronavirus vaccine quickly is so high that we should let volunteers risk their lives for the cause, and the US should be willing to “waste” billions on manufacturing candidate vaccines that turn out not to work. Scientists all around the world are racing to develop a vaccine with financial support from philanthropists and governments, but we need to be thinking much bigger. This is an unprecedented situation that demands far bigger sums of money and bolder approaches to testing and licensing. Covid-19 is currently killing thousands of people a day. The vast majority of the world’s population has no acquired immunity to the disease.  And the economy is grinding to a halt to curb its spread. Given the dire situation, the value of even marginally speeding the widespread availability of a vaccine is incredibly high and warrants much more attention and more extreme measures.  The federal government should do two things immediately: Throw huge sums of money at mass production of candidate vaccines that may not pan out, and explicitly authorize “human challenge” trials in lieu of the conventional FDA approval process.  To be clear: Doing these things with the correct amount of urgency will waste billions of dollars on producing ineffective medicine and almost inevitably get some people killed. But the world does not currently have options that don’t involve substantial losses of both money and lives. The cost of an all-out race to a vaccine is high, but the benefits in terms of lives and money saved would be much higher.  NIH official Anthony Fauci has repeatedly cited a timeline of 12 to 18 months for creating a vaccine, which is frustratingly slow to the bulk of the public. But experts say it is extremely optimistic relative to past vaccine work.  It’s not possible to know what scientific breakthroughs will or won’t happen in the future or on what timeline. But the reason insiders are confident that vaccine development will be slow is that the normal process takes a long time even once you’ve developed the vaccine that works. That’s because there’s a multi-step process that’s inherently time-consuming: The fastest that this has ever been done is four years, but experts in the US government and World Health Organization think that given the urgency of the situation, a conventional process could be undertaken in something like 18 months. That’s still not very fast because the Phase III trial, in particular, is inherently slow.  On any given day any particular person’s odds of getting sick are relatively low whether or not they have a vaccine. Obtaining statistically meaningful information about whether or not the vaccine is working requires a large-scale study and a lot of time.  Making vaccines is also slow. The US is going to want to immunize 200 million or more Americans. And of course there will be global demand for a vaccine. It’s a humanitarian imperative to push a workable coronavirus vaccine out globally, and it’s in the self-interest of the United States and other countries doing vaccine research to curb spread of Covid-19 in poorer countries. But we can try to speed the process up. The easiest way to get around the inherently time-consuming nature of a Phase III trial is to do a “human challenge” trial. Just like in a regular Phase III trial, you give some of your subjects the vaccine and some others a placebo. But instead of just having them go about their daily lives (daily lives that these days would involve social distancing and other steps designed to minimize the risk of infection), you deliberately expose them to the disease. The downside is that some test subjects are going to get sick. The vaccine may not work, after all, and even if it does, many in the trial were deliberately given a placebo. And if people get sick, some of them may die.  
    Related
   This is anathema to conventional medical ethics (“first do no harm”), which holds that you should not do something deliberately injurious like give someone a fake vaccine and then expose them to a deadly virus for which there is no cure. Human challenges are used sometimes for malaria vaccine candidates. But doctors consider that acceptable because high quality malaria treatment is very effective, while that’s not the case for Covid-19 so far.  Experts advocating human challenge trials — like Nir Eyal, Marc Lipsitch, and Peter G. Smith in an influential article in the Journal of Infectious Diseases — note that it’s possible to minimize the risk. If you only allow young people with no known major risk factors to volunteer based on everything we currently know about Covid-19, the risk of death is very low. Volunteers should also be segregated from the general population, in comfortable conditions, and assured of absolutely top-notch care. To further assuage ethical concerns, volunteers could be drawn from high-risk geographical areas or professions.   Contemporary medical ethics is haunted by the legacy of the Tuskegee syphilis experiment. A group of marginalized African American men were deceived by researchers into participating in a study where their syphilis infections went untreated despite the availability of effective treatment. The goal was primarily to satisfy researchers’ curiosity about what would happen.  You do not need a special canon of medical ethics to see this as a moral failing, a deep betrayal of the patients who put themselves in the doctors’ care. The medical community should recognize that the current situation involves some different risks. Allowing well-informed volunteers to put their lives on the line to help society in a crisis situation is not particularly out of the ordinary. This is the entire basis of fire departments, the military, and indeed the routine celebration of the health care workers who are on the front lines treating Covid-19 victims. To say that a doctor or nurse should be lauded for risking her life to help a handful of Covid-19 patients, but prohibited from risking their life to help end the pandemic entirely is hard to fathom.  The organization One Day Sooner which is trying to recruit volunteers for hypothetical challenge studies already has thousands of signups without much in the way of official encouragement. But allowing — and indeed encouraging — people to sign up is a no-brainer.  Congress and the Trump administration should act decisively to clarify that the FDA would welcome human challenge trial data as part of an accelerated vaccine licensing process. They should appropriate money to help recruit and inform potential volunteers, to establish suitable facilities, and to hail the volunteers as heroes much as they celebrate first responders, front-line medical workers, and soldiers during wartime.  Despite warnings from David Brooks and others that a coronavirus pandemic would likely kill human compassion, in practice the pandemic has brought forth a lot of positive social behavior. Unfortunately, the typical person without medical expertise simply can’t do that much to help beyond donating to charity and sewing cloth face masks. A relatively small number of challenge trial volunteers could have a huge impact on the world, and the government should encourage them to sign up if the risks are deemed acceptable.  A conventional business view is that no company is going to manufacture a vaccine at large scale until it’s been approved for use. Demand for a coronavirus vaccine would be off the charts, but it doesn’t make a ton of economic sense to invest in creating enough manufacturing capacity to meet the whole world’s vaccine demand in a short time frame and then be left with a bunch of idle factories. The economically rational approach, in other words, will lead to a situation where only a fraction of the needed vaccine is available at any point in time, with plenty of wrangling over prices paid and who exactly gets the medicine.  Bill Gates has a better idea, as Kelsey Piper has explained — just start manufacturing any promising candidate before it gets licensed: Gates’s proposal is to build seven factories, for all the leading vaccine candidates, and manufacture lots of each of them. It will mean some wasted money, but it’ll be worth it to get a vaccine to patients sooner. He estimates this will cost billions. Though the foundation hasn’t disclosed how much it will personally be spending, a project of this magnitude will require other stakeholders — as have most of Gates’s public health projects. “Billions” is a lot in the world of global poverty health philanthropy, which is normally dominated by earnest people helping poor people in developing countries. But we’re now living in a world where Congress is slapping together small-business support programs that cost hundreds of billions of dollars and are still inadequate to the size of the need. Spending extra money on accelerated vaccine manufacturing would be “waste” only if we ignore the genuinely crushing cost of not having a vaccine.  That burden is rightly calculated not only in terms of the (massive) economic cost of depressed business conditions, but also the seemingly large long-term harm to American children of prolonged school closures.  At the moment, interest rates on government bonds are less than the rate of inflation so anything with an economic benefit down the road is essentially free. It’s great that Gates is offering to kick in some of his own considerable personal fortune to help with this. But Congress should just pay whatever it takes, perhaps letting Gates save his charity money for work in developing countries that Congress is unlikely to fund.   The current debate over “opening up” the country is increasingly fantastical. Even if limited reopening can be pulled off in a safe way (a big if), huge segments of the economy — mostly those directly related to travel and lodging, but also formal and informal supports for white-collar office work — will likely be offline, and children will likely remain out of school. “Vulnerable” populations, including senior citizens and significant swathes of the non-senior population, will have to remain in a state of isolation, even as things open up.  As far as best-case scenarios go, this is an extremely costly one. And yet the most realistic outcomes, which involve periodic surges in cases and renewed periods of near-total shutdown, are considerably grimmer than that. There are currently about 2,000 people dying per day, and while that number may be trending downward, the impulse in several large states to start lifting restrictions without any ability to do comprehensive contact tracing suggests it will rise again in the future.  The only real way out of this bind appears to be getting people vaccinated. Speeding this process up by a few months — or even a few weeks — would be an incredible boon to the country and the world. Ideas for how to do that are currently kicking around on a volunteer and philanthropic basis, but accelerating our way out of this disaster takes leadership from the federal government.  Doing what it takes to get to vaccination as fast as possible will have real costs, but every day of delay is unimaginably more costly than the price of speeding up. In 2015, I asked Bill Gates a simple question: What are you most afraid of?  He replied by telling me about the death chart of the 20th century. There’s the spike for World War I. The spike for World War II. But between them sat a spike as big as World War II. That, he said, was the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic, which killed an estimated 65 million people. Gates’s greatest fear was a flu like that, ripping through our hyperglobalized world.  Gates had funded modeling that imagined precisely that scenario. Within days, it would be in all urban centers around the world. Within months, tens of millions could die.  Bill Gates saw this coming, and he tried to warn the world. He did TED talks and media interviews. He published in medical journals. He made policy proposals and spent millions on vaccine research. And he failed. The virus came, and we weren’t ready. Now we all live in the aftermath of Gates’s nightmare.  Gates has reoriented his foundation and committed hundreds of millions of dollars to the world’s fight against the coronavirus. He recently published a long essay detailing what we know and don’t know about the virus and the disease it causes, Covid-19, and what we need to invent and deploy to safely return to normalcy. I spoke with Gates on Friday to explore those questions, plus a few more. What does it feel like to be at the center of so many coronavirus conspiracy theories? What happens if we reopen too soon? Why are different cities seeing such different outcomes? Do rich and poor countries need different responses? What are the true chances of a vaccine in 18 months? But above all, I wanted to ask him the inverse of the question I asked him in 2015: What does he hope for? What is his vision for life after the coronavirus? You can listen to our full conversation by subscribing to The Ezra Klein Show wherever you get your podcasts. A transcript of my discussion with Gates, lightly edited for length and clarity, follows.   On February 28, you wrote in the New England Journal of Medicine that Covid-19 “has started behaving a lot like the once-in-a-century pathogen we’ve been worried about.” Two months have passed since then. Has what we’ve learned since then made you more or less worried?  Sadly, the disease got into exponential growth in a lot of Europe and the United States. So the toll there is greater than I would have expected. We’re still learning about how to do testing. In the US, even the numbers overstate where we are because we’re not prioritizing the right people, we’re not getting results back in a timely fashion. So it’s been a mixed bag. The fact that social isolation really knocks the numbers down — that’s good news. But, of course, that comes at an incredible price.  When we spoke in 2015, you talked about a model you ran that found that a 1918-like influenza could kill 33 million people worldwide in six months. We don’t look to be hitting that death toll. Do you think that’s because this is not as deadly or contagious as what we saw in 1918, or because we as a global community are doing a better job of responding than the models might have predicted?  We don’t really know what’s going to happen in developing countries, where most of the world’s population lives. The actual reported cases out of those countries are pretty small to date. But unless there’s some magical factor, the likelihood that the vast majority of the deaths will be there is very high. It’s harder for them to socially isolate and to do what we’ve done. So I think it’s premature to predict the eventual death toll.  Let’s talk about the developing world picture for a moment. A month ago, my reporting had me worried that Brazil was about to be a disaster; that South Africa, with its heavily immunocompromised population, would be a disaster; that India would be in terrible shape. So far, it’s not been as bad as I think a lot of people worried it would be. Why do you think that is?  That, to me, is the most mysterious thing. I hope there’s some reasons other than that they’re just not testing enough people and people are afraid to seek out testing, or that the people who do world travel are separated from the bulk of the population, so diffusion to a worker that lives in the slum may have taken an extra month or two.  They do have a better age structure, but they have more air pollution, lots of HIV, lots of malnutrition — which are associated with very bad outcomes. There’s one city in Ecuador that’s experiencing exponential growth. And, so I’m looking up, do they have a subway in Guayaquil?  You know, New York and London are even worse than pure density measures, or even the international travel would predict. What activities lead to these super-spreading events? This is the tricky part, to me. The pieces don’t quite fit together. Why does New York City look the way it does, but San Francisco has kept this under control? And if the answer is just early social distancing, why doesn’t Florida, which closed much later and had very poor political leadership and has a much older population, look worse? It’s the same with some of the developing countries. It feels to me like there are variables here that we are not seeing or we are not measuring correctly.  The flu, which has been around for a long time, kills on average 40,000 people every year. And the amount we don’t know about the flu is amazing. We don’t understand why the flu is seasonal. It’s such a profound thing that there’s this three-month period where it’s very active and then almost nine months where you have a hard time finding it, depending on which hemisphere you’re in.  Infectious disease hasn’t gotten the depth of [attention] that, say, cancer or heart disease has, because it’s largely gone from the rich countries that drive scientific priorities. That’s a big part of what our foundation does: to work on the things that kill the most people, including the remaining infectious disease burden. So it’s not that stunning to me. This is a very novel syndrome that we’re facing here.  One thing I appreciate about your paper is that you have a section about what we don’t know. What are the big things you wish we knew that we simply don’t?  The seasonality and weather effects. It’s looking more and more like indoor infection is a dramatic part of the infection, and that the way our circulation works in closed spaces like subways really works against you.  Are asymptomatics just slightly being exposed and therefore not in the chain of infection very much? The best study on that in Singapore shows about 6 percent [of cases came from asymptomatic transfer]. But other people have done the studies different ways that give, I think, unrealistically high numbers.  We don’t know enough about the human immune response yet. That’s very important, because if it’s a very weak response, then you’re not protected from a second infection. I don’t think that’s likely. Until we actually are looking at this blood plasma to see what the titers of the antibodies are, not this binary serology thing that’s not helpful, we’re very much in uncharted territory.  To go back to what you just said about the binary serological tests. We’ve seen some of these in Santa Clara and LA counties. For those not familiar with this debate, what they found is a much higher prevalence of the disease and a much lower lethality rate. Why do you think those studies aren’t reliable or helpful? The false positive rate on that serology test is very, very high. It’s just the way the statistics work. When you have 98 percent who certainly aren’t infected, false positives completely overwhelm the real data. So that study would say there’s like 10 times as many people who’ve been exposed as who’ve shown symptoms. Most other things — like Diamond Princess, Singapore, where you go through the viral loads — showed more like two to three times.  That will get resolved. We have quantitative serological tests that are being applied at the population level in about five different countries, including some work that I’m sponsoring. So we’ll get to the bottom of that. You know, it would be better if more people have been exposed, if that’s associated with immunity, but that’s also unknown.  I was looking back at a paper you published in 2015 about preparing for pandemics. And the point you made there that was telling: We are constantly rehearsing for war against an enemy of another country. We’re constantly rehearsing as part of NATO or US military war games.  Pandemics are a well-known thing, they’ve happened throughout history. We knew one was going to come eventually. And we were not doing these pre-rehearsals. Why do you think it is that we are so much more focused on threats from each other than threats that come from nature?   I think part of it is that the minor epidemics we had really didn’t hit the US. If you look at the Asian countries that did well, many of them wrote down: step one, identify all PCR machines. [Polymerase chain reaction machines, used by laboratories to copy small segments of DNA.] Step two: get supplies for PCR machines. We haven’t done that in a reasonable way today, even though we have more machines per capita than anybody else.  Places like Taiwan or South Korea, because they were hit with MERS or SARS, had the playbook. They opened the playbook, they went through those steps, and it’s saved them 10 percent of GDP and immense human suffering that they took respiratory disease in a serious way.  The fact that [a novel infectious disease] hasn’t been in this country for so long allowed us to not think about it as a priority. I wish I’d been more successful in getting these investments made in advance. I think back: How could I have been louder, more articulate?  Very little was done.  In the essay you wrote on April 23, you argued that we don’t just need policy to reopen — there are innovations we need but don’t yet have. What are some of the innovations that we need?  There are three categories. There’s scaling up testing, which if you had a miraculous level of, you might want to test everyone before they went on a cruise ship or went into a theme park or came to work in a warehouse. We’re a factor of a thousand away from that. And we can’t let the finite capacity go to that because we have higher priorities. So testing is the first big category. I’d put contact tracing into that as well because it’s all one regime for reducing infection.  Then you have the therapies or drugs. And then finally you have the vaccine. So those are the three buckets.  Let’s start then with testing. There have been reported shortages of things like reagents and swabs. There’s been a lack of focus. But in your view, what is between us and the kind of testing regime you wish we had? We’re showing the FDA that basically any swab works. You can swab yourself, put it in a plastic bag, and send it back, as long as it gets to the machine in a reasonable time frame. So the swabbing thing shouldn’t be a limiting factor.  In terms of the actual machines, there are ways of running them that can make it faster. We’re exploring those. But the machines still aren’t being used effectively. Even today, we’re not enumerating which ones still have idle capacity and making sure that the right things are fed into that. And is this a federal thing? Some states have a lot of PCR machines. Some states have very few. They briefly involved FEMA, but they didn’t have the background for this. I heard you give an interview with TED a month ago, where you said the same thing on swabs: that your foundation has shown the FDA that swabbing the tip of the nose was as sensitive as the more intrusive test. You’re making the same point today. So are regulators moving fast enough right now? And if not, is there some other process we need to be spinning up given it’s an emergency? There’s definitely progress. It’s moving at a much higher speed than it would absent a crisis. The pieces are coming into place to avoid the swab front end being a limiting factor. That’s a likely thing to happen in the next couple of months.  Let’s go to the next group of innovations. Are there medications short of vaccines right now that you think are promising and that we can have in a quicker time than the vaccines?  Absolutely. A therapeutic is easier. If your therapeutic has a dramatic benefit, you know, you can see that with just 100 patients. So you can go through a large number at a time. This is happening right now — we have studies going on. The UK is doing a good job on this. Germany is doing a good job.  There are particular compounds — and not necessarily the ones that get mentioned — that look very promising. There’s one where you look in the blood of recovered patients and find the best antibodies. And then you either directly use that blood or you manufacture that antibody. That one has got quite a bit of promise. So we’re orchestrating, who’s got the best antibodies? Who has that manufacturing capacity? And trying to get that up and going well before the end of the year. Given what we just talked about, how much do you think the limiting factor here is going to be manufacturing supply chain capacity six months from now?  For some of these vaccine constructs, it’s hard to scale up the manufacturing, partly because they are novel or just because the chemistry is very complex. And you’re in a new regime when you talk about making billions of a vaccine. We don’t make billions of any vaccine. We make hundreds of millions, but for those, we’ve had decades to work on their efficiency.  Even the fill finish at the very end where you put it in a glass bottle, that’s a special pharmaceutical-grade glass — the world doesn’t have enough of that. So we’re working to get that underway because all the vaccine approaches need to be put into a bottle at some point in time. I hope we get to the point where it’s the manufacturing piece because those investments are at most billions to save trillions.  Let me ask a dumb question about vaccines. I see a fair amount of confidence that there will be a vaccine in, say, 18 months. And yet, we’ve not got an HIV-AIDS vaccine. There are a lot of coronaviruses that we’ve wanted vaccines against forever. How likely is it that in two years, 3 billion people have been vaccinated for this effectively?  Very likely.  Why?  This target is not as difficult as HIV. That is — the spike protein isn’t changing its shape like it is with HIV. And for SARS, we actually did get a vaccine. Then the disease was gone. And so we never did a phase three trial. We even have an antiviral for Ebola. So I don’t think the coronavirus will prove to be an impossible target but I can’t guarantee it. Even now, we’re starting to see animal data. So by the end of the summer it will be pretty clear. And I think at least some of the top 10 constructs will look very promising. Tell me a bit about your project to set up different vaccine manufacturing platforms in advance, knowing that we’re not yet sure which kind of facility we’re going to need.  Well, [the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations] is the group we created to do a lot of this work. We’ve been directly funding these people. Some of them have new RNA approaches and one has a DNA approach. These new approaches have certain advantages, but you don’t want to totally bet on them because you’ve never actually made a vaccine that way before. So if you look at the risk level, it’s probably the more classic subunit vaccines, even though they get started a little bit later. Understanding the mechanisms and the manufacturing is straightforward for those.  Talk to me about some of these new approaches. What makes them different and what could make them better?   Usually what you do is you put a part of the shape of the virus in, and then the immune system sees that, realizes it’s a foreign thing, and decides it should be ready immediately to make antibodies if it ever sees this again. So usually you’re injecting at least part of the shape of the virus. Sometimes you do the whole virus, but it’s attenuated so it doesn’t multiply too much. Sometimes you take the virus and you kill it and stick it in.  Most of the new vaccines are subunit vaccines, where you don’t put the whole virus in. You just put a little piece of it — like the spike protein in the case of coronavirus. Instead of putting the whole shape in, what you do is you put in the code, the instructions to make that shape. What you have to manufacture is just RNA, which is trivial because it’s just these known codes that you string together.  That’s why it’s a promising approach that these new companies are taking: If it works, it will be the platform for quick response in future pandemics.  If we had been heavily investing in vaccine production capacity over the past five or 10 years, do you think we’d be in a different place today?  Oh, absolutely. We would be able to do this in a year.  There are a number of things that you have to practice to understand: Who should step up and make the decisions? Where do we pool this money? How are the regulators going to make the tradeoff of getting it out quickly versus having a big safety database?  There’s a political instinct of people to look good or not look bad. The crisis is a tough time to think through all the pieces that are necessary. It’s nice to not have that breathing down on you as you make these scientific decisions.  Are there regulatory approaches we could do that would make this move much faster? People talk, for instance, about “human challenge trials” — does any of that seem possible to you?  It’s up to regulators to decide. Mostly when you have a serious disease like this, it’s unethical to use human challenge trials. So I don’t think that will be used here. On paper, yes, that gives you a quicker way to see if your vaccine is effective so you could shorten the schedule. But who are those volunteers? Are they fully informed? For malaria that’s allowed because we have drugs that are entirely curative. But for TB, HIV, it’s not allowed. And unless there was some breakthrough innovation, it shouldn’t be allowed. Right now in the US, we have not filled the testing and contact tracing structure or innovations, much less these secondary therapeutic or vaccine innovations. And yet a number of states are moving toward reopening. How worried are you about significant second spike problems?  I’m super worried about it. Unless they’re very gradual and pick the things that we know don’t raise the rate of infection over one, then you’re going to have this heterogeneity where parts of the US will be doing well and other parts will be doing poorly. The temptation to interdict travel between those parts will be very difficult.  Without the testing, [reopening] is really a blind thing. I hate to be a broken record on this, but, where’s the testing prioritization? For most places, in late May, early June, we’ll have the case numbers down. So if you use that time to fix the testing, get the contact tracing going, then opening up will make sense. And that shouldn’t be some political thing. It should be a scientific thing.  You’ve mentioned a couple of times the problem of testing prioritization, which I think is an issue people are less familiar with. Can you talk about what it should be versus what it is?   Some people have access to testing who have no symptoms, and some people with symptoms have no access to testing. So a substantial percentage of the testing is not helpful. It’s almost corrupt in the sense that if you have a close relationship with your doctor in a hospital, you’ll get onto their PCR machine no matter what your circumstances are. And if you don’t have that type of connection, even if you’re a health care worker, you can get tests back five days later. So it’s a hard one to understand why people aren’t outraged about this.  As a technologist, what do you think about these contract tracing ideas to do massive scale digital surveillance, using phones and Bluetooth to enforce quarantine using digital information? It’s complex to characterize those. Some are more like a memory aid to remind you where you’ve been. So if you get called up for an interview, you can think through: yeah, I did go to that shop, and that shop. That can be helpful. If you just use Bluetooth, the distance is too large, so the false positives will just be overwhelming. It’d be hundreds per person in many cases. Some people are going further and using an ultrasonic sound to see which phones are nearby. But even that’s not perfect because a lot of the infections occur in a place where a virus particle was left on a surface. One person leaves with their phone; somebody else comes up an hour or two later and touches that virus and gets infected. There’s no telephone proximity there.  
    Related
   But the German approach, which does require manpower, can work very well. As long as that database is managed properly, it doesn’t jam the privacy issue quite the way that some of the Asian approaches do.  In 2015, I asked you what you’re afraid of, and you told me a lethal, pandemic respiratory flu. We’re living through that nightmare now. So let me ask you the reverse of it. Thinking three or five years into the future beyond just the vaccine. What do you hope for?  I hope that this draws the world together. After World War II, we created new institutions and we successfully avoided having another world war. That’s a phenomenal thing. We haven’t blown off a nuclear weapon as part of a conflict. And we did that by binding ourselves together through a variety of institutions — including the WHO on health. So as bad as that was, the outcome was positive.  This is a tragic event. Whatever good comes out of this will in no way make up for the problems that it causes. But it should say to us, this science is important — let’s use it to avoid pandemics. We’re not going to be out of this until we get rid of it from the entire world. Interdicting travel is a very brute force measure that has lots of negative effects. Even if we have to do that temporarily, it’s not where we want to be.  Everybody brings to the epidemic their hopes that they had before. And I’ve always believed in global cooperation. You can accuse me of just saying, “Everybody’s going to be convinced of my thing.” But I really do believe that the World War II analogy applies here.   But there’s a darker version of that, too. People could take the lesson that we’re too interconnected, that our borders are too open, there’s too much immigration. We’ve already seen Donald Trump trying to shut down green cards. Do you worry about this leading to a pulling back from global cooperation?  In the case of World War II, we know that Germany and Japan had something to do with causing the war. In that case, it wasn’t just some bat somewhere that some guy ate. You could have said then that it would permanently change attitudes toward people from Japan or Germany — and during the course of the war, we did horrible things we regret because of that. But that’s gone. My dad was part of the occupation in Japan and he couldn’t believe how friendly and cooperative they were. Very quickly, we helped them build up. They did build up. The sense of mutual benefit was very strong there through those institutions.  We took a much worse situation and crafted it into the institutions and the economic growth and innovation that we’ve had between World War II and now. I hope that this looks like that.  In the beginning of your essay you say this is like a world war, but we’re all on the same side. And what is striking to me about this period that we’re in is the effort to create sides. In America, there’s the effort to increase blame toward China —  trying to get the UN to call Covid-19 the “Wuhan virus.” And China has responded in kind.  This is something where obviously there needs to be not just global public health cooperation but economic cooperation to get out of it. And yet, there are leaders who see short-term gain in the kind of enmity that’s going to make it harder for them to get their country out of the problem.  I think in the end the US will show up in a strong way, even though it certainly hasn’t to date. The US Congress has been the most generous on HIV funding for the entire world. It’s been one of the most generous to GAVI in terms of funding vaccines. The US government has helped the health of the entire world. It’s been a huge part of the reduction in death.  In this case, not only is it humanitarian, it’s about strategic relationships and it’s about making sure the disease isn’t coming back into the US as we participate in global commerce that we benefit immensely from. So I think what you’re seeing in the short term, in terms of how the US is engaging, isn’t where we’ll end up. There are many voices that are going to push us to work with Europe and work with other countries and be part of the innovations that will bring this to an end.  The US has talked about pulling back funding from the World Health Organization. There are people, I think rightly, disappointed in parts of the WHO’s response. How should we think about the World Health Organization? Why would it be important going forward to continue funding?   There’s a big fire. The fire department was 20 minutes late. This is like saying, “Let’s fire all the firemen.” Yes, we should do a postmortem. But many people didn’t respond as quickly as they should have. This is not the time to start shifting blame.  The World Health Organization is what helps all countries understand what’s going on with epidemics. They have a very small budget. In movies they show guys flying around and knocking out bioterrorism. They have no budget for that. Their budget is less than a thousandth of what just the US spends on health care. So people who imagine they should have made a vaccine — that’s not their role at all. They’re just not funded to do it. They’ve done a lot of good things. They’re a necessary institution.  At the end of the day, I don’t think the US will reduce its contributions and fire lots of people from WHO in the middle of a crisis like this. I think that will blow over. At least, that’s my hope.   We knew a pandemic was going to come eventually, but we didn’t prepare for it. So imagine we take the lesson, societally, that we need to prepare for the other risks out there: What are the other ones we need to be preparing for right now? Well, things are tough enough. I don’t want to dwell on bioterrorism, but whatever the fatality rate of this thing is, it’s not anywhere near bioterrorism — smallpox or another pathogen that was intentionally picked for a high fatality rate as well as delayed symptoms and a high infectious rate. Fortunately, what we need to do to be ready for a naturally caused pandemic is a subset of what we need to do to be ready for a bioterrorism-induced pandemic, too.  I’m wondering how much you think about how we operate industrial animal production globally. This likely comes from wet markets in China and there’s been a lot of concern about confined animal feeding operations in other countries. The UN has said the way we raise animals is the weak link of the global public health chain. Do we need to rethink that approach? You’re not going to ever drive zoonotic diseases — diseases that cross species barriers — to zero. This will always be a risk and we can prepare for that risk. You can reduce the risk a little bit by having fewer wet markets and less bushmeat, but it’s very hard to regulate in the rural areas of sub-Saharan Africa. If you had to say where’s the next one likely to come from, that would be it. That’s very dangerous.  Do you think there’s a different trade-off that should be made between social distancing and keeping economies going in those countries compared to the richer countries?  Absolutely. If you push so hard that people don’t have access to food, you’re going to create civil unrest. That’s the opposite of social distancing. In these developing countries, nuanced policies are much harder to implement because your capacity is just lower. I think we need a lot of innovation to make policies that are appropriate for developing countries. And right now, they’re largely trying to do what worked in rich countries.  There has been a rise of conspiracy theories around you: that, because you were predicting something like coronavirus, perhaps you created it, to profit off it, or to use a vaccine to control people. So why did you create the coronavirus and what is it like to be at the center of that kind of conspiracy theory?  It’s kind of sad, really. Who would have thought that Lysol would have to remind people not to inject disinfectant in their body? Some people actually act on these things. Misinformation is dangerous, particularly in this type of crisis where people’s willingness to believe wild things is heightened.  We’re all in a very tough situation — me less than others, but broadly. So somebody says we should blame this country or that person, who’s different than us. That is dangerous stuff. And so I’m sorry to see that getting going. I don’t think it’s that widespread, but I hope it’ll die out.  Something that has struck me throughout this entire calamity is just how much any effective response relies on social trust and solidarity. We seem to be in a moment where our ability to break down the trust people have in institutions outpaces our ability to raise it.  I’m curious if you have any reflections on that. If you look at trust figures for most politicians, they’re up pretty dramatically. Where politicians are willing to admit what they don’t know and show that they’re trying to do their best by bringing in experts, I think it’s great that the trust levels are up.  Compliance on the social distancing has been very high. Over time, people’s patience will wear thin, particularly if they’re getting a confusing message from their leadership. But overall, you’d have to feel pretty good about the attitude in the country. If you said to me, we were going to shut all this stuff down, I’d have predicted more of a backlash.  People understand death and survival. Most of the questions that are being asked are very fair questions. Sadly, the topics are complex enough that getting across what we know and what we don’t know is fairly hard. That’s why I made the effort to write the memo. And, a month or two from now, I’ll know more, and maybe I’ll write again.   Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Govs. Larry Hogan of Maryland (R) and Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan (D) said Sunday that President Donald Trump’s recent comments musing about whether disinfectant could potentially be injected as a remedy for the coronavirus caused a surge in phone calls to emergency hotlines in their states inquiring about its truth. “When misinformation comes out, or you just say something that pops in your head, it does send a wrong message,” Hogan said on ABC’s This Week. “We had hundreds of calls come into our emergency hotline at our health department asking if it was right to ingest Clorox or alcohol cleaning products — whether that was going to help them fight the virus.” Hogan lamented that the government had to “put out that warning to make sure that people were not doing something like that, which would kill people.” And he offered a critique of the president’s behavior at the White House’s coronavirus press conferences: “This has been important to me from day one, communicating very clearly on the facts, because people listen to these press conferences, they listen when the governor holds a press conference, and they certainly pay attention when the president of the United States is standing there giving a press conference,” Hogan said. The Maryland Emergency Management Agency warned that “under no circumstance” should disinfectants be ingested.Gov. Larry Hogan says they received “hundreds of calls” seeking guidance following Trump’s comments and it’s important to communicate “facts.” https://t.co/zB7Ch1H4ND pic.twitter.com/RrFpJqmllo In an earlier appearance on This Week, Whitmer said she too had seen a worrying uptick in calls about ingesting disinfectants. “When the person with the most powerful position on the planet is encouraging people to think about disinfectants, whether it was serious or not, people listen,” Whitmer said. “And so we have seen an increase in numbers of people calling poison control, and so I think it’s really important that every one of us with a platform disseminate medically accurate information.” Hogan’s and Whitmer’s comments added more weight to reports that Trump’s query about using disinfectant to fight the virus was causing public confusion — and that it may have even encouraged people to consume poisonous products. The confusion began on Thursday during a White House briefing about the coronavirus. After listening to Bill Bryan, the undersecretary for science and technology at the Department of Homeland Security, detail research on sunlight and disinfectant’s ability to destroy the coronavirus, Trump turned to health official and coronavirus task force member Dr. Deborah Birx and asked if disinfectant could be used in the human body.  “Is there a way we can do something like that, by injection inside or almost a cleaning?” he asked. (The answer is no — and it can kill you.) After that press conference, it wasn’t just Michigan and Maryland that saw a surge in calls to poison control centers. A spokesperson for New York City’s Department of Health and Mental Hygiene said the day after the briefing the city’s poison control center received an uptick of calls about exposure to chemicals, including nine cases “specifically about exposure to Lysol, 10 cases specifically about bleach and 11 cases about exposures to other household cleaners.”  The public health director for Illinois, Ngozi Ezike, said Saturday there was “a significant increase in calls” to the state’s poison control center, and said that in recent days residents have reported alarming acts such as using detergent solution for a sinus rinse and gargling with a mixture of bleach and mouthwash. Even more concerning, Trump’s comments came at a time when there has already been an ongoing increase in reports of exposure to and ingestion of disinfectants and cleaners across the nation. Due to that uptick, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention noted in a report last week that while data from poison control centers “do not provide information showing a definite link between exposures and COVID-19 cleaning efforts, there appears to be a clear temporal association with increased use of these products.” Part of that temporal link may be due to more people using the disinfectants on household surfaces. Nevertheless, following Trump’s press briefing, the CDC tweeted, “Household cleaners and disinfectants can cause health problems when not used properly. Follow the instructions on the product label to ensure safe and effective use.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.President Donald Trump has several huge fights on his hands: America is under attack from a brutal pandemic. Its economy is collapsing. And he is facing a difficult reelection campaign. In the absence of real plans to solve any of these, Trump is relying on a move that comes reflexively for him: blasting out messages that are either pointless digressions or outright lies — not to persuade people, but to distract and confuse them. Take, for instance, a tweet he took the time to fire off Saturday afternoon that seemed petty even by his own Twitter standards: He wanted people to know exactly whom he was talking to when he made his jaw-dropping remarks last week about injecting light and disinfectant to cure Covid-19. Was just informed that the Fake News from the Thursday White House Press Conference had me speaking & asking questions of Dr. Deborah Birx. Wrong, I was speaking to our Laboratory expert, not Deborah, about sunlight etc. & the CoronaVirus. The Lamestream Media is corrupt & sick! Like other things Trump says, this one has elements of truth embedded in a slurry of falsehood. We can sort through that shortly. What’s more important than the message here is the tactic he’s using. Trump isn’t really interested in correcting the record, but he does want to create doubt. And that’s because a fog of generalized distrust is one of Trump’s primary political tools, as journalism critic Jay Rosen has pointed out.  “The Republican Party and the Trump campaign and the MAGA coalition are going to have to produce confusion and doubt on a scale that is unlike anything you’ve ever seen before,” Rosen told me in a recent conversation. “The key for the Trump campaign is to create confusion, not belief. And that’s what we’re going to see in the months ahead: the massive effort to create doubt and confusion about things that are overwhelmingly clear from the public record.” Trump’s message this weekend is a perfect encapsulation of the strategy. It doesn’t exonerate him in any way. But it is supposed to chip away at the authority of the media outlets that cover him. The accumulated weight of these niggles is meant to dissuade persuadable voters from believing ... anything. Trump does have the smallest of points with respect to his Saturday tweet: At various points in his April 23 press conference, he was indeed addressing Bill Bryan, an official from the Department of Homeland Security, who had given a presentation about how sunlight might affect the coronavirus. In the viral clip where Trump muses about bringing UV light inside the body or using an “injection” of disinfectant, Trump is talking to Bryan, who is sitting next to Birx, but mostly obscured by Trump’s podium.  "The disinfectant, where it knocks it out in a minute, and is there a way we can do something like that by injection inside, or almost a cleaning. It gets in the lungs" -- Trump seems to suggests that injecting disinfectant inside people could be a treatment for the coronavirus pic.twitter.com/amis9Rphsm And the viral clip of Birx reacting to Trump’s comments can make it appear as if he was talking to her: On the other hand, Trump did indeed spend some of the press conference telling Birx she should be looking into his idea that you could “apply light and heat to cure.” Get a load of Dr. Birx's demeanor after Trump tells her, "I would like you to speak to the medical doctors to see if there's any way that you can apply light and heat to cure [coronavirus]." pic.twitter.com/TP0QoSzkYl It’s even spelled out in the White House’s transcript of the event: THE PRESIDENT: Deborah, have you ever heard of that? The heat and the light, relative to certain viruses, yes, but relative to this virus? DR. BIRX: Not as a treatment. I mean, certainly fever — THE PRESIDENT: Yeah. DR. BIRX: — is a good thing. When you have a fever, it helps your body respond. But not as — I’ve not seen heat or (inaudible). THE PRESIDENT: I think it’s a great thing to look at. I mean, you know. Okay? But of course it doesn’t matter at all whether Trump was speaking to Birx or Bryan during the event. What matters is that he was telling government officials — on camera, at his press conference — that he has nonsensical and potentially dangerous ideas about how Americans should respond to the pandemic. Trump first floated his “I was talking to him, not her” defense on Friday, but that was only in passing. At the time, he was focused on his argument that his light/disinfectant theories weren’t theories at all — he was being sarcastic. TRUMP: I was looking at you yesterday when I was being sarcastic about disinfectantsJEFF MASON: I wasn't there yesterdayANOTHER REPORTER: You were looking at Dr BirxTRUMP: I was looking at Bill, the doctor, I was looking at some of the reporters *changes topic* pic.twitter.com/h8VxIknuey But the sarcasm argument quickly fizzled — even Fox News wouldn’t support it — so Trump has moved on to a new one. Maybe he’ll stick with it. Maybe he won’t. But the underlying strategy is one the president clearly believes in. He used it separately Saturday over a different point: relitigating whether he called the coronavirus a “hoax,” or if he was calling critics of his slow, ineffective response to the virus a “hoax.” The Do Nothing Democrats are spending much of their money on Fake Ads. I never said that the CoronaVirus is a “Hoax”, I said that the Democrats, and the way they lied about it, are a Hoax. Also, it did start with “one person from China”, and then grew, & will be a “Miracle” end! And just in case you missed it, Trump tried it again, seven hours later: I never said the pandemic was a Hoax! Who would say such a thing? I said that the Do Nothing Democrats, together with their Mainstream Media partners, are the Hoax. They have been called out & embarrassed on this, even admitting they were wrong, but continue to spread the lie! You can go to the tape on this one, too, and find evidence to support Trump. On the other hand, if you do watch the same tape, you’ll see that on February 28, Trump was boasting about “losing nobody, so far” to the virus, compared to reports of “35, and 40,000 people — and we’ve lost nobody.”  The CDC now says the virus has killed more than 50,000 in the US. But, again: Trump and his team don’t expect you to go to the tape or spend more than a second thinking about this. All they want is for you to doubt the things you see, hear, and read. And they’ll keep at it. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Dr. Deborah Birx, one of the White House coronavirus task force’s top public health officials, said Sunday Americans should expect to continue practicing social distancing through the summer. As more than a dozen states prepare to loosen restrictions on social and business interactions, Birx noted those plans do not mean protective measures can be suspended. And she also said that mass diagnostic testing — on a scale not yet possible — would be needed before social distancing guidelines can be safely lifted. “Social distancing will be with us through the summer to really ensure that we protect one another as we move through these phases,” she told Chuck Todd in an appearance on NBC’s Meet the Press. The statement came in response to a question from Todd about comments recently made by Vice President Mike Pence; the vice president said he believes the United States will “largely have this coronavirus epidemic behind us” by Memorial Day weekend, around May 25. Pence, Trump, and White House officials without scientific training have long been more optimistic than the federal government’s public health experts about when the coronavirus might be under control. Trump has said he expects to see protective guidelines relaxed “sooner rather than later,” and Saturday once again promised there “will be a ‘Miracle’ end” to the pandemic. Birx said Sunday that models and data from certain viral hotspots, such as New Orleans, Houston, and Detroit, have indeed offered some hope for a downturn in infection rates: “If you look at those outbreaks over time … and you look at how they’ve reached their peak and come down and what those cases look like as they come down, it gives us great hope,” she said. Health officials in those three cities have cautiously expressed the hope that their curves may indeed be flattening, but it remains to be seen whether those trends continue — and if they have enough testing capacity to identify potential future outbreaks.  Birx cautioned against taking aggressive action to reopen businesses until that capacity is increased — and warned current testing capabilities may fall short when it comes to confirming cases. “We have to realize that we have to have a breakthrough innovation in testing. We have to be able to detect antigens,” molecules that trigger an immune system response, Birx said. “Rather than constantly trying to detect the actual live virus or the viral particles itself.” Such tests would help experts understand the scope and scale of the virus’s spread, and could help limit community spread as states begin to reopen. Birx said she believes antigen testing will be available soon, and that states should have access to improved versions of current testing protocols in “the next two to three weeks.” The doctor’s comments come as at least 16 states prepare to reopen portions of their economies. Most are mandating social distancing at reopened nonessential businesses, but some are reopening businesses where social distancing cannot take place — such as hair salons and tattoo parlors. All this has some experts concerned those states’ policies will lead to a new wave of infections that will mean social distancing will have to be practiced not through the summer, but long past it. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.New York has so far been hit harder than any other region of the United States by the coronavirus, and the state’s nightmare is far from over. Saturday, 5,902 more people tested positive, and while that’s a substantial decline from the state’s peak (when some days saw more than 10,000 people test positive), it’s still more new confirmed cases in New York today than 25 states have had in total over the three months since the virus’s spread in the US began.  Nonetheless, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Sunday that as case numbers continue to decline, New York will start to think about reopening. The plan is to follow CDC guidelines, which say a state should not start to reopen until new coronavirus-related hospitalizations have declined for 14 days. That will happen in some parts of the state sooner than in other parts, and the least-affected areas of the state will get to begin reopening first.  “Phase one of reopening will involve construction and manufacturing activities,” Cuomo said. “And within construction and manufacturing, those businesses that pose a low risk.” Phase two will involve all businesses, with state leaders weighing how essential each business is, how reopening the business might affect community spread risks, and how those risks can be mitigated. “In phase two,” Cuomo said, “we need businesses to do that analysis. They need to think about how they’re going to reopen with this ‘new normal’ — what precautions are they going to take in the workplace?” After each phase, Cuomo said, the state will take two weeks to monitor the effects of the changes — if a sudden surge of cases is detected, the state will take a step back and reconsider, while if infections remain low, it will proceed to the next phase.  Cuomo didn’t specify an exact timeline for the execution of this plan. But it may not be implemented any time soon: While the coronavirus has caused widespread economic devastation in New York and around the country, there is not widespread public support for a prompt reopening. Polls show that Americans overwhelmingly favor stay-at-home orders continuing until they’re no longer needed to contain the coronavirus.  That hasn’t stopped many governors from putting forward plans to reopen their state economies. Some of them, like Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp’s plan to reopen nail and hair salons, as well as bowling alleys, have been roundly condemned by experts as incoherent and dangerous policy that will lead to a resurgence of cases.  But many of the more careful plans are designed to keep coronavirus case numbers falling while easing the economic and social effects of the shelter-in-place orders Americans have now been living under, in many cases, for more than a month. If they work, they could make the long road until there’s a vaccine or effective treatment more bearable.  The problem is, it’s not clear that there are any businesses that can be safely reopened while the country is still lagging so desperately on measures needed to fight the virus successfully. The best way forward — the approach used in other countries that have successfully controlled their outbreaks — is to test millions of Americans. The US is not increasing its testing capacity anywhere near fast enough to pull that off. It’s not clear if there’s another route to making people safe enough that business as almost-usual can resume — but proposals like New York’s are an attempt to find one.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.President Donald Trump has expressed growing frustration with his daily coronavirus-related press conferences, calling them “not worth the time and effort” Saturday. The sentiment, coming days after an erratic briefing at which Trump incorrectly suggested that injecting cleaning products could help kill off the coronavirus that causes Covid-19, has been echoed by some Republican allies, who reportedly worry that the conferences hurt the party as a whole. On Saturday evening, Trump lashed out in a tweet about how the media has responded to his press conferences, calling reporters “hostile,” while suggesting he has helped network news receive high ratings during the Covid-19 pandemic. What is the purpose of having White House News Conferences when the Lamestream Media asks nothing but hostile questions, & then refuses to report the truth or facts accurately. They get record ratings, & the American people get nothing but Fake News. Not worth the time & effort! The tweet came shortly after the White House stated Saturday’s expected daily coronavirus press conference would not take place, and a day after a noticeably shortened conference on Friday, at which Trump took no questions. Trump eschewed regular press conferences for much of his presidency, but began holding daily updates as the novel coronavirus took hold in the United States. For a time, Trump celebrated these interactions as both a way to speak directly to the American people, and as television ratings bonanzas. But according to the New York Times, some Republican leaders see these news briefings as potentially sabotaging their party’s plans to keep control of the White House and Senate. “Now we have the foundation of the campaign yanked out from underneath us,” said Glen Bolger, a Republican pollster, echoing sentiments expressed by some other Republicans who spoke to the Times, all of whom said they fear the tanking economy and Trump’s unpredictable responses will lose the party swing states — and Senate seats — come November. These concerns came to the fore after remarks Trump made at his Thursday briefing went viral. Speaking off-the-cuff, Trump suggested that household disinfectants — the kind used to remove the virus from hard surfaces — could be injected into infected bodies to fight the coronavirus from within. He likewise promoted sunlight as a potential miracle cure, due to its ultraviolet rays. Health experts and the chemical companies that produce such cleaners immediately warned that people should never ingest toxic materials, and scientists stated there is no evidence ultraviolet rays can cure Covid-19. Trump later said he had been speaking sarcastically, while White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany said the comments had been taken out of context. It remains to be seen whether Trump will resume regular press briefings. Speaking to reporters on Saturday afternoon, McEnany said future briefings are “entirely his decision,” and said that “the president is at his best when he’s speaking directly to the American people” — referring, perhaps, to Trump’s rallies, rather than televised question-and-answer sessions with journalists. Trump’s current frustration with the conferences — notably that they are “not worth the time” — echoes critiques from his opponents. As Vox’s Zeeshan Aleem has written, these critics argued the frequent misinformation that Trump relayed at these briefings, such as whether the outbreak will get worse and how long social distancing guidelines will remain in effect, made them of little use to the public. And these concerns eventually led to discussions in the media about whether to stop broadcasting them live. Trump responded to these considerations in late March, by comparing his press conferences to other major television events, like Monday Night Football. As Aleem points out, the president’s response at that time discounted the reason people tune into such briefings during a pandemic; not to see the president, but “because they want to keep up-to-date on coronavirus and the US’s policies on it:” During these briefings it’s not just Trump who speaks, but his coronavirus task force, which includes top public health officials like Dr. Anthony Fauci, the widely respected director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and Dr. Deborah Birx, a physician noted for her work combating HIV/AIDS and the White House’s coronavirus response coordinator. The coronavirus pandemic has caused an economic crisis, policy chaos at home and abroad, and widespread physical and mental suffering around the globe — it would make sense that millions are tuning in to hear the nation’s top officials provide clear, accurate information on the latest. As Vox’s Matt Yglesias has written, Trump critics broadly opposed live broadcasts of Trump’s briefings because they believed that they served as “ersatz rallies held for political purposes rather than bona fide attempts to inform the public.”  But now, Trump’s style and bravado has begun to catch hold in unflattering ways. Amid a crumbling economy and ongoing pandemic, his allies seem to be joining the call for a significant change to these press conferences. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Twenty-six million Americans have filed for unemployment benefits as of April 23, as a result of the economic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic. And many of them are discovering what plenty of people already knew: our system is dysfunctional. Although unemployment programs are run by the states, which means the quality varies from place to place, across the country, the broader social welfare system in the United States is generally hard to access: riddled with red tape, and plagued by pointless burdens. In Florida, for example, the previous Republican governor, Rick Scott, created a congested unemployment system that was nearly impossible to use so that the unemployment numbers would remain artificially low. Other states try to run an efficient system but simply lack the capacity to do so.  Pamela Herd is a public policy professor at Georgetown University and the co-author of Administrative Burdens: Policymaking by Other Means. That book, like much of her research,  examines how policy interacts with and reinforces inequality. In a recent op-ed for the New York Times, she argues that the “gap between the promise of public programs and the reality of their design” has been uniquely exposed by this pandemic. I spoke to Herd by phone about how the system we have is the result of deliberate political choices and why she thinks we need to completely rethink “how we administer the safety net in the United States.” A lightly edited transcript of our conversation follows. In normal times, if you lose your job and need unemployment benefits or food stamps to feed your children, what does the process of getting help look like? How painful is it? One of the challenges is that it all depends on which state you live in. If you live in Mississippi, it might look really different than if you live in New York state or Connecticut or California. And there’s a wide range in terms of eligibility standards and compliance procedures and all the stuff you have to do to access benefits.  So let’s take something like food stamps. If you need food stamps in some states, you might be able to apply online. But it’ll also require you to collect a ton of documentation of things like your earnings or any child support you might be receiving. And if you collect all of this documentation, along with your eligibility forms, then hopefully [you] can upload it online. But the process is extensive and exhausting and at the end of it, you usually have to go through an interview — this is the case in most states, at least. And often you have to go through all of this again every six months or so, depending on where you live. Thankfully, a lot of this has been relaxed in the wake of this pandemic. Which regions of the country, or which states, tend to do this the best? And what do you think accounts for that gap? It’s a complicated question. Some states that have more generous benefits, states we might typically think of as more liberal, are oftentimes easier in terms of these kinds of procedures and protocols. But that’s not strictly true, either.  In California, for example, there are really thorny processes for food stamps because where you enroll and what you need to do varies based on what county you live in, and some counties are much better than others. And then there’s a conservative state like Wisconsin that actually has fairly good administrative processes and it’s not that hard to get benefits.  But the general rule is that more poorly resourced states, like Southern states, just lack the administrative capacity to do this stuff well, even if they want to do it better. But if they lack the administrative capacity, aren’t they responsible for that lack? Isn’t it the state governments that choose to gut their public programs? There is absolutely evidence in a lot of these states that it’s by design.  Apparently the former governor of Florida, Rick Scott, designed their unemployment benefits system so that it would be difficult to access and act as a deterrent for people. Florida is the clearest example of this for sure. And Florida has the resources to do unemployment insurance reasonably well. Because Gov. Scott deliberately wrecked Florida’s program, they’ve actually only processed somewhere between 10 and 15 percent of their applications for unemployment going back into March. They literally just don’t have the capacity to do it, and it’s precisely because it was designed that way. The Florida example seems particularly egregious, but is it an outlier? Are there other examples of states hamstringing their own systems? It’s tricky because the reality is that most states just aren’t great at unemployment insurance and some of it has to do with the prevailing logic since the Great Recession in 2008. The guiding principle in most states is that people don’t need to be on unemployment and that there are plenty of jobs available. So they’ve built in processes to try to get people off it quickly. And most states designed their systems with something like 3 or 4 percent unemployment in mind, so they don’t have the capacity to deal with much more than that.  There’s a line in your New York Times op-ed that captures maybe the fundamental problem here: “For too long, administrative processes have been designed to prevent claimants from incorrectly receiving benefits, rather than ensuring that those in need get help.” That’s an assumption, or a value judgment, built into our model of social welfare that all but guarantees it won’t work well for the people who need it. I’m glad you brought that up, because it’s huge. Most of our social welfare policies are designed in such a way where they’re a lot more concerned about preventing people who aren’t eligible from accessing benefits than ensuring that those who are eligible actually receive them. We’re fixated on fraud and abuse, which is extremely low in social welfare programs — something like 1 to 2 percent of cases. And even then, it’s not what people mean when they think of “fraud and abuse.” It’s mostly people making mistakes because they didn’t understand eligibility rules.  The problem with this unjustified obsession with fraud and abuse is that it means 20 to 30 percent of people are unable to access these programs even when they’re clearly eligible for them, because they’ve created all these administrative burdens designed to target people they don’t want on the programs. So it’s a huge disconnect in terms of trying to meet the broader goals of these programs. I want to push a little on this point because I don’t think a lot of people who claim to be concerned about fraud and abuse are really concerned about fraud and abuse. As far as I can tell, this is about trumping up these accusations in order to undermine programs they fundamentally don’t believe in, just as a lot of Republicans disingenuously complain about voting fraud as a cover for depressing voting numbers. You’re right about that. Partly, this is a way conservatives justify the use of administrative burdens. They make these sorts of arguments all the time, whether it’s about voting or social welfare programs. The pretense is always about preventing fraud and abuse. But think about a program like SNAP, or food stamps. The goal of that program was to prevent hunger, was to ensure people had adequate nutrition. If you think about that goal and you realize the way that you’re running that program means that 20 percent of people eligible for that benefit aren’t getting that help that they really need, then you’re fundamentally undermining these programmatic goals. You’re allowing all those people to go hungry. Well, that’s partly why I brought this up, because sometimes it’s not clear whether we’re talking about cruelty or incompetence, but the distinction matters — There’s plenty of both. You can look at a lot of the proposals to alter the Medicaid program over the last five years, and it’s very clear that a lot of conservative Republicans pushing those were pushing them knowing that they were extraordinarily burdensome, that they weren’t really encouraging people to work but instead were ensuring that a lot of people who were eligible for benefits would have a harder time accessing them. Can you give me an example of what you mean here? Arkansas is a great example of this. [Most people] who lost benefits when they put in place the work requirement lost them because they couldn’t meet the new documentation burdens. And despite clear evidence that the program wasn’t working, they continued to push these burdens. So that’s a case where I think the intentions are pretty clear.  You’ve called for “a reconfiguration of how we administer the safety net in the United States.” Do you think this pandemic is the catalyst we needed? It’s possible. We’re in a moment where a lot of people, all at once, are trying to seek help from the government and are actually seeing what it’s actually like when you try to do that. People paid into unemployment, they qualify for unemployment, and it’s completely not their fault that they lost their jobs. But we’ve built this system that makes it almost impossible to get help. So maybe that realization will motivate people to push our legislators to do better. But I think this is also a moment for progressives to rethink their approach to this stuff. Progressives have been far more focused on expanding eligibility, but a lot less attention has been paid to these sorts of administrative burdens that are preventing a lot of people who are eligible for these programs from accessing them.  What are the simplest, most effective things we could do to improve this process right now for people in need? There are technocratic things like requiring state governments and the federal government to quantify how many people who are eligible for benefits aren’t getting them. Right now they’re required to report on fraud and abuse, but they should also be required to report how many people they’re failing to reach. This would be a good start.  In the short term, if we’re thinking about how to deal with this crisis, we need some quick, easy things the government can do, like increasing SNAP benefits. No one needs to do anything. It just gets loaded on your card and it’s super effective in terms of the return on investment and economic activity. On the unemployment front, I’d like to see the federal government relax the verification rules for states. We have all these new groups for unemployment, like gig workers, and a lot of these people haven’t even been able to file yet, because states haven’t figured out how to administer that part of the program. And one of the reasons why they’re slow about doing it is because the feds have basically said, “You’re responsible for the verification, and if people get on who shouldn’t get on, you’re going to have to pony up the resources.” So it gives states this really strong incentive to slow-roll this process. But we don’t have time for that right now.  One other thing I’d say is that the process of getting people help is being hindered by these verification requirements that require people to check in every week to say that they’re still unemployed. But that absorbs a ton of staff capacity right now and we could easily stop doing that for at least a couple months. These are small things but they would make a significant difference.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.The majority of unemployed Americans did not receive unemployment benefits in March — a month that shattered US records for job loss claims — according to a new study. The Pew Research Center has found that, although more than 11 million Americans filed first-time unemployment claims in March, the wide variety of methods states and territories use to administer their jobless programs have resulted in wide disparities in who has received their payments, and how much those payments were worth. As a result, only 29 percent of jobless Americans received benefits in March, according to Pew’s analysis of Labor Department statistics. The disbursement rate of unemployment payments was found to vary widely, with nearly 66 percent of unemployed Massachusetts residents receiving their benefits, compared to only 7.6 percent of unemployed Florida residents. The federal CARES Act, the $2.2 trillion stimulus package aimed at addressing coronavirus-related economic fallout, featured provisions meant to boost the size and scope of unemployment benefits. But it left the distribution of funds to the states — many of which have outdated, underfunded, and inefficient methods for enrolling the newly unemployed, as Vox’s Ella Nilsen has explained.  Also at issue, Pew notes, is those seeking support “face a hodgepodge of different state rules governing how they can qualify for benefits, how much they’ll get and how long they can collect them.” For example, in some states, workers must wait a week before they can start collecting benefits. In others, workers who receive commission, rather than standard wages, are ineligible for aid. And, in many states, people may exhaust their benefits after a certain period of time — a scenario that is unworkable in a job market in which standard employment is largely on hold for the foreseeable future. (The CARES Act does extend the length of people’s eligibility for federal benefits after their state benefits run out, the study notes.) These different scenarios result in regional disparities in who receives benefits — and mean that millions of those eligible did not, and perhaps still have not, received aid. By and large, the states where the fewest jobless people (under 15 percent) received benefits were in the South, and the states where the most jobless people (more than 40 percent) received benefits were in the Northeast and Midwest. The amount of the benefits also varied widely, because states cap benefits in relation to a person’s earnings, at different amounts, from $235 per week in Mississippi to $823 per week in Massachusetts. Some states offer additional benefits for dependents; others don’t. Even before this explosion of job loss, unemployment benefits were often hard to access, as many states’ administrative apparatuses went underfunded for years. All this comes at a time when Americans have said they need immediate support — more than half of low-income Americans report that they will have trouble paying bills this month. And nationwide, the economic fallout from the virus’s spread is on par with the Great Depression. Now, paired with new hurdles, such as the rocky rollout of new programs and glitchy or purposefully inaccessible online portals, millions more Americans are seeing — and about to fall through — the gaping holes in the national safety net. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.New York and Kentucky announced new programs on Friday aimed at improving access to mail-in ballots, as both states work to find ways to limit interaction at the polls during upcoming elections amid the Covid-19 pandemic. On Friday, New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and Kentucky Gov. Andy Beshear both signed executive orders mandating applications for absentee ballots be sent to all of their states’ voters — upon returning the applications to state officials, voters will receive ballots. “I am issuing an Executive Order to ensure every New York voter automatically receives a postage-paid application for an absentee ballot because no New Yorker should have to choose between their health and their right to vote,” Cuomo said in a statement. Kentucky’s plan does not include prepaid postage, but does require the state to create a website so voters can request ballots online. It also waives the requirement for absentee voters to notarize their ballot applications.  “While there will be significant education and work required, we are committed to making sure this election will be held in a safe manner while we are in this worldwide health pandemic,” Beshear said in a statement. Both Kentucky’s and New York’s primary elections have been postponed to June 23 because of the coronavirus outbreak. New York’s was originally scheduled for April 28, and Kentucky’s for May 19. New York has become the epicenter of the outbreak, with at least 271,000 confirmed Covid-19 cases as of April 25, and more than 16,000 deaths. Kentucky has nearly 3,800 cases, with 200 deaths. The push for increased absentee voting in both states comes weeks after a primary election in Wisconsin on April 7 illustrated the risk of forcing people to stand in long lines during an infectious disease outbreak. That election led to at least 19 Wisconsin voters being diagnosed with Covid-19. Hoping to avoid similar scenarios, other states — like Ohio — have begun making voting an entirely mail-in process. In some states that have not taken that step, certain specific jurisdictions, such as Florida’s Miami-Dade, Broward and Palm Beach counties — the last of which being where President Donald Trump is registered to vote — have also established their own plans to mail out absentee ballot request forms to all voters.  But such measures have faced political pushback, with many Republicans, including Trump, arguing that mail-in voting carries with it a risk of fraud. Voting experts have disputed these claims, finding voter fraud to be incredibly rare and noting that when it does happen, it does not privilege one party over another. Nationally, some lawmakers are working to expand mail-in voting for the long term. Sens. Ron Wyden (D-OR) and Amy Klobuchar (D-MN) introduced an updated bill that would expand early and absentee voting, and mandate voting contingency plans for future emergencies like coronavirus. As Vox’s Ella Nilsen has reported, 34 states allow all voters to vote by mail. The remaining 16 states require applicants to provide an excuse — such as serving in the military or living abroad — to request a mail-in ballot. (New York has such a requirement, which is functionally waived under Cuomo’s executive order.) It remains to be seen how the coronavirus will affect November’s general election — and whether efforts to broaden the availability of vote-by-mail will come to fruition by then.  At a hearing on the subject on Wednesday, elections experts warned there may not be enough time to prepare for a nationwide mail-in election in November. States may not have the time or resources to acquire the envelopes, ballots, and scanning machines needed, Washington state Secretary of State Kim Wyman told Wednesday’s panel.  “With the impacts of Covid-19, I am very concerned that with only six months really to implement vote-by-mail or absentee voting in a jurisdiction, that it’s going to be a heavy lift,” she said. And she added that poorly implemented absentee voting structures could undermine faith in the election’s result.  On the state level, Ohio has seen the difficulties Wyman outlined. In March, its primary was postponed at the last minute, causing confusion. The state decided to move to an entirely mail-in process. Now, some voters may not receive ballots in time to vote, Ohio’s secretary of state has said. It’s a reminder for increasingly cash-strapped states — and for federal lawmakers hoping to create national vote-by-mail programs — that to ensure a smooth transition to mass mail-in-voting this fall, action must be taken now.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  Two more states have announced plans to loosen restrictions meant to slow the spread of the novel coronavirus, even as experts warn that diagnostic testing must dramatically increase before the country can safely reopen. Friday, Iowa and Mississippi joined more than a dozen other states who have said they will reopen some nonessential businesses in the coming week. The governors of both states, however, said many restrictions aimed at reducing social interaction will remain in place. In Iowa, where there are nearly 4,500 confirmed Covid-19 cases as of April 25, farmers markets will reopen Monday, and Gov. Kim Reynolds (R) has signaled she will consider reopening other businesses, according to reporting by the Des Moines Register. Hospitals will also be able to perform nonessential surgeries, reversing a ban that took effect in late March in effort to conserve medical equipment. In Mississippi, which has more than 5,400 confirmed Covid-19 cases as of April 25, Gov. Tate Reeves (R) transitioned his state’s “stay-at-home” order to what he calls a “safer-at-home” order. The new order is expected to be in effect for two weeks, beginning Monday. It allows many businesses to reopen, encourages customers to follow social distancing guidelines, and instructs Mississippians to stay home “as much as you possibly can” and limit gatherings to 10 or fewer people. They join states like Florida, where beaches and parks have reopened; Minnesota, where some sport and recreation shops have reopened; South Carolina and Georgia, which will allow their “stay-at-home” orders to expire almost completely; and Tennessee, where restaurants will be permitted to reestablish their dine-in service on Monday and where retail stores may reopen on Wednesday — as long as dining room and retail space capacity doesn’t exceed half of their maximums. Both Iowa and Mississippi have taken steps to avoid some of the criticisms other states beginning to reopen have faced. For example, Georgia’s reopening plan allows for businesses like hair salons and tattoo parlors to serve customers — Mississippi’s order does not. And in Iowa, hospitals performing nonessential procedures will have to maintain a certain number of ICU beds for coronavirus patients. But epidemiologists have cautioned that such measures are not enough, and that much more is required before reopening any businesses at all will be safe, including ensuring states are able to substantially increase testing capacity and better equip hospitals.  States and the federal government have struggled to balance the public health risk posed by novel coronavirus — which is more contagious, deadlier, and lasts longer on surfaces than the flu — with the severe economic cost of shutting down public life. Since March, more than 26 million Americans have applied for unemployment benefits. More than half of low-income Americans have reported that someone in their household lost work because of coronavirus, and that they will therefore struggle to pay bills this month. But while reopening portions of the economy immediately might seem as if it would help those struggling with bills and unemployment, experts argue doing so risks achieving the worst of both worlds: failing to avoid an economic recession while also causing a new spike in coronavirus cases and deaths. Steps have been outlined — by the White House’s public health officials and other experts — that could allow the economy to be restarted safely. But experts say the US is far from ready to take them.  These steps include establishing a robust system for contact tracing — which identifies all people an infected person comes into contact with — and regular diagnostic testing. In particular, epidemiologists have called for hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of daily tests, repeated on people over time, to properly understand the scope of the disease’s spread as people begin to reengage with normal life. Reopening would also require ensuring sufficient protections for health care workers, who have faced significant equipment shortages and risk becoming overwhelmed if there is a spike in new cases. There are also questions as to whether people are willing to patronize newly reopened businesses, as Vox’s Matthew Yglesias has written: Americans fear spreading or contracting infection, so much so that they’ve overwhelmingly participated in social distancing measures. They tell pollsters by wide margins that they fear lifting those restrictions too soon much more so than too late. They’re willing to stay put even if it harms the economy. They also fear economic hardship. That’s led prudent people, even those left relatively unharmed by the downturn so far, to delay nonessential purchases, like new cars, appliances, clothes, and other goods. Whatever choices state officials make about opening things up, there’s not going to be a vibrant economy until real steps are taken to address those dual sources of fear. This lack of testing and uncertainty about people’s economic appetites means states reopening nonessential businesses are more or less engaging in an experiment in the midst of an unchecked viral outbreak, former Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Jeffrey Koplan said last week. “There’s talk of [new cases] tapering off into a plateau and talk of it looking better than the models, but it feels very premature,” Koplan said of declining case counts. “This is no time for this kind of experimentation.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.FreedomWorks, a conservative-leaning organization best known for its support of the Tea Party movement and its longtime opposition to government bailouts, has applied for a Small Business Administration loan through the Paycheck Protection Program, Congress’s emergency response to the economic downturn. The loan is to support the group’s foundation arm. As first reported in the New York Times, nonprofit groups are permitted to apply for SBA loans intended to prop up struggling businesses in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic. Those nonprofit groups include the FreedomWorks Foundation. The Times quoted FreedomWorks President Adam Brandon as saying, “I would love someone to give us free cash.” A provision in the legislation, which socially conservative organizations recommended to Republican lawmakers, made clear that certain nonprofit groups could apply as well. The provision opened the door for taxpayer funding to subsidize well-connected organizations that are part of the political fray in an election year. And at least a few groups — on both sides of the political spectrum — decided to apply, so far with mixed results. The Congressional Progressive Caucus Center’s application for a $160,000 loan is awaiting resolution, as is FreedomWorks Foundation’s request for $300,000, according to officials at the groups. FreedomWorks has long opposed federal bailouts, describing the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 as “unconstitutional.” In response to the passage of the Phase 3.5 bill earlier this week, FreedomWorks’ Jason Pye said, “The line has long been crossed. No more spending. Period. At this point, we should be focused on reopening the economy and getting Americans back to work.”  And as I reported earlier this week, FreedomWorks is connected to many of the anti-stay-at-home-order protests taking place across the country. For example, in Wisconsin, the main anti-shutdown group, Open Wisconsin Now, was organized by the Committee to Unleash Prosperity and by FreedomWorks.  While FreedomWorks is best known for the actions taken by the group’s political side, the FreedomWorks Foundation — aimed, according to its website, at “educat[ing] and empower[ing] Americans with the principles of individual liberty, small government, and free markets” — is eligible for an SBA loan.  According to its 2018 990, the FreedomWorks Foundation had roughly $1.1 million in total assets at the end of 2018. Brandon, the FreedomWorks president, told me the group chose to apply for the loan because “it’s responsible to explore all options.”  “We had to cancel our annual fundraiser because of the shutdowns, and that is [a] big blow to our fundraising,” Brandon said over text message. “My quote [in the New York Times] was out of context and I was being sarcastic since we will not get that opportunity for our fundraiser until next year.” He reiterated that only the Foundation would receive PPP support and said, “I think it’s responsible to explore all options. We have no idea how long these shutdowns will last. We’re in a good position now with reserve funds, but I have no idea what the world looks like in six months if the lockdowns continue.” I asked him if he saw any contradiction between FreedomWorks’ previous opposition to government bailouts and their decision to apply for and take an SBA loan. He said, “No,” adding, “It’s like when your land gets taken, you get compensation. It’s a takings issue. The moral hazard is when you get bailed out for negligent behavior.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. A month or so ago, Florida seemed primed to be the next epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak in America. Pictures of spring breakers at the beach evoked fears of a young army of super spreaders. The state’s population — more than one in five are 65 or older, the highest share in the country — seemed particularly susceptible to a virus that is more dangerous to seniors. Gov. Ron DeSantis dragged his feet before finally issuing a statewide stay-at-home order on April 1. Yet today, public health experts are conspicuously sanguine about the trendlines in the state. Nobody is declaring victory yet, not with the lag in reporting new positive cases because of testing delays. But there is some glimmer of hope. Why, given everything we know and don’t know about this disease, does Florida seem to largely have been spared (at least so far)? As Thomas Hladish, a research scientist at the University of Florida’s Emerging Pathogens Institute, put it to me, the Florida outbreak is “a puzzle that still has to be explained.” In raw totals, Florida had the eighth-most coronavirus cases as of April 24. It has the third-most people, so if you adjust for population, Florida slides all the way down to 18th in Covid-19 cases per capita, according to tabulations from USA Today last week. The important indicators — daily new cases and deaths — haven’t totally taken a turn for the better yet, but they don’t appear to be getting dramatically worse either. “It looks to me like we are not really declining at this point, but we’re on a plateau,” Hladish said, adding the Florida outbreak was “clearly not growing exponentially.” To account for some of the lag in reporting delays, let’s go back a couple of weeks to see how Covid-19 is trending in the Sunshine State. On April 13, there were 995 new cases reported. On April 20, there were 763. There were 41 deaths on April 13 and 38 on April 20. The high point for new cases was April 3; for daily deaths, it was April 6. Even allowing for imperfect reporting, Florida does not seem to be experiencing exponential growth as seen in New York City. It is testing at an average rate, ranking 20th in tests per million people. So while a fair number of cases could be being missed, the state is not an outlier by any means in its ability to track the disease. Jerne Shapiro, a lecturer at the University of Florida’s epidemiology department, summarized her feelings like this: “I am optimistic when I’m looking at those trendlines.” So why haven’t the worst fears for Florida come to pass? With one more caution that things could still break bad in the coming days and weeks, let’s run through a few of the theories I went over with public health experts in the state. Every expert I talked to cited social distancing, first and foremost, as the best explanation for the seeming plateau of Covid-19 cases in Florida. “We’re doing a really good job of social distancing,” Shapiro said. “People are taking it seriously, and that allows us to slow the spread of the disease.” Gary Wang, chief of the UF College of Medicine’s infectious disease and global health division, was only willing to cite one thing to explain the Florida trends: “good social distancing.” As it turns out, news coverage might have given a misleading picture of how Floridians were actually responding to the coronavirus threat. According to Google’s mobility reports, Florida is actually outperforming the US average on every metric of social distancing the tech company is tracking. Retail visits are down 49 percent (45 percent across the US). Trips to grocery stores and pharmacies have dropped 20 percent (7 percent US average), and people are going to parks less (down 54 percent versus 16 percent nationwide). Though DeSantis was reluctant to issue a statewide stay-at-home order, many localities had already taken that critical step before he came around on April 1. Miami-Dade and Broward counties, the two most populous counties in Florida, had already urged residents to stay home by late March. Florida may also have benefited from the precautions being taken in other states, which limited travel to this tourism-dependent state. “That’s been better for Covid-19, though it’s not been great for our economy,” Cindy Prins, assistant dean at UF’s College of Public Health and an epidemiology professor, told me. “People got the message early on to protect themselves.” One thing I think is often overlooked in the conversations about social distancing is the environmental factors. Florida has at least two obvious advantages over somewhere like New York when it comes to keeping one’s distance: More people live in single-family homes, and more people travel by car than public transportation. Owner-occupied homes are a useful proxy for single-family households. Higher rates of ownership generally translate to more people living in a standalone house, while more rentals typically mean more people living in multi-unit facilities. Per census data, the owner-occupied housing rate in Florida is 65 percent, while in New York City, it is about 33 percent. (For all of New York state, it’s about 54 percent.) The number of people per household is almost identical between the two places, so the difference is really in living situation. “Even in some of our more urban areas, we don’t have the population density that you have in New York,” Prins said. “Higher population density, you’re always more likely to be exposed. You’re encountering more people and more at risk of being exposed.” In an apartment building, Hladish said, “you can’t help the fact you’re touching the same elevator buttons or the same handrails.” Some recent studies have suggested public transportation was also an important vector in New York, though others have cast doubt on that theory. Regardless, it is undeniable that Floridians find themselves in their cars a lot more than on mass transit. In 2013, nearly 80 percent of people in Florida commuted alone in their car, truck, or van. In New York state, it was a little over 50 percent, while 28 percent were commuting via public transportation. In Florida, just 2 percent of people get to work by bus or subway. “It’s a lot easier to stay away from your neighbors here,” Hladish says. So while New Yorkers and Floridians might be equally committed to social distancing — Google’s mobility reports show similar trends — the latter group might simply find it easier to do. “It’s not that Floridians cared more or are better at it,” Hladish says. “They may have simply been in a better position to take initiative at the individual level.” Given all the recent debate about how much higher temperatures or humidity might limit the coronavirus’s spread, or not, it would be remiss not to address it in the country’s hottest and most humid states. As Shapiro pointed out, Florida has already experienced 90-plus-degree days. It’s possible there has been a marginal effect — but not in the way you might think. In general, the experts I talked to were unpersuaded that heat or humidity would explain Florida’s relatively mild coronavirus outbreak thus far. “I don’t see that temperature and humidity would really have any effect. Even if they have one, I don’t think we would see it,” Prins said. “It’s just too easy for it to spread right now. We have too large a susceptible population.” An MIT study from mid-March concluded that while climate factors might have some limited effect on the virus, “it is extremely unlikely that the spread of [Covid-19] would slow down in the USA or Europe, due to environmental factors.” Hladish agreed that heat and humidity on their own wouldn’t be a big factor. But he did raise the possibility that warmer weather makes it easier for people to get outside — and get away from other people — which matters because the virus can spread more easily in indoor settings than outdoors. “I think the behavioral effects of weather are more likely to be a factor,” he said. “In Florida, in many parts of the state, you can go outside and be away from other people.” Hladish added that was actually part of the reason he wasn’t particularly concerned about reopening beaches. From an epidemiological perspective, it would be best to keep them closed. But if something is going to open, as state leaders are insisting, then beaches might be better than other options. “We were going to do something, and I think this is relatively low risk,” Hladish said. “I have a hard time imagining there’s a lot of transmission happening at the beach.” Though the virus seems to spread much more indoors, his concern was more that the people who are rushing out to the beaches are also engaging in other risky behaviors that could lead to the virus spreading. “I think the bigger concern is there are a whole lot of people who just don’t care and aren’t worried,” he said. So social distancing, and Florida’s structural advantages in social distancing, seem like the most likely explanation for the plateauing outbreak there. The weather may be playing some marginal role, but the state can’t depend on its climate alone to save it from the coronavirus. And there was probably a bit of luck, too: As Vox’s German Lopez explained, some of the variance between places is simply a matter of when the virus showed up there. But every expert I spoke with emphasized, again and again, that Florida shouldn’t rest easy yet. “Social distancing has been working, but we should not conclude that we’re declining yet,” Hladish said. The test reporting lags are one cause for concern. The consensus seems to be that states should see two weeks of declining deaths and cases, at a minimum, before they start to think about any plans to start reopening businesses and public activities. “We have to be very cautious thinking that yesterday’s number of cases is a trend,” Prins said. “It’s not yet.” If social distancing is relaxed too quickly, the coronavirus could come roaring back. Public health experts worry that politicians will simply look at data visualizations, see a flattened curve, and conclude it’s safe for life to go back to normal. Hladish isn’t too worried about beaches reopening. If there is an effect, he doesn’t think it would lead to an explosion of cases.  But he does add, as a word of warning: “I do think that would happen if we ended the lockdowns.” This story appears in VoxCare, a newsletter from Vox on the latest twists and turns in America’s health care debate. Sign up to get VoxCare in your inbox along with more health care stats and news.  Get our newsletter in your inbox once a week. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. President Donald Trump now claims he was being “sarcastic” when he mused on Thursday about disinfectant injections being a possible miracle cure for the coronavirus. Unfortunately for him, there’s video. Asked during a White House bill-signing ceremony on Friday to explain his comments — which were widely mocked for being ridiculous and more than a little irresponsible, became the top trending topic on Twitter, and prompted warnings from health agencies that it’s actually a bad idea to inject or consume bleach — Trump tried to rewrite history. “I was asking a sarcastic, and a very sarcastic question, to the reporters in the room about disinfectant on the inside,” Trump lied. In reality, he was looking at White House officials when he earnestly asked them to investigate whether there’s “a way we can do something like that, by injection inside or almost a cleaning. Because you see it gets in the lungs, and it does a tremendous number on the lungs. So it would be interesting to check that.” Notably, even as he tried to distance himself from his remarks, Trump illustrated his fundamental inability to ever admit a mistake by continuing to defend his premise. Disinfectant “does kill it, and it would kill it on the hands, and that would make things much better,” Trump said. Watch the two clips back to back for yourself: Here's a mashup of Trump claiming today he was just asking "a very sarcastic question to the reporters in the room" when he mused about disinfectant injections as a possible coronavirus miracle cure, followed by the original clip showing beyond a doubt that he was not doing that. pic.twitter.com/wby4ucd59Q Asked later on Friday if he wanted to clarify his comments for people who might have misunderstood his “sarcasm,” Trump reiterated, “I do think that disinfectant on the hands could have a very good effect.” But that’s entirely beside the point. Trump’s bizarre comments during Thursday’s White House press briefing came after a Department of Homeland Security official presented research indicating that “commonly available disinfectants work to kill the virus” on surfaces. At no point did he suggest using them on human hands. That’s likely because 1) disinfectants contain harsh chemicals that can cause skin irritation and even chemical burns, and 2) soap and hand sanitizer already exist. When his disinfectant remarks came up for a third time on Friday, Trump seemed to get lost in his own lies, got corrected by a reporter about what the video shows him actually saying, and then abruptly ended the press event. Watch: TRUMP: I was looking at you yesterday when I was being sarcastic about disinfectantsJEFF MASON: I wasn't there yesterdayANOTHER REPORTER: You were looking at Dr BirxTRUMP: I was looking at Bill, the doctor, I was looking at some of the reporters *changes topic* pic.twitter.com/h8VxIknuey The scene was a quintessential example of gaslighting. Instead of simply admitting he said something dumb, Trump told people they didn’t see what they saw, then shut things down when reporters began to call him out on his contradictions. The scene was reminiscent of his efforts to retcon his 2016 call for Russian hackers to attack Hillary Clinton as just “a joke,” even when a cursory review of video from that press conference showed, beyond a doubt, that he was being serious. Trump, however, has already primed his supporters to disbelieve their senses and just listen to him. “Don’t believe the crap you see from these people, the fake news,” Trump said during a 2018 speech. “Just remember, what you’re seeing and what you’re reading is not what’s happening.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.After weeks of social distancing, lockdowns, and quarantines, federal and some state governments are starting to issue guidelines for reopening and getting back to something approaching normal. Testing is a key part of that, and most experts say the United States isn’t doing enough. In fact, it’s not even close. While President Donald Trump just signed the latest relief bill, which allocates $25 billion for testing, there are many barriers preventing the country from deploying the kind of mass testing program it needs. There are shortages of supplies and, until that $25 billion is distributed, funding. There’s also no comprehensive national plan to distribute tests to the places they’re needed most. This lack of planning goes back to the pandemic’s early days, when systemic failures significantly delayed coronavirus tests from rolling out and left the US trailing in testing capacity compared with other countries. For these reasons, the number of tests performed has plateaued at about 150,000 per day in the US. Experts say we need several times that. “We need to significantly ramp up not only the number of tests, but the capacity to perform them, so that you don’t have a situation where you have a test but it can’t be done because there isn’t a swab, or because there isn’t extraction media, or not the right vial,” Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told Time in late April. “I am not overly confident right now at all that we have what it takes to do that. We are doing better, and I think we are going to get there, but we are not there yet.” So what will it will take to ramp up testing to a level that allows the US to start easing social distancing? It’s complicated. The available tests aren’t as dependable as they could be, and the labs required to process them need to increase capacity. On top of that, the country needs more public health personnel to carry out the test as well as to run the labs. Then, of course, this will all cost a lot of money. These things are not necessarily impossible tasks, though the road ahead looks tough. There are two types of Covid-19 tests: molecular and serological. Molecular tests look for the presence of a virus’s genetic material, showing that there is an active infection. Those are the tests that require a swab to be shoved through the back of your nose and into your throat to collect a specimen (although — good news — the FDA recently authorized specimen collection by swabbing around the nostrils, and there’s a new test that uses only saliva). Serological tests look for antibodies to the virus in the blood, the presence of which indicates there was an infection in the past. While the molecular tests for Covid-19 have been around since the beginning of February, serological tests weren’t authorized until April 1. Many people see these tests as a way to prove immunity against the virus, allowing those who test positive to resume their normal lives, free from the threat of contracting the virus again. Some countries are even using serological test results to issue “immunity passports” to citizens who test positive. Here’s some bad news on that front: Experts warn that we don’t yet know for sure that these antibodies confer immunity, nor for how long that immunity lasts if they do.  “We have no idea whether the presence of antibodies correlates with immunity,” said Dr. Gary Procop, director of clinical virology at the Cleveland Clinic and the chair of the Institute for Science, Technology and Public Policy at the American Society for Clinical Pathology.  “People are making that leap of faith, and I wouldn’t make it,” Procop added. “We don’t use serologic testing for influenza and other respiratory viruses. Why do we think we should be able to use it here?” (If you really want to go in-depth into how these tests work, Scientific American has a great primer on reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reactions and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays.) Because the FDA approval process takes such a long time, coronavirus tests are instead given an Emergency Use Authorization. As of April 24, 59 molecular and 4 serological tests have received this authorization. There are also nearly 100 tests that do not yet have that authorization but which the agency is allowing to be used in order to get more tests out there sooner. In addition, the FDA has given some state health departments the right to approve tests without waiting for or needing FDA authorization. While it’s clearly good to have tests available, the lack of strict oversight from the FDA and real-world testing that would typically occur as part of the approval process has led to some tests having significant issues with accuracy. On April 2, the Wall Street Journal said doctors were seeing about a 70 percent sensitivity rate in some molecular tests, which means 30 percent of patients were getting false negatives. Over time, these numbers should improve. No test is perfect, but ABC News reported that a similar molecular test for the flu has a 90 to 95 percent sensitivity rate.   Another issue is that not every lab can run every type of test kit — far from it. So while there may be a surplus of one company’s test kit, the only labs that can run that particular test may not have the capacity, while other labs that do have the capacity may not have the materials required to do so. The BBC compared it to expecting Chevy truck parts to fit a Prius. For the most part, molecular tests must be performed in a laboratory, with — and this is a very simplified summary of the process — a medical technologist preparing the specimen, running it through a machine, and then manually reading and interpreting the results. Just the machine part of the process takes several hours. Factor in the time it takes to get the test to the lab, and you’re likely looking at a one or two day turnaround (if there’s a lab on-site that can do the test, obviously, it would be much less). If the lab has a backlog, the turnaround will be a lot longer. That’s what makes “point of care” tests so appealing. These can be done in a matter of minutes at the same place where the specimen is collected — for instance, at a drive-in testing site or at an urgent care center. Abbott Lab’s ID NOW machine can get a positive result in five minutes, while the Cepheid GeneXpert can do it in 45. These tests are molecular tests but use a different method than the PCR tests performed in laboratories. They’re also generally less accurate. Trump introduced the ID NOW machine to the country in a March 29 press conference, where he displayed the toaster-sized, 6.6 pound machine upside down. Eager to anoint the newest immediate solution to this massive and complex worldwide problem, the president called the test a “whole new ballgame.” But there have been issues with the test, such as accuracy and availability falling far short of what the administration initially promised.  “These tests are performing terribly,” Michael Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota, bluntly stated in a recent Project on Government Oversight panel discussion.  For its part, Abbott Labs told the Wall Street Journal that it has distributed 600,000 test cartridges as of April 19, adding “we’ve been clear from the outset on what we could initially provide, and we’ve met every commitment.” The company is currently manufacturing 50,000 test cartridges a day, but the number of test cartridges does not mean that many tests can be run. As the machines can only do one test at a time, point-of-care testing capacity really depends on how many machines there are. (Laboratory PCR tests, on the other hand, take longer to run but can test many specimens simultaneously.) According to NPR, there are 18,000 ID NOW machines in the country. Cepheid says there are 23,000 GeneXpert machines globally. So having a point-of-care machine, say, at the entrance to every workplace, school, or airport across the country — not to mention a trained person to run the rest, wearing the necessary PPE — simply isn’t realistic yet. At-home tests could make things even easier, but taking the collection and testing process out of the hands of trained professionals introduces another set of problems. Many people can’t even put on masks correctly. Expecting them to properly collect a specimen, pack it, and ship it to a lab might be too much. For these reasons, the FDA has been slow to authorize any test kits with any at-home element, only doing so for one kit so far. This test, the LabCorp COVID-19 RT-PCR, allows people to collect their own specimens, which they then send to the lab to be processed.  “Any at-home test, there’s always an issue of specimen acquisition,” Procop told Recode. “Did the person get the swab up their nose far enough? ... There may be issues of people who only do the front part of their nose where the virus doesn’t really live, and that may decrease the sensitivity a little bit. But, for the most part, it’ll probably be okay.” A test that can be performed entirely at home, no trained clinicians or expensive lab equipment needed, sounds great, too. It’s a goal some researchers think they can achieve. MIT Technology Review recently wrote about efforts to create such tests. A completely at-home test for a virus isn’t unheard of. You can buy at-home HIV tests at the drug store, but that test detects antibodies and antigens, which take a while to form so early cases would be missed. Also, it was more than 30 years from the time HIV was first widely known to the point when this test got approved by the FDA. “I think that’ll be a long way off,” Procop said of the possibility of a completely at-home Covid-19 test. Creating a coronavirus diagnostic test is only the first step of a long process that might lead to widespread use. The test still has to be manufactured, distributed, and administered at the mass scale required. Here is where we are really seeing the impact of the delays and a lack of funding and guidance from the federal government. Some of these problems were unavoidable. For example, when the coronavirus outbreak started earlier this year, the supply chain for these tests simply didn’t exist at the scale needed, so many testing companies faced shortages of everything from swabs to reagents (chemicals used to create the reaction needed to detect the virus in molecular tests). The FDA has tried to help by authorizing other materials to be used for swabs, but again, there are only so many materials that can collect specimens, and the FDA warns that its substitute swab material recommendations “are based on limited available evidence.”  Scaling up the production of reagents is even more complicated. These compounds include DNA components, enzymes, and saline solutions. “Pretty complicated biochemistry,” Procop said. “And, of course, the companies have to make these under certain conditions. ... They have to make very complicated products in a very controlled manner.” There are signs that testing capacity is starting to improve. According to the COVID Tracking Project, over 311,000 were run on April 22. This is the most tests performed so far in a single day and represents more than twice the average number of daily tests during the month of April, when the average floated around 150,000. That said, the number of daily tests dropped back down to around 190,000 on April 23, so it remains unclear if the US can maintain a high level of capacity.  Quest Diagnostics, one of the largest lab companies in America, told Recode that it is now running 50,000 coronavirus diagnostic tests per day, and has eliminated the backlog that once caused significant delays in reporting results. “That capacity meets demand,” Quest told Recode. “If the demand were higher, we would explore way to accommodate that. We may very well be able to accommodate increased demand (depending on the amount) with our current setup. To increase capacity, we may explore bringing up test capabilities in additional labs or other means.” The demand for testing right now does not necessarily line up with the level of testing that experts believe we need to ease social distancing. Some plans call for 1 to 2 million tests a day for this to happen; one calls for 100 million per day. Scott Gottlieb, a former FDA director for Trump who wrote a roadmap to reopening the economy for the American Enterprise Institute, told Vox that these shortages were not simple to fix, as the materials come from other countries — all of which need these supplies for their own tests — and manufacturers would have to take the time to set up a new source in America: Getting to the point where you have a 2-3 million test capacity per week — which is probably where you need to be initially as you do this transition — is going to be very hard. We’ve tapped out the available platforms and now we’re dependent upon creating new platforms and new supply chains to fuel those platforms. We’re approaching an upper limit in spare capacity. The question is how fast can Abbott and other companies build new testing platforms? And how fast can LabCorp and Quest scale up new labs that didn’t exist before?  Then there’s the issue of having enough trained personnel to run those labs and machines. “If we’re talking about doubling or tripling our capacity, that would require, for some of our members, retraining staff specifically for these tests,” Louise Serio, spokesperson for the American Clinical Laboratory Association (ACLA), which represents commercial labs, told Recode. “It may mean hiring more staff. That would be a piece that is necessary to significantly expand the capacity — in addition to obviously having access to those very high-throughput platforms [machines that can run many samples at once].” One medical laboratory scientist and teaching specialist told ACLA that she is now working 50 to 70 hours to train medical technologists who work in departments to run molecular tests. But say we do manage to get all the supplies, machines, and people needed to do the number of tests that will let the country ease social distancing without endangering more lives. Then, those tests have to be given to the people and places that need them. That’s a massive undertaking, too. Until recently, the US lagged behind many other countries in its testing. Though President Trump famously said in the beginning of March that “anybody who wants a test gets a test,” this has never been true. Trump has made big promises that companies like Google, Walmart, Target, Walgreens, Rite-Aid, and CVS would work with the administration to facilitate access to testing, but the reality has fallen far short of expectations. As of April 23, the US has performed about 4.6 million tests, currently completing an average of about 150,000 tests per day. But the testing rate has plateaued there, rather than steadily scaling up to reach the level experts say that’s needed. This might indicate that America has reached its testing capacity, and tests still aren’t readily available in many areas, or have been restricted only to people who fit certain criteria.  There’s also a problem with how the US is testing. America currently has a test positivity rate — the percentage of positive tests in all tests conducted — of 20 percent. For perspective, that’s 10 times higher than South Korea’s. Harvard epidemiologist William Hanage told NPR that a 10 percent positivity rate or lower is a good benchmark for an adequate testing program. A high positivity rate, like the 20 percent number in the US, could indicate that tests are only being done on the people most likely to have the virus, which means many people still aren’t being tested.  “The high positivity rates on #COVID19 testing would suggest our testing capacity is still too low,” Gottlieb tweeted. “At the current levels of infection, to achieve a positivity rate of 1%, we would need to have conducted 70+ million covid tests.” That said, where America was once embarrassingly behind on testing, it has recently caught up to some of its peers. It now tests more people per capita than South Korea, to which its testing rate was once unfavorably compared. In both the US and South Korea, the first coronavirus case was diagnosed on the same day: January 21. The initial response could not have been more different. While South Korea ramped up testing quickly and was able to minimize the spread of the virus, the United States took its time, rejecting the World Health Organization’s test protocol to develop its own through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). In the meantime, the Trump administration and some health agencies repeatedly downplayed the virus’s threat to the American public.  When the CDC’s tests were released, they were flawed. The tests were also only given to people who fit strict guidelines, and could only be performed by a few CDC-approved labs. It wasn’t until the end of February that the FDA allowed commercial labs to test for the coronavirus and use their own tests, which greatly expanded testing capacity. At this point, however, the virus was already widespread. By the end of March, the per capita testing rate in South Korea was six times that of the US. Even with its progress, America still lags behind countries including Germany, Canada, Spain, and Italy in per capita testing.  “The idea of anybody getting [a test] easily the way people in other countries are doing it, we’re not set up for that,” Fauci said in a March 12 hearing. “Do I think we should be? Yes, but we’re not.” South Korea and Germany, by contrast, were prepared. South Korea learned from its mistakes in the 2015 MERS (Middle East Respiratory Syndrome) outbreak, and therefore had a better response system in place, including an invasive contact tracing system that likely wouldn’t be accepted by the American public. Germany thought ahead and got test kits together before the virus ever hit the country. As of April 24, Germany had just over 150,000 coronavirus cases and about 5,500 deaths. On the same day, the US had over 870,000 cases and just over 50,000 deaths. Germany and South Korea also have effective systems to keep track of infected people and centralized public health care systems. The United States does not. The population of the US is several times larger than Germany’s and South Korea’s combined, which obviously makes testing and supply shortages a bigger issue. That’s an excuse, but not a complete one. If anything, South Korea may have a surplus of tests, as it is now sending some to America. Maryland’s Republican Gov. Larry Hogan was able to secure 500,000 test kits from the country after a frustrating and futile effort to get them from American suppliers (he then thanked the federal government for “generously offering” the use of labs to run those tests), and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) purchased 750,000 tests from South Korea in mid-April. All that said, America has still managed to keep its death rate lower than many of Germany’s peers, including the United Kingdom, Belgium, Spain, France, and Italy. This is assuming that countries are accurately tracking and reporting all of their cases and deaths. As the New York Times recently reported, coronavirus death tolls have likely been undercounted worldwide, and the lack of testing makes it impossible to truly know how many cases there are.  But while the US isn’t the only country to face dire consequences for failing to adequately prepare and respond to the pandemic, it does have the most known cases of and deaths from the virus than any other country.  How many tests do we really need? As noted above, the number of tests experts believe the US should perform varies quite a bit. The higher estimates call for testing the entire US population every three to four days in order to catch the virus before an infected person can spread it to someone else.  Still, many plans call for millions of tests per day. Dr. Brett Giroir, the Trump administration’s testing czar, has called for a number on the lower end of those estimates, saying he thinks the country will need 4.5 million tests per month. And the Harvard Global Health Institute’s director Ashish Jha told the New York Times that at least 152 tests per 100,000 people should be performed daily (that’s about three times more than the current average). A recently released Harvard report, “Roadmap to Pandemic Resilience,” put the number at 5 million per day by early June (for a “safe social reopening”), scaled up to 20 million per day by late July (to “fully mobilize the economy”). Even that, the report says, may not be enough.  In any case, experts do agree that testing must be accompanied by contact tracing and people continuing to practice things like good hygiene, social distancing, and quarantine if they suspect they are sick. So, how do we scale up from about 150,000 tests a day to millions of tests per day? And why aren’t we doing that many already? A lot of it comes down to money — and not just money so that patients can afford the tests. We’ve seen the government provide funding for this already. The country’s health system needs money for the tremendous additional upfront cost for the machines, equipment, supplies, and personnel.  “There’s been a disconnect between everyone agreeing that testing is essential to our way out of this and the government’s willingness to invest in the large commercial laboratories who are performing the majority of the testing in the US to have this national network,” said Serio, from the ACLA. Keep in mind that many of these items will no longer be needed once the pandemic passes, making them a bad investment for labs. Even the biggest labs are already under financial strain. And while the larger commercial labs might be able to absorb the additional cost of more machines, smaller ones can’t. While the demand for coronavirus tests is clearly there, testing overall has actually declined — people aren’t having elective surgeries or getting routine bloodwork done for their annual physicals these days. Quest recently furloughed 4,000 employees and issued pay cuts after it saw a 40 percent decrease in overall testing volume.  So, who will pay for it? For some context, let’s look at the ventilator shortage, where there was a similar issue: Hospitals couldn’t afford to buy the expensive machines they likely wouldn’t need once the pandemic was over. The federal government eventually spent $3 billion to purchase hundreds of thousands of them for the Strategic National Stockpile, which can then be distributed as needed across the country.  The Trump administration has been reluctant to pay for a testing program, even though the need for tests was apparent even before the need for ventilators. Trump himself dismissed the notion of the federal government being involved in testing as “ridiculous,” tweeting that it is “the States” that “have to step up their TESTING!” Earlier this month, the federal government stopped funding testing sites, saying they would be left to states to manage instead. States, on the other hand, have appealed to the federal government for the funding they say they need to set up testing programs, including in an April 21 letter to Congress from the National Governors Association. Most states have balanced budget requirements, which makes it extremely difficult or even impossible for them to suddenly spend huge amounts of money on a testing system whilst simultaneously taking in far less tax revenue than anticipated, due to businesses shutting down and people being laid off. The federal government, on the other hand, routinely spends more money than it takes in — hence America’s ballooning national debt. The good news is that the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services increased its reimbursement amount for coronavirus tests from $51 to $100 in the hopes that getting more money per test would encourage labs to invest in what they need to run more tests (Medicare and Medicaid typically reimburse providers far less than the market rate, meaning providers sometimes lose money on those patients). The first relief bill, signed in March, paid for testing for uninsured patients. The $25 billion in the relief bill for coronavirus testing includes funding for items needed to increase capacity. Once the funding is there, the federal and states government will have to decide where and how to distribute it. How much labs will actually get, then, is still in question. “ACLA urges HHS to quickly provide clarity on how the funding will be allocated to support hotspots and high-risk populations, as well as broader efforts to increase high throughput testing nationwide,” ACLA President Julie Khani said in a statement. “Continued support and funding for high throughput testing from commercial, hospital, and academic laboratories is essential to achieve both of these goals.” But this $25 billion provision wasn’t in initial versions of the bill and was only the result of a week of negotiations to add it — Democrats wanted it, Republicans didn’t — indicating that, even now, with the federal government desperate to re-open the country, getting the funds necessary to safely do so from it is still a struggle.  The fault lies at the top. Trump once said he’d rather keep sick people on a cruise ship, potentially infecting the rest of the passengers, than let them on American land because it would increase the number of coronavirus cases. The president is reportedly far more concerned with keeping the number of confirmed cases down than he is with minimizing the actual number of cases. In that case, mass testing is not in Trump’s best interests, even if it is in his country’s. Which is tough. After all the issues America has had so far with its Covid-19 testing system — developing new tests, fixing supply chains, getting them to the people who need them, allowing more labs to perform them, and scaling up the capacity of those labs to run these complicated molecular tests at an unprecedented rate — securing the funds to make it all work requires support from the federal government. That means the decision to ramp up testing in the United States likely depends on the whims of President Trump. This is the same man who, when he declared a national emergency over the coronavirus outbreak, said about testing, “I don’t take responsibility at all.” Open Sourced is made possible by Omidyar Network. All Open Sourced content is editorially independent and produced by our journalists. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The news from Thursday’s briefing should have concerned some interesting new findings about environmental factors that might slow the spread of the coronavirus. Instead, it turned into President Trump musing about injecting Covid-19 patients with bleach and disinfectants.  It all started with a presentation from William Bryan, an experienced national security professional currently serving as acting undersecretary of homeland security for science and technology. He aimed to update the public on what Department of Homeland Security scientists have learned about the coronavirus’s basic biology, a topic that remains highly uncertain and makes it difficult to render sound epidemiological judgments about how to halt its spread. The lab’s findings appear to bolster three widely discussed but as-yet-unproven hypotheses about the virus: It has a much harder time surviving in hot or humid conditions, or when exposed to the ultraviolet rays of direct sunlight. These lab experiments aren't entirely definitive in terms of implications for human-to-human transition in real-world conditions, since some hot, humid places like Singapore and Ecuador have seen significant outbreaks. But they’re suggestive indicators of best practices for both policy and personal conduct.  Briefly, Bryan also mentioned that they’d confirmed the already well-known fact that isopropyl alcohol (the active ingredient in most hand sanitizers) and bleach (commonly used in a range of disinfectant products) kill the virus.  At this point, things went off the rails when Trump took the microphone, not to discuss the relevance of Bryan’s findings but to suggest exploring the possibility of injecting Covid-19 patients with disinfectant: “Is there a way we can do something like that, by injection inside or almost a cleaning?” he asked. Really. This is absurd (and dangerous if anyone is misguided enough to try it). But in addition to the direct danger of attempting quack home remedies, the moment speaks to the larger danger: The president is excessively focused on miracle cures and wishful thinking rather than on making incremental progress through small improvements on multiple fronts. Bryan’s research, after all, could be genuinely useful in saving lives and improving living conditions — but only if the government applies it in a reasonable way.   After listening to Bryan’s presentation, Trump ignored the obvious implications about outdoor time, temperature control, and seasonal and regional variation in contagion to instead ask about bringing “light inside the body,” or whether we could use “injection inside or almost a cleaning” with household disinfectants to kill the virus. TRUMP: Thank you very much. So I asked Bill a question that probably some of you are thinking of, if you’re totally into that world, which I find to be very interesting. So, supposing we hit the body with a tremendous — whether it’s ultraviolet or just very powerful light — and I think you said that that hasn’t been checked, but you’re going to test it. And then I said, supposing you brought the light inside the body, which you can do either through the skin or in some other way, and I think you said you’re going to test that too. It sounds interesting. BRYAN: We’ll get to the right folks who could. TRUMP: Right. And then I see the disinfectant, where it knocks it out in a minute. One minute. And is there a way we can do something like that, by injection inside or almost a cleaning. Because you see it gets in the lungs and it does a tremendous number on the lungs. So it would be interesting to check that. So, that, you’re going to have to use medical doctors with. But it sounds — it sounds interesting to me. So we’ll see. But the whole concept of the light, the way it kills it in one minute, that’s — that’s pretty powerful. You can’t shine ultraviolet light into the interior of the human body “through the skin” because of physics. The good news, however, is that if you try, the worst thing that could happen is a somewhat elevated risk of skin cancer. But if you inject a person with household disinfectants, they’ll get sick and possibly die. That’s why household cleaning products say things like “DANGER: Corrosive” on them. More broadly, when you’re dealing with infectious disease treatments, the difficult thing isn’t finding ways to kill a virus or bacteria — it’s finding ways to kill them that don't also kill the infected human. The magic of a good antibiotic or antiviral drug is that it’s safe to consume. If the name of the game was to just kill the pathogen by any means necessary, we could all be injecting bleach. But the cure would be worse than the disease.  Friday morning, the US Consumer Product Safety Commission’s Twitter account (which has a history of fun and absurdist tweets) tweeted a reminder from “Quinn the Quarantine Fox” that household cleaning products are poisonous without offering any further context. QUINN THE QUARANTINE FOX: Cleaning products are poisonous, America! Make sure you keep those cleaning products in their original bottles and locked up out of sight and out of reach of kids! pic.twitter.com/yKdZAfO2Rz The manufacturers of Lysol also put out a statement saying that “Due to recent speculation and social media activity [i.e., from the president of the United States], RB (the makers of Lysol and Dettol) has been asked whether internal administration of disinfectants may be appropriate for investigation or use as a treatment for coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2).” They helpfully clarified that the answer to this is no: “As a global leader in health and hygiene products, we must be clear that under no circumstance should our disinfectant products be administered into the human body (through injection, ingestion or any other route). As with all products, our disinfectant and hygiene products should only be used as intended and in line with usage guidelines. Please read the label and safety information.” Still, criticism of the president’s irresponsible speculations produced some pushback from the right. The conservative pundit Erick Erickson, for example, suggested that once again “the media” was being unfair to Trump, who didn’t advise people to go out and inject themselves with disinfectants but merely suggested it as a possible line of research. I'd like to note that President Trump did ask about UV light and disinfectant.  But, contrary to what the media seems to be asserting, he did not suggest it as an option, but merely asked the question and said it needed to be researched by the doctors.  So, a few things… But here’s the thing. The impact of household cleaners on human health is an extremely well-researched subject. That’s why the bottles have warning labels. That’s why the CPSC tells you to keep them away from children. That’s why the manufacturers of Lysol are able to swiftly put out a statement advising against this. There is no further research needed on the question of whether drinking bleach is harmful — it’s very well-established. Now, normally, we say these products should be kept out of reach of children because we take for granted that adults already know bleach is dangerous, can read warning labels, or both. Why Trump seems to be unfamiliar with this is a bit of a mystery to me, but perhaps he’s rich enough that he’s never cleaned anything in his life. The larger issue, however, is that Trump continues to fail to grapple with the real nature of the pandemic, instead putting stock in implausible miracle cures. The sudden daydreaming about shining ultraviolet light on the interior of human bodies or washing out lungs with bleach is a sequel to the president’s brief infatuation with the notion that the antimalarial drug hydroxychloroquine would prove to be a highly effective coronavirus treatment. Good morning pic.twitter.com/CjlXeqV77y The hydroxychloroquine thing, at least, was based on preliminary research that does not appear to have panned out. But while it would be convenient if some existing medicine were to turn out to be a very potent coronavirus killer, we obviously can’t count on that.  What we can do is try to find better ways to cope with the virus, which is what Bryan was initially talking about.  If keeping the AC off all summer diminishes the virus’s prospects for spreading inside nursing homes and supermarkets, that would be useful information to know. If outdoor activity on sunny days is dramatically safer than indoor activity, that has implications for how we should think about opening up businesses that are currently closed.  Warmer, more humid temperature, sunlight, and frequent use of disinfectants on surfaces can’t solve the pandemic on its own. But deploying these ideas in a consistent, deliberate way — along with other mitigation strategies like face masks — could help the country lift restrictions on activities while preventing huge spikes in infections.  But the president doesn’t seem interested in realistic strategies for making things somewhat better. He’s focused on miracle cures and seemingly can’t be deterred.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The number of coronavirus tests in the US picked up this past week, although the figures are still far from what experts say is necessary to combat the current Covid-19 pandemic. The number of new tests on Thursday, April 23, came in at more than 191,000, based on the Covid Tracking Project. That was up from the average in the previous week, when there were about 147,000 new tests a day. Since the start of April, America has averaged about 156,000 new tests a day. There was an unusual spike in tests on Wednesday, April 22, with close to 314,000 new tests reported. But according to the Covid Tracking Project, that appeared to be a result of California clearing its backlog and reporting the batch all at once. “We’re not sure why they are batch processing like this, but it’s the second time it has happened,” the group tweeted. Excluding Wednesday, testing was still slightly up this week so far, with about 158,000 tests done a day. It remains to be seen if the gains will continue or if testing will stagnate, as it did for the first few weeks of April. Whatever the case, even the best days of testing in the US are still far from what experts say is necessary to allow the country to safely reopen the economy. On the low end, experts say the US should be able to do a minimum of 500,000 tests a day. At the high end, some have called for much more — up to the tens of millions a day. So far, America isn’t even getting close to the low-end requirement. Testing gives officials the means to isolate sick people, track and quarantine the people whom those verified to be sick came into close contact with (a.k.a. “contact tracing”), and deploy community-wide efforts if a new cluster of cases is too large and uncontrolled otherwise. Without it, the only way to deal with the outbreak is more social distancing, which further hurts the economy, or letting the disease run its course — at the cost of potentially hundreds of thousands or millions of lives. The continued shortfall rebukes President Donald Trump’s claim that US testing numbers are fine. Earlier this week, Trump claimed that America has done more tests than every other country combined; in reality, the US makes up roughly a fifth of all reported tests.  America’s testing rates also fall behind Germany, Italy, and Canada when controlling for population. Germany alone, widely praised for its quick response to Covid-19, has tested at nearly double the rates as the US. The national numbers also mask massive variation between the states. Rhode Island has tested 39 people per 1,000, and New York, the state hardest hit by the pandemic, has tested about 34 per 1,000 — while Kansas, Virginia, Texas, and Arizona have all reported testing rates below 8 per 1,000. 
    Related
   The struggle to get testing up to much higher levels has led even some federal officials, including those on Trump’s coronavirus task force, to cast doubt on the US’s capabilities. “We need to significantly ramp up not only the number of tests, but the capacity to perform them,” Anthony Fauci, the head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told Time magazine. “I am not overly confident right now at all that we have what it takes to do that.” The current testing gaps are driven by shortages in supply and strict rules around who can get tested. Experts argue the federal government needs to relax criteria for testing, invest in new supplies and labs, and better coordinate supply chains to address, among other issues, chokepoints. States, with limited resources and little control of the national supply chain, simply can’t do this all on their own. The Trump administration has taken some steps to address the issues, like its move this week to use the Defense Production Act to boost testing swab manufacturing. But it has also suggested the issue is on the states, tweeting, “The success of the phased approach will rely on preparedness and planning by states—safe and efficient screening, sufficient [personal protective equipment] supplies, and the ability to mitigate any rebound.” Experts say the US will have to hire many more contact tracers to, along with testing, track not just the people confirmed to be infected but also their close contacts. Aggressive contact tracing has been a crucial component for other countries, like Germany and South Korea, that have managed to control their outbreaks. The Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security and Association of State and Territorial Health Officials released a report this month calling for hiring 100,000 contact tracers at the cost of about $3.6 billion in emergency funding — which may seem like a lot, but it pales in comparison to the cost of life from the coronavirus pandemic and the cost of having to keep the economy locked down. But there’s little sign the federal government is going that big. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention this week said it will hire 650 contact tracers. Some states are acting — like Massachusetts’s move to hire 1,000 contact tracers — but states likely can’t handle the costs and coordination required on their own. A phone app could help mitigate the need for quite as many tracers, but it’s unclear that Americans have the appetite for an app that will effectively track their every move.  This is one reason the plans to end social distancing are so grim: Not only do they suggest that some level of social distancing will be needed for the next year or so (until a vaccine or a similarly effective treatment is widely available) — which we don’t know if the country can sustain — but they call for a level of surveillance and testing the US simply hasn’t yet shown the ability and willingness to build and manage. The US could get a lucky break; there’s still a lot about the coronavirus that we don’t know, and maybe as we learn more, we’ll realize the country can be spared the worst. (That’s optimistic, given the outbreaks we’ve already seen across the globe, but it’s possible.) The Trump administration and states also still have time to ease testing criteria and scale up capacity in the coming weeks. But for now, America is far from where it needs to be, with only faint signs that’s changing — even as thousands of coronavirus deaths have been reported on a daily basis.There’s a significant amount of money — $370 billion — allocated to support small businesses in a new bill that Congress passed this week. These funds are in addition to the $377 billion that lawmakers had previously approved in the CARES Act. Figuring out how to access this money, however, can be somewhat confusing.  Vox is here to help. The funds in the recent legislation are divided among two small-business programs that offer forgivable grants and loans. (These Small Business Administration programs also apply to nonprofits that meet the necessary size requirements.)  The first of these two programs is the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), which enables organizations to obtain up to $10 million in loans that are 100 percent forgivable if they do not lay off any employees or if they rehire employees they’ve already laid off. Seventy-five percent of this money needs to be spent on payroll for the loan to be entirely forgiven.  The second is the Economic Injury Disaster Loan Program (EIDL), which includes a grant that caps out at $10,000. Businesses that receive this do not need to pay it back. The rest of the EIDL loan, which could go up to $2 million, is not forgivable but can be more flexible than PPP in the types of expenses it covers.  
    Related
   Experts tell Vox that it’s possible for businesses and nonprofits to apply to both — and that they should do so fast if they haven’t already. “We encourage you to apply as quickly as you can because there is a funding cap” reads a statement from the Treasury Department. Since both programs have a limited amount of funding, applying sooner is also important in case their allocated funding is fully used, like it was in the first round.  Currently, the EIDL application is accessible here, and can be submitted directly on the SBA website. The PPP application is also live and can be submitted directly with banks, credit unions, and fintech companies including Square and PayPal.  Both the SBA and banks should be able to begin taking new PPP and EIDL applications in the coming days, in the wake of Congress’s approval of these new funds. Businesses that have already applied do not need to apply again and are already in the queue.  This guide is intended to give a broad overview of both programs, but for specific questions, organizations can reach out directly to the Small Business Administration via a 24/7 helpline: 1-800-659-2955. Businesses are also encouraged to connect with advisers at small-business development centers, women’s business centers, and SCORE, who are available to provide free guidance. (Contact information for the closest regional advisers can be found on their websites.) The Paycheck Protection Program and the Economic Injury Disaster Loan Program are the two main options small businesses and nonprofits have to obtain financial support during the coronavirus outbreak. (It’s worth noting that organizations can receive both loans and that an EIDL loan can also be refinanced into a PPP loan.) If businesses keep employees on payroll or rehire them by June 30 after they’ve been laid off, these loans could be fully forgiven. Businesses are able to request 2.5 times their average monthly payroll costs for this loan. At least 75 percent of the loan must be used to cover payroll costs in order for the entirety of it to be forgiven.  Organizations can apply for PPP by calling their banks and lenders directly. Many of these institutions have online forms that are set up specifically for this program, and online platforms like PayPal and Square can now approve loans, too. As a condition in the new bill, about one-fifth of the new funds are specifically set aside for smaller community-based lenders, including Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs), which is intended to improve access to these loans.  This money will go toward two things: It sets up a grant program that would provide an emergency “advance” of as much as $10,000 that businesses won’t have to pay back, and it funds low-interest loans that organizations can use to cover operating expenses, though they will have to repay these funds. The loan amount that organizations can request will be based on the amount of “economic injury” that they have sustained because of the coronavirus. Businesses and nonprofits can apply for the EIDL directly on the Small Business Administration website.  Both the EIDL application and the PPP application are now up and running, though there’s still a lot of uncertainty around how long it will take for SBA and banks to process these loans.  Banks have raised concerns about the rushed PPP rollout, and some have limited the loan applications they are receiving to existing customers. Many are warning that the new money that’s been approved by Congress will likely run out quickly, much like the first wave of funding did.  The $10,000 grants that are part of the EIDL program have been viewed as one of the fastest ways for businesses to obtain relief at this point, but this program has also seen overwhelming interest, which could mean delays in how quickly people receive a response about their application. Additionally the amount of the grant is now capped at $1,000 per employee, so any business with less than ten employees would likely not be eligible to receive the full amount.  In the original timeline offered by the agency, if a business is approved for these grants, it would be able to receive them within three days of approval, though businesses have since reported major delays in obtaining status updates.  Any business or nonprofit that applies for an EIDL loan can indicate that it is interested in this emergency advance, and organizations can still receive it even if they aren’t approved for the full loan.  “Businesses applying for EIDL loans are eligible for an emergency advance of up to $10,000 that does not need to be repaid,” Michael Chasalow, the founder of the USC Small Business Clinic, told Vox. “It seems that a business in need of immediate cash should pursue this option.”  Below is what we know so far about how to apply to both programs. We’ll keep updating this guide as more information is released.  The first step for companies and nonprofits interested in these programs is to figure out whether they’re eligible for these specific loans, which are predominantly focused on helping organizations that have suffered economic uncertainty because of the coronavirus outbreak.  In addition to meeting the size standards that are set by the SBA, businesses and nonprofits need to show that they’ve been affected by the coronavirus.  Businesses and nonprofits eligible for the PPP program are required to have been operational on February 15, 2020, and to demonstrate that the economic fallout from the coronavirus has impacted them. They include: Businesses and nonprofits eligible for the EIDL program are required to have been operational on January 31, 2020, and to have experienced economic uncertainty because of the coronavirus crisis. They include: Organizations will have to evaluate which loan program makes the most sense for their immediate needs, though multiple experts told Vox there’s no harm in applying to both of them.  In fact, this move is encouraged to make sure that businesses have more options — as long as they don’t use the two loans for the same purpose. (An EIDL loan could not be used to pay employees for the month of May if a PPP loan was already being used to do that, for example.) The focus of the two programs, ultimately, is slightly different.  Under PPP, the loans are predominantly aimed at covering payroll costs (up to $100,000 per employee) but can be used to address other expenses as well, including utilities, rent, and interest on mortgage payments. Loans, of which 75 percent are used to cover payroll costs are 100 percent forgivable at the end of the eight-week period during which they are used, but if more than 25 percent of the money is used for other expenses, that portion of the funds will not be forgiven. Under EIDL, the grants and loans can be used for a broader array of costs, including rent and mortgage payments, salaries, workers’ paid leave, and the business’s operational needs. Because small business owners don’t have to worry about as many rules around loan forgiveness, there’s slightly more flexibility regarding these funds.  The big difference between the two programs is that the PPP loans are entirely forgivable if companies meet a specific set of requirements, while EIDL loans (except for the $10,000 grant) are not. The cap for PPP loans is also higher, at $10 million per organization, while the EIDL loans cap out at $2 million.  Applications for these loans are expected to go through two different channels.  All 1,800 banks that currently participate in the SBA’s 7(a) loan program are expected to participate in the PPP option, and the Treasury Department is continuing to approve new lenders in recent weeks including PayPal, Square, and Intuit. Smaller lenders, like Community Development Financial Institutions, are also receiving dedicated funds for these loans, as part of the new bill.  Participating institutions already include hundreds around the country such as TD Bank and Bank of the West, though some — like Bank of America — may require businesses to have an existing account with the institution to be considered for PPP. (Businesses can check directly with their banks to determine if this is the case.) A more comprehensive list of banks that currently offer 7(a) loans can be found at the SBA website, and businesses can look for lenders in their area using the agency’s Lender Match tool. In order to move the process along quickly, SBA is not expected to be involved in the approval process, and banks will be able to move forward with candidates independently.  The requirements across the two programs differ slightly, though both have relaxed the need for a personal guarantee of the loan:  PPP: Businesses are able to obtain 2.5 times their average monthly payroll costs for this loan, up to $10 million per organization. Costs that can be included as payroll costs include worker salaries, paid leave, health care benefits, commissions, tips, and state payroll taxes.  Average monthly payroll costs can be calculated using monthly costs the business experienced from January through December 2019 or the last 12 months, according to the Treasury Department. If a business is seasonal, it could use the average monthly costs the business experienced between February 15 or March 1, 2019, through June 30, 2019. If the business did not open until this year, the costs would be calculated based on average monthly costs in January and February of 2020.  Businesses should begin preparing documents that demonstrate their monthly payroll and operational costs including payroll tax filings and rental contracts.  EIDL: There are no personal guarantees needed for loans less than $200,000, according to Forbes. Business owners should have documentation including their previous federal tax return and information about personal assets and debt.  Components of both the EIDL offering and the PPP program are entirely forgivable, and each offers its own unique terms for repayment, which businesses should keep in mind as they are weighing the two.  PPP Terms  The PPP loans are 100 percent forgivable, depending on whether businesses lay off workers and how they use the money.  EIDL Terms  Correction, April 3: A previous version of this article included the wrong number for the SBA helpline.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Terri, a hairstylist in the Atlanta metropolitan area in Georgia, would rather wait to go back to work amid the coronavirus pandemic. But she doesn’t have much of a choice: Hundreds of businesses across the state are being allowed to reopen on Friday, including the salon she works in. Republican Gov. Brian Kemp on Monday announced that gyms, barbershops, tattoo parlors, bowling alleys, and hair and nail salons would be allowed to resume operations at the end of the week, and by next Monday, theaters, social clubs, and restaurant dine-in services will be able to get up and running again, too. It’s putting businesses and workers across the state in an incredibly difficult spot: Go back to work and risk your health, or stay home and risk your income. Terri, who is in her 40s and asked that her last name be withheld to protect her privacy, has decided to go back to her salon just one day a week initially, hoping to only be there on days when it’s less crowded. The state has put forth four pages of safety guidelines — including temperature checks for employees and customers, changing personal protective gear between clients, and maintaining social distancing — for reopening barber and cosmetology salons, which she finds ridiculous. And Terri is staring down the barrel on her first day: nine and a half hours of back-to-back clients, with no breaks. There’s no way there’s enough time to comply with the safety guidelines, in her view — after all, hairstylists are hairstylists, not doctors — and who can find hand sanitizer and cleaning supplies right now? She would rather stay home, but she has to pay her bills. Even though, as she puts it, “Hair can wait.” 
    Related
   As states across the country begin to reopen their economies, Georgians are on the front lines of that experience. I spoke with Terri about what it’s like to go back to work right now, how her coworkers, boss, and clients are feeling, and what, if anything, she can do to keep herself safe. After all, it’s impossible to cut someone’s hair from 6 feet away. Our conversation has been lightly edited for length and clarity. So take me through this week. When did you find out you would be going back to work, and what happened? Monday, when the governor had his press conference. Then I got a text that evening from the salon wanting to have an in-person staff meeting the very next morning wanting to talk about opening up. I got there, and they were ready to go for Friday morning. Of course, at this point, the governor had not released the four-page requirements to reopen the salon. So they went ahead and just made plans full speed ahead, because of course everybody wants to get back to work; everybody needs money.  How are you feeling about going back? I don’t want to go back to work at all. The things that are required for us to go back to work aren’t even available, really, and it basically sounds like they want us to cover ourselves as if we were medically treating someone, but none of us have a medical license; we don’t know what we’re doing. What’s your decision been, here? I chose to go back to work one day a week when there would be a total of less than 10 people in the salon. I couldn’t go back any more than one day because there was only one day where that was possible. People actually added extra hours to their shifts and extra days because they feel like they’re going to try to get caught up on their clients and their money, and my health to me is more important. I’m not going to be in there with 20 people in a 1,200-square-foot room. What about your coworkers? I have one coworker who has a child that is immunocompromised — she had a bone marrow transplant this past year. So she is terrified. But then she feels like if she doesn’t go back to work, she’s not going to have any money either. She’s also going back to work on a limited schedule. She would like to work more, but she’s terrified to even do that. You’re just caught between a rock and a hard place. What do you do? We’re not going to qualify for unemployment now that the salon’s opening back up, so you feel forced to go back to work.  Some of us are scared, and then there are others that are scared but the money is more important. My boss, he has some health issues that lower his immunity, he’ll be 70 this year, and I don’t think that he would be opening the salon if he wasn’t afraid of losing everything he has at his age. It’s scary. What does your boss say about all of this? When he talks, I get the impression that he’s concerned with keeping the clients protected, and not as concerned with actually keeping his employees protected. But, again, I think that comes from a point of fear on his part. He does care about his staff, but he also cares about his business, his livelihood. Were you able to apply for unemployment in the interim? I did not apply for unemployment because the salon owner was going to have to do that for us, and he applied for the small business loan, which, as of right now, I don’t know that he’s gotten the money or not. I actually know he’s been floating our payroll out of his own pocket for the past three weeks in hopes that he was going to get those loans. So now that they’ve said we can open up, he’s trying to get the place open. And what are your clients saying? Are they eager to come back? For everyone that calls concerned about reopening and saying it’s a bad idea and they don’t think they should, I have another one calling asking, “How soon can you get me in?” so it’s really a mixed emotion from people.  What sort of directions are you getting in terms of how to stay safe? Well, we didn’t get anything until they put the four-page document out, and I feel like there are some stylists that haven’t even seen them. But I don’t know.  Here’s the basic thought on it: that honestly it’s out there, they put it out there, but really there’s no enforcing whether anything’s going to be adhered to. And I promise when the salon opens, there are going to be things that are being done that — I wouldn’t feel comfortable being there, I wouldn’t feel like it would be a safe situation, as a client or an employee. And those four pages of instructions, are they easy to comply with? It’s really impossible to comply. The PPE [personal protective equipment], a new smock between every new client for the stylist, the cleaning, the time constraints, just the availability of the product that they’re requiring us to have. You can’t find them right now. Cleaners, hand sanitizer, you can’t find that stuff anywhere.  So there’s no way you’re going to be able to do all the things you need to keep yourself safe. Absolutely. What does it mean for you to go back one day a week? Do you have the option to not go back at all? I have the option to not go back [she is paid on commission and could wait longer], but then that leaves me in a position where if nothing changes in the next six or eight weeks and I haven’t gone back in some capacity, is my entire clientele going to be gone? I don’t know. Even going back in a smaller capacity — I don’t want to lose my income. I’m in a position right now where I feel like I can make it a few more weeks, but that’s it.  At some point, will you have to start working more than one day a week? Probably within the next four to six weeks.  You all in Georgia are facing something right now that people in a lot of states are going to be facing soon in having to go back. What would you want people to know? Or policymakers to think about as they make these decisions? You know, if it’s not required, I think people just need to stay home until the testing is adequate, until we’re sure that the numbers are stable, until we have a little bit more information on the virus and how it spreads. Because it seems like we’re learning new things every day, new symptoms.  Until then, I wish even just [for] another few weeks, people would just stay home unless it’s something that they clearly have to get out of the home for — to get food or maybe even to get exercise, things like that.  Hair can wait. Bowling can wait. They opened up the bowling alleys, the tattoo parlors — those things can wait. They can all wait.  Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The question of how many people in the United States currently have, or have already had, the novel coronavirus is one of the most urgent that scientists need to answer.  It’s agonizing to not have this information because it could stop more people being infected and help policymakers figure out when it’s safe to reopen the economy. Recently, two research groups in California from Stanford University and the University of Southern California (with some overlap between them) took a stab at estimating just how much the virus has spread in two populations: residents of Santa Clara County and Los Angeles County. Their results are preliminary and haven’t been peer-reviewed by other scientists or published in a journal. But they suggest there were vastly more infections than the number of confirmed cases in those areas, perhaps as many as 85 times more.  If their estimates are correct, that suggests the virus is far more prevalent in the population than previously thought, but also that the disease is far less deadly. However, other scientists noted there were major flaws with these studies and quickly picked apart the findings on Twitter. What a weird turn to see John Ioannidis pushing one of sloppiest studies in the deluge of Covid-19 papers. If he weren't an author I would expect the Stanford serostudy to show up in one of his talks as a particularly potent cocktail of bad research practices. Critiques ranged from how the researchers recruited participants to the accuracy of the tests they used.  While a finding that Covid-19 isn’t as dangerous as once thought may be reassuring, the evidence presented by these studies may do more to obscure than clarify the situation.  Health officials are still struggling to control the pandemic, and there is immense pressure for information needed to make critical decisions. But for a survey of the spread of the disease to be useful, it needs to be conducted on a larger scale and with more rigor. One of the biggest problems with figuring out how many people have been infected with Covid-19 is how stealthy this virus can be. It spreads easily between people, and many can be infected without showing any symptoms. So estimating the prevalence of the virus in a population based just on hospitalizations, deaths, and positive tests vastly underestimates its spread. As of April 24, the US has reported more than 895,000 confirmed cases of Covid-19. The researchers behind the two California studies wanted to fill in this blank. They tested people for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19, by screening blood serum, the liquid part of blood that’s left behind after clotting. Such serology tests can reveal who was previously infected with the virus, even if the virus is no longer present in their body. The tests also could give scientists information on possible immunity to the virus. In Santa Clara County (population 1.9 million), researchers conducted serology tests in 3,300 participants; 2,718 adults and 612 children. Based on the number of people who tested positive for antibodies to the virus, the researchers concluded that between 2.49 percent and 4.1 percent of Santa Clara residents had been infected — between 48,000 and 81,000 people.  That’s 50 to 85 times the number of confirmed cases at the time of the study. Scientists expect more people have been infected with the virus than have been confirmed by tests, due to low levels of testing and many people only having mild cases. But this number is much higher than previous estimates, and other researchers have been critical of the result.   Meanwhile, the antibody survey in Los Angeles County (population 10 million) didn’t specify the number of people tested but concluded that between 2.8 percent and 5.6 percent of adults in the county carry antibodies to the virus. There were 7,994 confirmed cases of Covid-19 in the county at the start of the study, so the projection indicated that 28 to 55 times more people may have been infected than previous testing had confirmed.  The Santa Clara study is a preprint report, meaning that it hasn’t been peer-reviewed. The study, like many on Covid-19, was hosted on a preprint website so that other scientists could take a look without waiting months for the review process to run its course. That can be helpful in a rapidly moving crisis like the Covid-19 pandemic. But the methods, data analysis, and results haven’t been critiqued by other researchers and could have significant flaws that would have been corrected in a published paper.  The LA County results, meanwhile, haven’t even been written up as a paper (they were announced in a press release), and researchers say they are still testing more people.  Questions started to emerge about the conclusions of both studies shortly after they were posted. Addendum: Folks commenting that people self-selected into the survey because they had been sick and wanted confirmation. Agreed, this is what I meant by “consent bias.” This is expected w/ volunteer studies. How to adjust/avoid it? Household samples are great but take longer. For one, they didn’t follow best practices for study design. In the Santa Clara study, researchers acknowledged these limitations. They recruited their participants through a Facebook ad, so it wasn’t a random sample of the population, and they tested people at a drive-through site, so participants had to have access to a car. The sample overrepresented younger white women and underrepresented Hispanic and Asian people. The study also didn’t control for age. “The overall effects of such biases is hard to ascertain,” authors wrote.   As a result, they likely sampled people who were motivated to be tested, oftentimes people who thought they may have been infected. That may have boosted the prevalence rate of antibodies in the sample.  The Los Angeles study recruited participants through a marketing firm from a database that is representative of the population. The tests themselves also pose a problem. Right now, there are only four serology tests for Covid-19 that have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration, and even those were only under emergency use guidance (which means they didn’t go through the full validation process).  The antibody test used in these studies, from a company called Premier Biotech, was not FDA-approved. Researchers in the Santa Clara study reported it to be 80.3 percent sensitive to SARS-CoV-2 antibodies and 99.5 percent specific to them.  The problem is that even seemingly accurate tests don’t do well when the thing they are looking for is scarce. Right now, there’s still only a tiny fraction of the population that has ever been infected with SARS-CoV-2, so false positives end up as a disproportionately large share of the total number of positive results.  “So if you have 1 percent of your population infected and you have a test that’s only 99 percent specific, that means that when you find a positive, 50 percent of the time will be a real positive and 50 percent of the time it won’t be,” said Deborah Birx, the White House Covid-19 response coordinator, at a press conference on April 20.  6/7 In a low risk population, false positives quickly outnumber true positives that the results are very difficult to interpret. Even with a positive test, you're more likely than not to be negative. This all has implications for the use of antibody tests for "immune passports." Other researchers said they found problems in the calculations conducted in the study. I have been corresponding with the authors of the well-known Santa Clara County COVID-19 preprint, and I am alarmed at their sloppy behavior. The confidence interval calculation in their preprint made demonstrable math errors - *not* just questionable methodological choices. Andrew Gelman, a statistics and political science professor at Columbia University, criticized the findings on his blog. “I think the authors of the above-linked paper owe us all an apology,” he wrote. “We wasted time and effort discussing this paper whose main selling point was some numbers that were essentially the product of a statistical error.” Based on these studies’ conclusions, the deadliness of Covid-19 should be way lower than has been actually seen. The low-end estimates of the infection fatality rate — that is, the percentage of people who were infected who later died from the virus — were barely above the percentage of the total population killed by the disease in Covid-19 hot spots. (The infection fatality rate is distinct from the case fatality rate. The latter focuses on fatalities based on reported cases, whereas the former is based on all infections, including those that resulted in no symptoms and went unreported.)  The first study would put the Santa Clara infection fatality rate for Covid-19 between 0.12 percent and 0.2 percent. For the Los Angeles study, that would put the infection fatality rate roughly between 0.13 percent and 0.27 percent. By comparison, the World Health Organization estimates seasonal influenza has an infection mortality rate “well below” 0.1 percent.  The estimates from these serology surveys don’t comport with the actual results seen in Covid-19 hot spots like Italy and New York.  In Lombardy, Italy, for instance, more than 12,500 people have been killed out of a population of 10 million, meaning 0.12 percent of the total number of people there have died of Covid-19. If one were to limit the denominator to just the number of people infected, the fatality rate would be much higher.  Similarly, New York City has already seen 0.12 percent of its total population die due to Covid-19. It stands to reason the infection fatality rate is much higher, since only a fraction of the population has been infected.  Across the board, one would expect the infection fatality rate from Covid-19 to be higher than the population fatality rate, so the estimates based on the California studies seem suspiciously low.  It would be handy to know how many people have had this coronavirus and might have some immunity to it — we’re in a unique moment where huge public health decisions need to be made swiftly about when to lift social distancing measures. So it’s important to make sure the studies on these critical topics are robust.  The studies didn’t lay out the implications for the response to Covid-19. But one of the authors, Stanford University epidemiologist John Ioannidis, has previously suggested that a lack of information about the Covid-19 pandemic may be causing officials to overreact with “draconian countermeasures” if the fatality rate is much lower than previously thought.  “It’s like an elephant being attacked by a house cat,” Ioannidis wrote in a March 17 editorial for Stat News. “Frustrated and trying to avoid the cat, the elephant accidentally jumps off a cliff and dies.” But if they’re wrong, people’s health and lives are at risk. And they might very well be wrong.  Even if the coronavirus’s infection fatality rate is in fact this low, that will hardly matter if social distancing restrictions end too soon, because the fatality rate is also related to access to health care. With more person-to-person contact, the number of infections would grow, sending more people to hospitals. If there aren’t enough beds and equipment for this surge, the fatality rate will rise as a share of the number of people infected.  And the debate over the specific value of the infection fatality rate is tangential for health workers on the ground who are on the front lines of this pandemic. Covid-19 is clearly dangerous and deadly. Already some of the top health care systems — in Northern Italy and New York City — have been overwhelmed by Covid-19 patients. Yet the vast majority of people, even in pandemic hot spots, remain vulnerable to the virus. Whether seroprevalence is 2% or 3% is mostly of academic interest. What’s clear is that the notion that we all got infected and didn’t know it and now we are near herd immunity is completely unrealistic. Our communities are still almost completely susceptible. 2/ To be clear: The conclusions of these surveys could be pointing in the right direction. Covid-19 could be way more prevalent and far less deadly than anyone has realized. But the evidence presented by the Santa Clara and Los Angeles studies isn’t enough to make a decision about relaxing social distancing or other pandemic control measures.  Serological surveys are critical to the public health response to Covid-19. However, weak studies do little to satiate the desperate need for information about the pandemic. Assessing the spread of the virus within a population is an essential step, but it needs much more rigorous research to yield anything worthwhile. Such studies could be strengthened by sampling larger numbers of people within a population and truly randomizing who is tested. The problem of false positives and negatives can be countered by repeated testing of participants.  Conducting a study like this would be more time-consuming and expensive. And one study alone won’t cut it; multiple serological surveys are needed around the world to illuminate the true extent of the disease. To this end, the National Institutes of Health and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have their own large serological surveys underway for Covid-19. NIH is recruiting up to 10,000 volunteers across the US. The CDC is also conducting a national survey, as well as targeting Covid-19 hot spots and people at higher risk of exposure to the virus.  There is no definite timeline for when these studies will wrap, but they stand to yield a sharper picture of the spread of the new coronavirus. And from there, health officials can start to focus on how to let things go back to normal.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   With his hype for hydroxychloroquine in the rearview mirror, President Donald Trump used Thursday’s White House press briefing to muse about whether disinfectants and sunlight might be the new miracle coronavirus cures of the moment — much to the bewilderment of Dr. Deborah Birx. At the briefing, William Bryan, undersecretary for Science and Technology at the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), discussed preliminary government research indicating that “heat and humidity suppress Covid-19” and “commonly available disinfectants work to kill the virus.”  After Bryan’s presentation, Trump took to the podium and made a deeply bizarre inference.  “Supposing we hit the body with a tremendous, whether it’s ultraviolet or just very powerful light ... and then I said supposing you brought the light inside the body, which you can do either through the skin or in some other way. And I think you said you’re gonna test that,” Trump said, addressing Bryan. “And then I see disinfectant, where it knocks it [coronavirus] out in a minute — one minute — and is there a way we can do something like that by injection inside, or almost a cleaning. Because you see it gets in the lungs and it does a tremendous number on the lungs, so it’d be interesting to check that. So, that you’re going to have to use medical doctors with, but it sounds interesting to me.” "The disinfectant, where it knocks it out in a minute, and is there a way we can do something like that by injection inside, or almost a cleaning. It gets in the lungs" -- Trump seems to suggests that injecting disinfectant inside people could be a treatment for the coronavirus pic.twitter.com/amis9Rphsm While there is still a lot we don’t about the coronavirus, it is highly unlikely that injecting humans with disinfectants will turn out to be a safe or effective treatment.  But if his ill-fated push for hydroxychloroquine wasn’t already proof, Trump made it abundantly clear during Thursday’s briefing that he has no qualms about making huge leaps of faith to sell some hope. And he didn’t stop there.  At the same time that his own government is urging people to stay in their homes to slow the spread of Covid-19, Trump seized upon DHS’s preliminary finding that sunlight helps kill the virus and said, “I think a lot of people are gonna go outside all of the sudden.”  He then attacked Washington Post reporter Philip Rucker after Rucker advised him, “People tuning into these briefings — they want to get information and guidance and want to know what to do. They’re not looking for rumors.”  “I’m the president and you’re fake news,” Trump said, adding that his comments “are just a suggestion.” "I'm the president and you're fake news" -- Trump to @PhilipRucker after he asks him if it's responsible to make all sorts of wacky and unproven suggestions about possible coronavirus treatments pic.twitter.com/8ag4izDrGj There are indications that people do take Trump more seriously than they should. For instance, during the weeks in which Trump was pushing hydroxychloroquine at every opportunity, an Arizona man died after he tried to self-medicate with chloroquine phosphate. The man’s wife told NBC that she took the drug with her husband because they were thinking, “Hey, isn’t that the stuff they’re talking about on TV?” At another point during Thursday’s briefing, Trump told Dr. Deborah Birx, coordinator of the White House coronavirus task force, “I would like you to speak to the medical doctors to see if there’s any way that you can apply light and heat to cure [coronavirus] ... I’m not a doctor, but I’m, like, a person who has a good you know what.” The ensuing expression on Birx’s face was akin to a parent trying to stay patient with a child as they spout complete nonsense. Watch: Get a load of Dr. Birx's demeanor after Trump tells her, "I would like you to speak to the medical doctors to see if there's any way that you can apply light and heat to cure [coronavirus]." pic.twitter.com/TP0QoSzkYl While the totality of Trump’s comments suggests he’s hoping to find new potential miracles to take the place of hydroxychloroquine — an anti-malarial drug whose potential as a coronavirus treatment was further diminished this week after a study of coronavirus patients at US Department of Veterans Affairs hospitals found it’s not only not beneficial but also potentially dangerous — Trump wants you to believe that there’s actually been no shift in his attitude. Asked by Rucker why he stopped promoting hydroxychloroquine, Trump claimed he “hasn’t at all.” But CNN has receipts proving that’s not true. Trump says "I haven't at all" stopped promoting hydroxychloroqunie as a #COVID cure. That's a lie. This chart shows all the times he mentioned it at his daily briefings and on Twitter as well. More context here --> https://t.co/d74WOMk1VO pic.twitter.com/00R7ehHZSy Trump told even bigger lies on Thursday. At one point he claimed, “statistically we are doing phenomenally, in terms of mortality ... when you look, Germany and ourselves are doing very well.” But Germany has had just over 5,500 coronavirus deaths as of April 23; the United States, by contrast, has over 49,600.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. In March, as awareness spread about the novel coronavirus and the necessity of social distancing, scenes from spring break vacationers crowding the beaches of Florida horrified Americans. It was eventually reported that some of the spring breakers contracted the coronavirus, and a few even died of it. The state closed nonessential businesses (including its beaches) on April 1, much later than many other states. Now, only a few weeks later and with the outbreak still uncontrolled, parts of Florida are reopening beaches on a county-by-county level, after Republican Gov. Ron DeSantis said he would leave the decision to local officials. Unsurprisingly, this has gone over poorly in the national news, with beachgoers who have returned to shore being criticized as #FloridaMorons. In the early days of the US outbreak, the beachgoers came to symbolize American recklessness in the face of the coronavirus, and the reopening of beaches is being cited as an example of how ignorant and reckless policymaking will prolong America’s coronavirus crisis. But that criticism isn’t entirely fair. While there are definitely some ignorant and reckless policymakers reopening their states too early — Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp (R) is proceeding with a ridiculous plan to open hair and nail salons and bowling alleys, indoor businesses where close contact between and among employees and customers is unavoidable — there’s a good case for limited reopening of Florida beaches. Just like parks and open spaces, beaches provide an important opportunity for people to stretch their legs, get fresh air and sunlight, and exercise. Amid the coronavirus outbreak, many states have cut off access to these areas in response to overcrowding. But it’s a better idea to figure out how to ration open spaces like beaches and parks so that people can use them safely. If a state has a way to make low-risk outdoor activity available, it should take advantage of it — while monitoring to make sure there are minimal negative impacts on public health. New data could change all of this, but right now beaches don’t look like a grossly unreasonable bet. We’re looking at months — maybe more than a year — of dramatically changed life because of the coronavirus. During that time, we have a tough job ahead of us: figuring out which activities are low-risk enough to proceed cautiously, so that social distancing is sustainable for everyone and transmission rates remain low. That might mean opening sites like Florida’s beaches, and at the very least, it means that people elsewhere shouldn’t scorn Florida for considering it.  Fresh air and exercise are good for you. Exercise and vitamin D have been shown to help protect against all kinds of illness, including respiratory illness; evidence from the 1918 flu pandemic suggests that treating flu patients outside rather than inside saves lives. And there’s some tentative evidence that getting people outside keeps them safer from the novel coronavirus, too.  There’s still a lot we don’t know about the spread of the coronavirus. But some research suggests that most transmission happens indoors. One study from China (which has not yet been peer-reviewed) examined 318 outbreaks with three or more people across the country. Only one happened outdoors, and only two people got sick: Every outbreak with three or more cases happened indoors. A different study (also not peer-reviewed) in Japan found that “the odds that a primary case transmitted COVID-19 in a closed environment was 18.7 times greater compared to an open-air environment.” There are some caveats, of course. Indoor transmission is easier to trace than outdoor transmission, meaning authorities likely had a tougher time tracing outdoor outbreaks. China, outside the province of Hubei, didn’t have widespread community transmission during the time the study took place, and beaches are probably a lot more dangerous if hundreds of people there have the virus instead of just one. Still, this suggests that shutting down outdoor recreation perhaps shouldn’t be the highest priority — people are mostly getting each other sick indoors.  And there is some reason to worry that banning people from going outside leads to people instead congregating indoors. As Zeynep Tufekci argued in the Atlantic last week, banning young people from meeting friends outdoors looks good — no embarrassing photos of crowds — but it probably doesn’t prevent them from meeting at all: Keeping parks open could even be seen as a form of harm reduction for congregating youth. If a group of 10 young people goes to a park like Brockwell and is kept six feet away from every other group, the police shooing them away may end up being pandemic theater that might increase the risk of transmission among the group members if they instead spend that time socializing anyway in a cramped, poorly ventilated apartment. Of course, ideally people would not be meeting at all with anyone who doesn’t live with them; any meeting creates risk, and the smartest thing you can do (and the right thing to do for other people) is to stay away from people you don’t live with. But shutting down the most visible rule-breaking won’t end all rule-breaking, and it might mean the rule-breaking that does happen is 20 times riskier. Marc Lipsitch, who studies infectious disease at Harvard, has also argued that it’s important to let people go outside. “The benefits of getting outside vastly outweigh the risk of getting infected in a park,” he co-wrote (with Ned Friedman and Joseph Allen) in a Washington Post op-ed last week. Closing open spaces “should be a temporary, last-resort measure,” and whenever we can, we should prefer to have them open with social distancing.  Does that apply to Florida’s beaches, I asked him? “Yes,” Lipsitch wrote back in an email, “as long as people maintain distances.” So in general, authorities should be working to help their population access the outdoors and open spaces safely, not fighting to keep them cooped up inside.  The decision about whether to reopen Florida beaches should be made by local officials, DeSantis announced last week. Many counties kept their beaches closed, but a few — including Jacksonville, on which most of the national coverage focused — opened them. The cities that did open their beaches have taken measures to ensure that beachgoers stay safe and practice social distancing.  In Jacksonville, for example, beaches are open from 6 to 11 am and 5 to 8 pm, under significant restrictions — activities such as sunbathing and picnicking are not allowed; nor are beach towels or chairs, and residents must keep 6 feet between themselves and others. Jacksonville parks are also open, but public restrooms and other facilities (which could be grounds for virus transmission even if people are socially distancing appropriately outdoors) are shut.  Florida’s stay-at-home order closing nearby bars and restaurants remains in effect. There is police enforcement on the beaches. Other counties have opened beaches but not parking lots, so only people who live nearby are likely to visit. You may have seen pictures implying that Florida’s beaches have been packed with people as they reopened in the past few days. But many of those are misleading, and residents say there is widespread compliance with social distancing.  National news has shown pictures that make it look like Floridians are being irresponsible. But it’s not easy to judge from a picture whether people are social distancing appropriately. The lenses commonly used for images like this Associated Press photo of a Jacksonville beach make it hard to tell; the impression can easily be that a beach is crowded even if everyone is, in fact, following social distancing rules. As Jacksonville journalist Vic Micolucci explained in a Facebook post, the beach looks crowded in some images but nearly deserted in drone shots, which make it clearer how spaced-out people are. “If you take the miles of beaches up and down Duval County, there were indeed thousands of people. However, most kept their distance. And there was a lot of sand,” he writes.  PERSPECTIVE:

Jacksonville area journalists are being accused of lying to the public about the images shown of the... It takes more than a glance at a picture to know whether Floridians are being safe. The big question: Are the restrictions tied to the beach reopenings sufficient? That remains to be seen. If the Jacksonville area sees a surge of cases in the next few weeks, public health authorities may conclude that even this limited approach creates too much risk. But at this point, that’s not obvious. To be clear: Tourism to Florida to play on the beach is utterly unacceptable right now. If you live far enough away that you’d have to make an extended trip, you should stay home and use outdoor spaces closer to where you live. You should stay away from people and wear a mask when you go out. And personally, I would still stay home as much as you possibly can. But there’s a case to be made that Florida’s reasonable, limited actions here are being condemned out of proportion. When it comes to social distancing, there are no easy answers. Measures that are desperately needed for public health come at a high human cost in terms of unemployment, isolation, and the risk of domestic violence.  And there are real costs associated with opening beaches in Florida, or parks and recreation spaces everywhere else. But there are real benefits, too. As we try to figure out how to navigate the months ahead, we should acknowledge that there are degrees of risk here, and that opening Florida’s beaches is not necessarily a reckless act of ignorance, but a difficult act of balancing many crucial human needs. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Sign up for the Future Perfect newsletter and we’ll send you a roundup of ideas and solutions for tackling the world’s biggest challenges — and how to get better at doing good. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. Future Perfect is funded in part by individual contributions, grants, and sponsorships. Learn more here. President Donald Trump signed an executive order Wednesday night temporarily suspending the issuance of green cards to immigrants abroad, saying it’s needed to protect American jobs amid an unemployment crisis brought on by the coronavirus pandemic.  Earlier drafts of the executive order would have also suspended the issuance of new visas. But the New York Times reported that Trump ultimately decided against it after pushback from business groups that rely on foreign workers, particularly in the tech sector.  Under the executive order, American citizens are still able to apply for green cards on behalf of their minor children and spouses, and immigrants residing in the US can convert their existing visas into green cards. But immigrants living abroad, including the family members of green card holders and adult children of US citizens, won’t be granted green cards for a period of 60 days unless they are seeking to enter the US to perform an essential job in the health care sector. Roughly 358,000 green card applications could be affected. “As we move forward, we’ll examine what additional immigration-related measures should be put in place to protect US workers,” Trump said during a press conference on Tuesday. “We want to protect our US workers and I think as we move forward, we will become more and more protective of them.” Trump had already shut down many parts of the immigration system prior to announcing the executive order: Migrants on the southern border are being turned away, and foreign consulates are no longer processing visas. Travelers from China and Europe are banned from entering the US.  But on Monday night, he signaled that he wanted to go further: “In light of the attack from the Invisible Enemy, as well as the need to protect the jobs of our GREAT American Citizens, I will be signing an Executive Order to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States!” Trump tweeted. White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany claimed in a statement on Tuesday that the action was necessary “at a time when Americans are looking to get back to work.”  As the coronavirus pandemic and the associated economic fallout has worsened, the Trump administration has shied away from aggressive action on addressing issues with testing and shortages of medical equipment. It has been much less reluctant to crack down on immigration — seizing the opportunity to advance the restrictionist policies the president has pursued for years.  The Trump administration had already restricted immigration amid the pandemic. The executive order goes a step further in curtailing legal immigration.  In March, the State Department suspended routine visa processing at its consulates and embassies abroad, which has significantly slowed legal immigration. Some 9.2 million visas were issued at consulates and embassies abroad in 2019. The US’s borders with Canada and Mexico are closed to nonessential travel.  The Trump administration has also implemented a system to swiftly turn away migrants arriving on the southern border during the pandemic. Migrants from Mexico, Guatemala, El Salvador, and Honduras are processed in the field rather than inside US Border Patrol stations, and without so much as a medical exam, they’re sent back to Mexico in an average of 96 minutes, the Texas Tribune reported. The administration had further postponed all court dates prior to April 22 for migrants in the “Remain in Mexico” program who have been sent back to Mexico while they wait for the outcome of their asylum applications in the US. Their applications will now be delayed.  Trump also restricted travel from China and Europe, which he has repeatedly touted as key to keeping the coronavirus at bay in the US. The US, however, now has more reported coronavirus cases than any other country in the world, and testing capacity is still well below that of some other developed countries. All of these restrictions taken together have already made it much more difficult for legal immigrants applying for visas abroad, asylum seekers at the southern border, and citizens of China and Europe to come to the US. Trump’s executive order will now block, at least for the next two months, those looking to settle in the US permanently, if they’re applying for green cards abroad. Workers in essential fields will still be able to obtain visas under the executive order. That’s particularly critical given concerns about labor shortages in health care and agriculture. As patient demand continues to increase nationwide and with more health care workers unable to show up for work, either because they contract the virus or because they have to self-quarantine, many hospitals are facing staff shortages.  The US health system already relies heavily on immigrants, who make up 17 percent of all health care workers and more than 25 percent of all doctors. And some states have sought to increase staff by waiving licensing requirements for foreign medical school graduates so they can contribute to the coronavirus response.  Farmers have also been voicing concerns about potential labor shortages that could threaten the food supply. They rely on seasonal agricultural workers, many of whom come to the US from Mexico on H-2A visas. The US State Department recently eased restrictions on these workers, who numbered more than 250,000 in 2019, eliminating requirements that they show up for in-person interviews. This means that farms should still be able to access these workers, despite the fact that the agency shut down visa processing across Mexico. The Department of Homeland Security also announced last week that it would allow H-2A workers to more easily switch employers and stay in the US beyond the three-year period their visas remain valid. Still, farmers worry about visa processing delays and the prospect that fewer workers may want to risk coming to the US this year amid the pandemic. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Sen. Elizabeth Warren’s oldest brother, Donald Reed Herring, died on Tuesday night, three weeks after testing positive for Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus. Warren shared the news in a short, photo-filled Twitter thread Thursday, praising her 86-year-old brother for serving in the Air Force and being “charming and funny, a natural leader.” “I’m grateful to the nurses and frontline staff who took care of him, but it’s hard to know that there was no family to hold his hand or to say ‘I love you’ one more time—and no funeral for those of us who loved him to hold each other close,” Warren tweeted Thursday. “I’ll miss you dearly my brother.” What made him extra special was his smile—quick and crooked, it always seemed to generate its own light, one that lit up everyone around him. pic.twitter.com/SFMOaBVCN3 According to the Boston Globe, Herring flew B-47 and B-52 bombers, completing 288 combat missions in Vietnam. A lifelong Republican, Warren’s brother nevertheless agreed with her on some political fundamentals, she said. Herring, along with Warren’s two other brothers, John and David Herring, who are also conservatives, even appeared in a Warren ad during her run for the Democratic nomination for president. Her brother’s death makes the political fight over the government’s response to the ongoing pandemic a personal one for Warren, who has rolled out several proposals to deal with the pandemic fallout.  
    Related
   In January, Warren was the first presidential candidate to release a coronavirus plan; she put out a second one in March. In an April 6 interview with Vox’s Ezra Klein, Warren stressed the need for more testing capacity in the US, something the country is still struggling with.  “We need enough test kits not just to test people who are showing raging symptoms, but enough test kits to be able to test people who appear to be healthy, so you can keep detecting it in the population and identify hot spots,” she said. “We’ve got to keep our doctors and nurses safe. They need personal protective equipment. And we need to have enough test kits so that we’re testing not just people who are being admitted to the hospital or showing high fevers, but we’re testing in the population on a regular basis. That’s our best chance in dealing with it.” Warren’s coronavirus plans have kept coming, even as her brother struggled with the virus. On April 15, Warren and Sen. Tina Smith (D-MN) released a $50 billion plan to help the child care industry, which has taken a massive hit with so many states still under shelter-at-home orders. The plan was much more ambitious than the $3.5 billion set aside in the second round of stimulus funding passed by Congress. Another Warren plan, this time partnering with Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-OH), was released on April 21 and proposes to help Americans who are drowning in debt with no job or income to repay their loans. In the three weeks before the release of the plan, 22 million Americans had filed initial claims for unemployment, and a Pew survey released Wednesday indicated that 53 percent of lower-income Americans wouldn’t be able to pay all their bills in April. 
    Related
   Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. At the start of 2020, more than a dozen states seemed very likely to legalize marijuana for recreational or medical purposes by the end of the year. Now that a coronavirus pandemic has overwhelmed just about every aspect of American life, it seems only a handful of states will be able to enact marijuana reform. The pandemic has hit legalization efforts on two fronts: First, at a time of social distancing, advocates in some states just can’t gather the signatures they need to get the issue on the ballot. Second, state lawmakers who might have passed marijuana legalization before quickly shifted to other priorities once the coronavirus crisis began. Efforts to get recreational legalization on the ballot in Arkansas, Montana, Missouri, North Dakota, and Oklahoma have stalled out, as have medical legalization efforts in Idaho and Nebraska. That could change if the coronavirus outbreak recedes faster than expected or if courts let organizers collect signatures online, but things don’t look good right now. The pandemic has also dashed efforts by state lawmakers to legalize marijuana. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo (D) previously said marijuana legalization was a priority for him. With his state now suffering the worst coronavirus outbreak in the US, he has walked that back, saying, “Too much [to deal with], too little time.” Lawmakers have also diverted attention from recreational legalization in Connecticut, New Hampshire, and Vermont and from medical legalization in Kentucky and Alabama, although it’s possible some of the states will come back to the issue later this year. These hurdles aren’t exclusive to marijuana legalization, with other drug and psychedelic decriminalization efforts similarly suffering as a result. As Marijuana Policy Project deputy director Matthew Schweich told Politico, “The coronavirus has impacted every signature drive on every issue across the country.” The good news for legalization advocates is some efforts are moving forward. In New Jersey, state lawmakers last year set a legalization ballot initiative for November. Arizona’s recreational marijuana legalization ballot initiative also seems likely to get on the ballot. Two separate medical marijuana measures are on the ballot this November in Mississippi. There are also ballot initiatives to legalize marijuana for recreational and medical purposes in South Dakota. And Virginia recently decriminalized cannabis. The coronavirus-related hurdles are also very likely to be temporary bumps in the road — because marijuana legalization remains very popular, with surveys by Gallup and the Pew Research Center finding that roughly two-thirds of Americans support full legalization. To that end, many of the campaigns have said they’ll be back in 2022 or 2024 should they fail to get on the ballot this year. Some advocates argue that the current crisis may even increase support for legalization, because it could offer a new source of revenue and jobs as the country recovers from the economic downturn caused by coronavirus lockdowns. Supporters of legalization argue that it eliminates the harms of marijuana prohibition: the hundreds of thousands of arrests around the US, the racial disparities behind those arrests, and the billions of dollars that flow from the black market for illicit marijuana to drug cartels that then use the money for violent operations around the world. All of this, legalization advocates say, will outweigh any of the potential downsides — such as increased cannabis use — that might come with legalization. Opponents, however, claim that legalization will enable a huge marijuana industry that will market the drug irresponsibly. They point to America’s experiences with the alcohol and tobacco industries in particular, which have built their financial empires in large part on some of the heaviest consumers of their products. This could result in more people using pot, even if it leads to negative health consequences. The coronavirus, however, has put much of this debate on pause as the public and lawmakers shift their focus elsewhere. For more on marijuana legalization, read Vox’s explainer. Every evening in many parts of the country, quarantined residents cheer for essential workers — doctors, nurses, and first responders — to thank them for their service. But the range of people we’re depending on to keep our economy going during the pandemic, take care of us and our loved ones, and keep us safe is much broader than that. The reality is that essential workers in the midst of the coronavirus crisis are fast food workers, social workers, cleaners, retail associates, transit workers, home health aides, and even those who provide support for victims of domestic violence. They’re often not highly paid individuals, and they’re risking their lives. For Helen Sweeney, a veterinarian in upstate New York, being essential right now means curbside service where pets, not people, are allowed into her clinic. Her team tries to take videos and pictures so the influx of new pet owners have a sense that they “were there,” or find ways for them to peek through a window. For euthanasia, though, they break their own rules — owners are allowed in as long as everyone wears masks and gloves and stays at a safe distance. For Nichole and Jason Pavlus, a hospital social worker and a mail carrier, being essential means if they get sick with Covid-19, wondering who gave it to whom: “If I get it from my work and I give it to him, will he give it to the employees he’s worked with?” Whether you are deemed essential depends, in part, on where you live. In Arizona, the governor deemed golf courses essential. In Pennsylvania, liquor stores were shuttered as nonessential; in New Jersey, they were not. Guidelines as to whether construction workers are essential vary from state to state, and not everyone who is considered essential wants to be. There is federal guidance laying out parameters around the essential workforce, but for many people, whether they’re expected to go into work and what sort of protections they’ll get depend on their state governors and their company bosses.  Millions of essential jobs are low-paid ones, where paid leave isn’t an option, let alone the offer of employer-subsidized health insurance. They are jobs disproportionately held by women and, particularly, women of color. Black and Hispanic workers are able to work from home at lower rates than white and Asian Americans, and so if they’re working in essential posts, they’re likelier to be in person. The higher representation of black and Hispanic people the “essential” category likely contributes to the race gap in coronavirus deaths in many parts of the US. Some are wondering what their sacrifice is really worth, and they’re struggling with the complicated idea that they’re being forced into danger while still be grateful to have a job. Kylee Mays, a McDonald’s worker in Hawaii, wonders why she’s exposing herself to the virus every day earning $11.57 an hour while people on unemployment are making more. One Walgreens associate in Brooklyn making $15 an hour spends $20 on Ubers to and from his job because public transportation is too slow and too scary right now. The coronavirus crisis has exposed many ugly truths about America, how underrecognized and underappreciated essential workers are, not just during a pandemic but always. I spoke with nearly two dozen essential workers across the country in recent days, some on the condition of anonymity to protect their jobs, to ask them about their experiences: what it means to be essential right now, how they’re feeling, what they’re worried about, and what they want people to know. The picture that emerged was not the one I expected.  One of the lines that’s become common around essential workers is that they’re allowing those of us who have the privilege of staying home to do it, helping keep the economy going while the health crisis unfolds. But essential workers are really care workers, in every sense of the word. Take Melanie, a caregiver at an assisted living facility in Colorado. The patients she works with have dementia and Alzheimer’s, and it’s been difficult to explain to them what’s going on — why their families can’t visit, why they can’t go outside. Two people on her six-person team have had to be quarantined, meaning she’s having to take on extra shifts and is exhausted. She makes $12 an hour and doesn’t have health insurance. While she acknowledges some extra money would be nice, what she really wishes is that her boss would even check on her, give her a call. “She’s putting these residents’ care in our hands, but our hands are getting tired,” she said. 
    Related
   At one point in the conversation, she asked if other people I’d heard from were feeling anxious, as if to confirm she wasn’t alone. She’s a widow and lives alone with her dogs. I asked her if she’s considered quitting, given the stress of the situation. “My heart won’t let me, because then who’s going to look after these residents?” she replied. There are more than 3 million home health and personal care aides across the country, the vast majority of whom are women and more half of whom are people of color. They take care of the elderly and disabled in their homes and in community settings, and right now, those people are leaning on them more than ever, and not for a lot of money: The average hourly wage for the group is $12.71. But even essential workers who aren’t directly working in care functions are doing just that: caring for people. In a global pandemic, cars still break down, trash still gets thrown out. People, in general, need help. Diedre, a state employee in Sacramento, California, works in an office where her job is to forward mail to domestic violence victims so that their abusers can’t find them. Millions of people are trapped at home with their abusers right now under stay-at-home orders during the pandemic, and the work she is doing is likely about to intensify. “We are their lifeline,” she said. “We’re not like witness protection, but we give them the tools to be able to feel safe and secure in doing simple things like receiving a piece of mail.” Alexa Zachary, a marketing coordinator for campus dining at North Carolina A&T State University, has been charged with making sure the 200 students still on campus are being fed. That includes pitching in as a grill cook or cashier when regular employees can’t come in. Her husband, also essential, is a police dispatcher at a nearby college where just 15 students are left. When I asked if he was bored at work, she chuckled, “He’s watched a lot of Netflix.” The workers who are taking care of the rest of the country are putting their lives on the line — and some of them are dying. In New York City, the epicenter of the United States’ coronavirus crisis, dozens of transit workers, doormen, janitors, and health care workers have died of the disease. The city’s Sanitation Department just reported its first employee death. Essential workers are living on the front lines of the coronavirus crisis, up close and personal. They didn’t need to read about the Great Toilet Paper Hoarding of March 2020 or hear harrowing stories about patients on ventilators, they lived it. For those in hospitals and the health care system, the experience can be both tragic and uplifting. They’re seeing what this disease is doing to people each and every day, even if they’re not a doctor or a nurse. Coronavirus patients’ families aren’t allowed to be with them in the hospital, which means coronavirus victims suffer — and sometimes die — alone. Health care workers try to set up FaceTime and video chats for people to talk to their families or to say goodbye. One respiratory therapist in Texas described connecting a family with a patient who was on a ventilator and unconscious. “It was more of a comfort for the family, to be able to hope that they could hear them,” she said, worrying she was about to start to cry. But she emphasized that a lot of people do get better. And when they do and are discharged, the hospital plays them a song, “Here Comes the Sun,” which appears to have become a trend in hospitals across the country. “There are people that are coming out of this, it’s not just completely 100 percent you get it and that’s it.” One social worker in Queens told me she thinks one-third of her department is out sick, largely due to Covid-19. The day before we spoke, a nursing manager had snuck her downstairs and disguised her as a nurse so she could get a highly coveted N95 mask. She’s struggling to find child care for her kids — it’s especially impossible to find a babysitter for your kids when you work in a hospital. “It’s one thing if I work in a hospital, but my kids didn’t sign up for this. Frankly, no one signed up to work in a pandemic,” she said, describing the “animosity” that she and other health care workers sometimes feel toward the public and the trauma they’re facing. Then she paused, asking me if I could hear the clapping in the background. Every time a patient is extubated — a good sign for their recovery — the hospital applauds. “It’s sad, for sure, and people are dying, but I hear that clapping like three times a day,” she said. For essential workers outside of hospitals, the front-line experience is a less dire one, but nevertheless stressful, risky, and sometimes perplexing. When people flooded grocery stores and retailers to stock up as the coronavirus pandemic set in in March, essential workers were the ones who had to deal with them — and were among those most at risk for contracting the disease from the crowds. They’re the ones who have to interact with customers complaining about out-of-stock items or compel them to abide by guidelines around social distancing and masks. They also don’t need to hear about whatever people’s quarantine hobbies are on social media — they can see it in buying trends. Sandra Cisneros, a manager at a Family Dollar in Taos, New Mexico, started implementing a two toilet paper packs per person rule in her store before it was implemented by corporate. She finds the hoarding a little perplexing — she jokes that it’s like people buying nasal spray for diarrhea — but also recognizes the desperation customers feel. Most older people get their welfare checks on the third of every month, so she held back some cases of toilet paper and paper towels so she could put them out to make sure there would be some left for them when they come in. Someone went into the back room and saw. “I had to go on Facebook and say we’re not hoarding it, we’re saving it for older people,” she told me. Cisneros’s store, like so many, regularly runs out of hand sanitizer and wipes, so she’s started to post do-it-yourself recipes by the register. After we spoke, she sent me the recipes, too.  Workers say most — but not all — customers are treating them better than normal in these extenuating circumstances, which anyone who’s ever had a customer service job can tell you is quite a feat. “We’ve got people coming up to us being like, ‘Thank you for being here, we appreciate you,’” one Target associate in Texas told me. “Normally, they just kind of look down on retail employees.” She said pick-up and curbside orders have skyrocketed amid the crisis, on top of the people still coming in the store. And some of what they’re buying is a little befuddling. People seem to be picking up more school supplies and books, which seems nice. But other items make less sense. “You never would have thought yeast would have been a big seller, but it seems like every time it’s coming in, it goes out of stock,” she said. “Some of the things that people want is just a weird thing with this coronapocalypse.” Those who are working from home right now are faced with a new and challenging reality: trying to balance their work responsibilities with their children’s needs, figuring out how to keep schedules, just finding a comfortable place to sit. For people going in to work, the personal-professional blend is there, too, but in a different way. Some essential workers say they feel like “sacrificial lambs” and are having to take risks they didn’t exactly sign up for. And it’s not just their own health they’re putting in peril, it’s also that of their families and the people who live with them. One Family Dollar worker in Georgia said she prays every day, “Lord, just watch over me and protect me. And then I’ve got to go home to my family, is my family being exposed?” She has three teenage children at home. “I tell the kids as soon as I open that door to spread me down head to toe with Lysol.” And in some households, it’s not just one member who is essential but multiple, which can heighten anxieties even more. Diedre, the state employee, is married to a mechanic who is also essential right now. His shop has run out of hand sanitizer — people keep stealing it. “There is a very high chance that we will eventually get it and give it to our children, and I have a child with a breathing issue, he has really bad asthma, and that is terrifying,” she said. They’re also balancing how to handle child care when both are at work. In March, President Donald Trump signed into law a $2.2 trillion stimulus package, the CARES Act, that among other things beefs up unemployment insurance significantly. On top of state benefits, the federal government is tacking on an extra $600 a week for four months and has expanded who can apply for and collect benefits. This has become a source of animosity among some essential workers, many of whom are making less than they would if they were unemployed and receiving benefits. Some of them would rather stay home, go on unemployment, and stay safe, but they’re stuck. Unemployment benefits generally go only to those who are fired, furloughed, or laid off, not those who quit. In some states, they can try to get on unemployment after leaving their jobs, but it’s a risk. And even if they might qualify, unemployment systems across the country have been jammed, and it’s not clear when the money might start coming in, if at all. Sarah Miller, who works at a small family restaurant in Georgia, is making $9 an hour right now and doesn’t have health insurance. She’s worried about getting sick and, even more so, getting her mother, who she lives with, sick. “If she gets this, it could possibly kill her,” she said. Her bosses asked if she wanted to take temporary leave until things get better, but she said no. “I’ll probably just stay working there because I know there’s a problem with people getting unemployment right now as it is, and I’m not sure about being able to get the money that I need for unemployment,” she said. “What I want is for employers and for our legislators to really take care of essential workers, they are the backbone of the economy,” said Rudolph Thomas, a caretaker for children with autism in New York who has started a petition calling for hazard pay for all essential workers. “We’re the only workforce that is keeping the economy afloat, and that cannot go unnoticed.” Low-wage workers are among the hardest hit by layoffs amid the coronavirus crisis. But millions of low-wage workers have suddenly been deemed essential, too. And so on top of being terrified about their health, they’re also in incredibly precarious financial positions. Some companies have instituted hazard pay or one-time bonuses, but it really depends on where you work as to what you get and whether you get it. What’s the calculation on how much risking your life is worth? An extra $1, $2, $3 an hour? A one-time bonus? A dollar an hour in hazard pay translates to $160 a month before taxes. And in many cases, businesses are reducing their hours, meaning employees are having their hours reduced, too. Any addition to wages might be canceled out. One Walgreens worker in Brooklyn I spoke with explained that in March, Walgreens had announced a one-time bonus — $150 for part-time and $300 for full-time employees. But the store he works at has shortened its hours and is increasingly short-staffed. They’re making less and under more stress. “They really don’t care about us, they just care about having someone there to help them make money,” he said. He’s been taking Ubers to and from work instead of public transportation, which is running less frequently now — and feels more dangerous. “It’s also expensive, because you’re making minimum wage, $15, and then you spend $20 on an Uber, and that is more than I made for an hour of work.” Josh Johnson, a driver in Orlando, estimates he’s lost three-quarters of his income due to the coronavirus. With tourism coming to a halt and people staying in, making money from Uber and Lyft is next to impossible, and he’s scared to drive people around right now anyway. He had been living in his car, but he’s been staying with a friend since the county has implemented a curfew, and he’s delivering pizza for a national chain. It’s not all bad — he told me he’s training to be a manager, and he kind of likes the contactless delivery thing. It speeds things up a little bit. Stephanie, a construction inspector in Las Vegas, told me she also feels like she’s being squeezed. They’ve been doing more concrete pours for new houses in the past three weeks than in the past three months, she said, which is strange, given the circumstances. She suspects it’s because developers are trying to speed up work in case construction is no longer deemed essential. That’s another thing I heard from essential workers when we talked: Just because someone is essential now doesn’t mean they will be forever. Job security is not guaranteed. And in the day to day, essential workers are facing all sorts of challenges on the ground we just don’t see. Those who work in retail stores are competing with customers for some of the items that are in such high demand, and if they’re lucky, their managers stow away a box of hand sanitizer or Lysol wipes every once in a while so they can take them home. The personal protective equipment they usually need for their jobs is suddenly in short supply. Obviously, doctors and nurses need them more, but you don’t want to be serving food without gloves or working construction without a mask. One substance abuse director at a jail in Kentucky told me that going into work is actually the most normal part of her life — beyond getting her temperature checked, the day to day is the same. What’s strange is waiting in line to get into Kroger’s. One woman who works in a waste management office in Arkansas said she’s worried about her medical safety and about her husband’s job. But she also just really misses her favorite bar. “I need my margarita,” she told me. I heard about one local community leaving disinfectant wipes in their mailboxes for their mail carrier. One pharmacy worker said he’d given elderly customers hand sanitizer he’d tucked away for himself when the store ran out. Sometimes, workers deal with the stress through humor, and they’re funny. If you’ve got some spare time, take a look at some essential worker TikTok videos. They do not disappoint. But some of the conversations were also devastating. Millions of essential workers are under extreme levels of stress right now, and the uncertainty and anxiety seem unbearable. And sure, everyone is being nice to them now, but if and when this ends, who’s to say people won’t go back to treating them like they’re a piece of furniture? When I asked one retail worker what she wants from this and what she thinks people should know, she seemed taken back. “Honestly, I just kind of wish if we’re considered essential, maybe we’d be paid essential,” she responded. After we hung up the phone, she continued thinking and wrote me a lengthy follow-up message. “What I really hope is that after all this, we will reassess what is important,” she wrote. “We will realize that we are all just a few paychecks from horrible debt or poverty.” Melanie, the Colorado caretaker, said she just wants people to know that we’ll get through this, and that things are bad right now but they’ll get better. And she hopes the coronavirus-inspired kindness we’re seeing now doesn’t end with the crisis. “Why can’t we always be like this? Stop being so selfish and look out for each other more. If nothing else, take that away,” she said. She stopped abruptly, distracted by a neighbor apparently carrying a grocery bag. “Oh, I see Walmart has toilet paper now.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Kristen Courville, a self-employed hairstylist in Alpharetta, Georgia, is in a terrifying conundrum: Her governor, Brian Kemp, says she can go back to work on Friday. On the one hand, her bills are racking up, and she needs to pay her rent. On the other hand, she’s scared of getting sick, and whenever she does open up, she’s worried clients won’t want to come in anyway. She’s laid out a plan to reopen, but it’s not been an easy decision. “I’m being forced to choose between my health and my job,” Courville, 32, said. The coronavirus crisis is hardly over in Georgia, but the state’s leadership has decided it’s time to start reopening parts of the economy there anyway. Republican Gov. Kemp announced in a tweet on Monday that businesses such as gyms, hair salons, barbershops, tattoo parlors, bowling alleys, and nail salons will be allowed to resume some operations on Friday, April 24. And on Monday, April 27, theaters, social clubs, and restaurant dine-in services will be able to start back up as well. Due to favorable data & more testing, gyms, fitness centers, bowling alleys, body art studios, barbers, cosmetologists, hair designers, nail care artists, estheticians, their respective schools & massage therapists can reopen Friday, April 24 with Minimum Basic Operations. #gapol It won’t be back to business as usual entirely — bars, nightclubs, amusement parks, and live performance venues will stay shuttered. And businesses that are open have to comply with what the state is calling “minimum basic operations” standards, including screening workers for a fever, enhanced workplace sanitation, and staggering shifts. Businesses are also supposed to separate workspaces by 6 feet. Many businesses, lawmakers, and consumers across the state were caught by surprise. To many, the maneuver seems preemptive and not all that well thought out. How do you cut someone’s hair from 6 feet away? How do you keep people at bowling alleys from touching, you know, the ball? And what even makes the bowling alley a priority in the first place? Nobody has all of the answers on next steps when it comes to relaxing social distancing and letting economic activities start back up, including the federal government. Georgia, like most of the country and the world, is still struggling to wrap its arms around the health crisis brought on by the coronavirus pandemic. But it appears to be determined to forge ahead on reopening the economy, and it’s going to be a case study in what that looks like — one conducted before health concerns are figured out. Kemp, Georgia’s Republican governor who was elected in 2018 and its previous former secretary of state, made the announcement on Monday about his state starting to reopen some business operations. Its shelter-in-place directive remains in place until April 30, but as mentioned, some smaller establishments will be able to get up and running before then. “In the same way that we carefully closed businesses and urged operations to end to mitigate the virus’s spread, today, we are announcing plans to incrementally — and safely — reopen sectors of our economy,” Kemp said on Monday. Many people in the state reacted with disbelief. Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms said she was surprised by Kemp’s announcement. “I have a great working relationship with our governor, but I did not speak with him before he made this announcement,” she said on Monday. She said she’d spoken to other mayors who were equally “perplexed” by the situation. “As I look at the data and as I talk with our local public health officials, I don’t see that it’s based on anything that’s logical.” Kelly Girtz, the mayor of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, warned that some of the high-contact environments Kemp was allowing to open “are exactly the kind of places that we need to have maintain closure for the moment.” Girtz is encouraging constituents to continue to stay home and not reopen. Despite criticism, Kemp appears determined to move forward. “We took measured steps to get the shelter in place, and now we’re taking measured steps to come out of that,” he said on Tuesday. “This is not a giant leap forward.”  At a press conference on Tuesday, President Donald Trump offered his support to Kemp. “He’s a very capable man. He knows what he’s doing,” he said, adding he’d be speaking to the governor “in a little while.” Then on Wednesday, the president said he “strongly” disagrees with Kemp’s decision. Kemp’s coronavirus response hasn’t exactly been exemplary. He was slow to issue a stay-at-home order in the first place, and he only did so after claiming to have just learned asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 was possible, even though it’s a possibility scientists flagged months before. It is also unclear what data and expertise is behind Kemp’s decision-making. Georgia has had more than 20,000 reported cases of the coronavirus, and more than 800 people have died of the disease there. Dennis Miller, a hairdresser at Hello Gorgeous in Savannah, says he’s listening to his mayor over the governor on when to go back, and his friends are doing the same. “Kemp just figured things out when everybody else in the general public knew it for two-and-a-half weeks, so his lightbulb isn’t too bright, if there is a lightbulb,” he told me.  Miller, 60, has been licensed in cosmetology since 1978 and also dealt with Kemp when he was secretary of state overseeing the state board of cosmetology and barbers. “He did some real stupid things there, too.” Kemp allowing businesses to reopen does not mean all of them will, nor does it mean people will go out to frequent them. Jennifer Franco, a massage therapist in Woodstock, Atlanta, told me she won’t be going back to work this month, adding that the minimum basic operations guidelines are laughable. “The basic requirement of our job is to touch people,” she said. The shop where she practices isn’t planning to open until mid-May, but even if the timeline speeds up, she won’t take clients, many of whom are over the age of 50. “I know them well and I wouldn’t want to risk infecting any of them,” she said. Franco, 39, told me that it appeared many businesses in her area were going to remain closed until at least May. Even her local Planet Fitness told her they didn’t have an opening date. Kenya Nelson, a personal trainer in Atlanta, told me she plans to continue to shelter in place until June or July and won’t be returning to the space she rents at a local gym in her area. One fitness coach in a more rural, conservative part of Georgia said his gym took a poll and decided not to open up, though most other gyms in the area are. “We’re taking a LOT of heat for the decision in our community,” he said in an email. Businesses deciding not to open back up, workers deciding not to go back to work, and people deciding to stay home anyway expose a wrinkle in Kemp’s reopening plan: It’s tough to get back to business as usual when people are terrified of getting sick and dying in a global pandemic. Of course, plenty of people will venture out, but a lot of people will, at the very least, think twice about it. As Vox’s Matt Yglesias recently explained, Trump, Republican governors, and whoever else declaring the economy open can’t force people back into restaurants: The problem is a question of fear. Americans fear spreading or contracting infection, so much so that they’ve overwhelmingly participated in social distancing measures. They tell pollsters by wide margins that they fear lifting those restrictions too soon much more so than too late. They’re willing to stay put even if it harms the economy. They also fear economic hardship. That’s led prudent people, even those left relatively unharmed by the downturn so far, to delay nonessential purchases, like new cars, appliances, clothes, and other goods. In the meantime, Kemp has imposed extra stress on people by forcing this decision on them. Imagine you’re a Georgia worker now expected to go back on the job. Do you stay home, forgo your livelihood, and hope an unemployment check comes in? Or do you go in and hope not to get sick? To be sure, Gov. Kemp and Georgia are hardly alone in nudging toward reopening the economy, even though the coronavirus crisis is hardly settled. Multiple states are beginning to move in that direction, and people are getting antsy. States such as Georgia, Tennessee, South Carolina, and others testing the waters may start to show what the path ahead looks like. But they may also reveal that the country really is a long way away from having this figured out. The country is still a long way away from the levels of mass testing experts believe are needed to start to move forward — they believe at least 500,000 tests a day are needed, and less than a third of that, tops, is being done. And even then, there’s contact tracing, enforcing quarantines, and multiple other questions that may not have even been thought of yet. As Vox’s Ezra Klein recently wrote, there is no plan to return to normal, at least not yet. And a vaccine is probably a long way away. It’s more than understandable to want to get the economy reopened and get back to life as it used to be. And with at least 26 million Americans filing new jobless claims over the last five weeks and the economy headed into a deep recession, the situation can feel especially urgent. Folks need to get back to work to survive. The problem is, if states don’t get this right, people seem destined for waves of lockdowns and reopenings for many months, if not years. Is Georgia getting this right? No one knows. But we’re about to find out. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. This week Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell suggested he might be ready to pump the brakes on any future coronavirus relief packages.  “We haven’t had much discussion about adding $2.7 trillion to the national debt, and the way that could indeed also threaten the future of the country,” McConnell recently said on The Hugh Hewitt Show.  Leaders of both parties have acknowledged that more aid is needed to address the overwhelming economic fallout that’s occurred during the pandemic, but McConnell appears increasingly reluctant to approve additional stimulus at the current scale. He also suggested that bankruptcy for some states might be preferable to bailouts — a process almost all states currently cannot use. With the likely passage of a $480 billion bill aimed at providing more funding for small businesses this week, the combined coronavirus relief will include over $2.7 trillion going toward workers, businesses, and states. These bills far surpass the roughly $1.5 trillion lawmakers approved across different bills in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis.  But the current economic crisis and public health crisis is unprecedented; more than 22 million people have filed for unemployment insurance in the span of a month.  Many economic experts note that the stimulus that’s needed will have to match the singular magnitude — and nature — of the crisis. Additionally, they emphasize that current interest rates, which are lower than they were when congressional Republicans imposed their tax cuts in 2018, reduce the cost of borrowing.  “We want massive, debt-financed disaster relief while the economy is in its medically induced coma,” economist Paul Krugman has said.  McConnell and other Republicans, including House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy, meanwhile, have been stressing that continuing to approve stimulus packages at this rate could be detrimental to the national debt. They’ve argued that the best response to the economic downturn may not be ramping up the degree of stimulus but to reopen parts of the economy strategically.  “The best way to get the economy back [up] and running is to begin to open it up again, rather than passing immediately another bill where we have to borrow,” McConnell told Politico.  While the timing around reopening the economy is by far the largest question on pretty much everyone’s minds, doing so too soon could result in further spread of the coronavirus, which would then have even worse implications for the economy down the line. As Vox’s Ezra Klein put it, “So long as the virus is a live threat, our economies won’t recover because we won’t let them recover.” At this point, McConnell’s statements appear to indicate that he’s less open to the same types of stimulus that Democrats are proposing in the upcoming package — something lawmakers have dubbed CARES 2. Democrats have signaled that their priorities include expanding funding for states and cities, which are under severe financial strain due to tax revenue shortfalls, and including hazard pay for frontline workers.  While Democrats have leverage of their own in both the House and the Senate, McConnell’s comments make it seem like he’ll be putting up some serious opposition.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.    In a scathing letter, the former director of the federal agency overseeing the development of a coronavirus vaccine claims he was removed from his post following clashes with Trump administration officials over their pushing of unproven and potentially dangerous coronavirus treatments. “Specifically, and contrary to misguided directives, I limited the broad use of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, promoted by the administration as a panacea, but which clearly lack scientific merit,” writes Dr. Rick Bright in the letter, which was released through the law firm representing him. Bright was alluding to efforts President Donald Trump and a number of his supporters in government and the media have made in recent weeks to promote hydroxychloroquine as a potential coronavirus miracle drug. 
    Related
   “While I am prepared to look at all options and to think ‘outside the box’ for effective treatments, I rightly resisted efforts to provide an unproven drug on demand to the American public,” Bright continued. “I insisted that these drugs be provided only to hospitalized patients with confirmed Covid-19 while under the supervision of a physician.” Bright led the Department of Health and Human Services’ Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA), the agency leading the push for vaccines and treatments for Covid-19, until he was demoted Tuesday into a lesser role within the National Institutes of Health.  In the letter, first reported by the New York Times, Bright demanded the Department of Health and Human Services Inspector General investigate whether his demotion to a lesser role with the National Institutes of Health (NIH) stemmed from political or financial motives instead of public health ones. (Trump has a small investment in a company that manufactures Plaquenil, the brand-name version of hydroxychloroquine, and numerous wealthy Republican donors who are close with Trump have larger financial stakes in hydroxychloroquine drugs.) “These drugs have potentially serious risks associated with them, including increased mortality observed in some recent studies in patients with Covid-19,” Bright writes. “Sidelining me in the middle of this pandemic and placing politics and cronyism ahead of science puts lives at risk and stunts national efforts to safely and effectively address this urgent public health crisis.” Here is Dr. Rick Bright's full statement, just emailed out by the law firm Katz, Marshall & Banks which will be representing him as he files a whistleblower complaint.(First reported by @maggieNYT) pic.twitter.com/oQ3j9Z17SK Unnamed HHS sources quoted by Politico pushed back on Bright’s explosive account by characterizing his departure as “more than a year in the making” and following clashes between him and other officials.  Later Wednesday, another Politico report cited “three people with with knowledge of HHS’s recent acquisition” of hydroxychloroquine who claimed Bright actually praised the purchases in internal email exchanges. In a statement sent to Vox, an HHS spokesperson echoed that report, claiming “it was Dr. Bright who requested an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for donations of chloroquine that Bayer and Sandoz recently made to the Strategic National Stockpile for use on COVID-19 patients. The EUA is what made the donated product available for use in combating COVID-19.” Trump, for what it’s worth, claimed to have never heard of Bright during Wednesday’s press briefing. Trump says he has never heard of Dr. Rick Bright, the HHS coronavirus official who says he was pushed out because of his resistance to Trump's hydroxychloroquine push pic.twitter.com/Ep7uBk9BHP Bright’s demotion came just ahead of publication of a study of coronavirus patients in Veterans Affairs hospitals that found more deaths among those treated with hydroxychloroquine, an anti-malaria drug, than those treated with standard care. Researchers reported finding no benefit to its use, reinforcing previous warnings from doctors that hydroxychloroquine can result in drug-induced cardiac arrest for a small subset of the population. The study of VA patients, which the NIH posted to its website on Tuesday and is the largest of its kind, was not peer-reviewed, and the authors concluded more rigorous studies are needed. But while it isn’t the final word, the new study represented a major setback to Trumpworld’s efforts to portray hydroxychloroquine as a magic bullet that could end the coronavirus crisis. During press briefings earlier this month, Trump described hydroxychloroquine as a “game-changer” and said of doctors, “I hope they use it because I’ll tell you what, what do you have to lose?”  On April 7, Trump told Sean Hannity, “by the way, the hydroxychloroquine, we have millions of doses that I bought. I bought millions of doses. You know, for the country.” Indeed, HHS recently acquired millions of doses of the drug, and late last month the Food and Drug Administration authorized its emergency use for coronavirus. Trump’s infatuation with hydroxychloroquine can be traced back to a controversial French study released in March on a small number of Covid-19 patients that found hydroxychloroquine could lessen the duration of infection. Media Matters for America has detailed how the French study and similar anecdotal evidence from China were covered by Fox News, amplified by Trump, with Trump’s amplification in turn being covered by Fox — a perfect illustration of the Fox-to-Trump feedback loop. As it became clear that the United States was going to be especially hard hit by the coronavirus pandemic, Trump became insistent that the drug could be a savior — despite warnings from National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Director Dr. Anthony Fauci that clinical trials were needed and it was too soon to “make any definitive statement” about the efficaciousness of the drug.  "I answered this 15 times. You don't have to answer." -- Trump prevents Dr Fauci from answering a question about hydroxychloroquine pic.twitter.com/8R1K1hDsaX On Tuesday, however, Trump’s tone suddenly changed. Asked about the results of the VA study during that evening’s White House press briefing, Trump dodged, saying, “I don’t know of the report,” and then tried to distance himself from the drug. “We’ll be looking at it, we’ll have a comment on it at some point,” he said. JON KARL: Are you concerned about this VA study showing that hydroxychloroquine can be fatal?TRUMP: "I don't know of the report." KARL: Are you concerned that the NIH is recommending against treatments you recommended?TRUMP: "We'll take a look at that." pic.twitter.com/PhYSBMZLzS While those comments put Trump’s position on the unproven drug more in line with public health experts, Bright’s letter indicates there is still a great deal of discord happening behind the scenes.  “I am speaking out because to combat this deadly virus, science — not politics or cronyism — has to lead the way,” he wrote. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. A push for proxy voting in the US House of Representatives during the age of coronavirus has been postponed — for now. After an outcry from Republicans, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi canceled a planned Thursday vote on a resolution to allow remote voting-by-proxy proposed by House Rules Committee Chair Jim McGovern. Had the resolution passed, it would have been an unprecedented change — House rules say that members shall be present to vote — in keeping with the unprecedented challenges of the novel coronavirus outbreak. Instead, Pelosi announced Wednesday on a caucus phone call that a bipartisan group will consider ways to do remote voting and committee work, to allow Congress to social distance during the pandemic.  Proxy voting is the act of allowing members of Congress to cast votes on behalf of those who can’t be there in person, in this case because of Covid-19 concerns. While initially reluctant to entertain remote voting, Pelosi recently signaled openness to proxy voting in the midst of the pandemic.  But after a letter from House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-CA) asking for “a clear, safe and effective plan for reopening Congress,” Pelosi decided to wait longer for bipartisan consensus on a plan.  The House wasn’t planning to use proxy voting to pass an interim funding bill containing billions of dollars for small businesses slated for Thursday. While leadership is encouraging every member who can safely vote present to return to the Capitol Hill, they were initially hoping to separately pass the proxy-voting resolution as a contingency plan for future votes.  “We are asking every Member to return who can return. And we hope that that is a large number,” House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer (D-MD) told reporters on Tuesday, adding that more than half of its members are expected to be present for the vote. “We’re not ordering members to come back. We do expect sufficient members to come back so we can have a quorum.” Pelosi had previously said proxy voting should only be used in a limited fashion, related to coronavirus legislation, before Congress can return to normal. “It’s not just about us. It’s about the staff, it’s about the press, it’s about the security, it’s about those who run the buildings,” Pelosi told reporters Tuesday.  It’s not just Republicans in the House who have registered their displeasure with the idea. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell blocked a motion from Sen. Rand Paul (R-KY) to allow temporary remote voting on future bills in the Senate. “We’re not going to move on another bill related to this subject until we all get back here,” McConnell told Politico’s Burgess Everett in an interview.  On Wednesday, the House Rules Committee released its plan for proxy voting, which it was set to debate in committee on Wednesday evening.  The Rules Committee resolution would establish proxy voting during times of a pandemic, and it would happen in consultation with both the House sergeant at arms and the attending physician.  The resolution spells out that proxy voting would be temporary and would end after 60 days unless leadership and the sergeant at arms decided there should be another 60-day extension if a pandemic were to continue. The period of time for proxy voting could also be terminated early by the House speaker.  The resolution also spells out the process of how proxy voting will occur; the member who cannot physically be present will submit a signed letter (which can also be submitted electronically) to the House clerk designating who their proxy is.  The proxy would then enter their colleague’s vote into the record during voting, whether done electronically or through a roll call vote. The proxy for a member will indicate they are voting on behalf of another colleague during voting and is expressly not allowed to change their colleague’s vote.  What the resolution did not allow is remote voting being done by Zoom, FaceTime, or any other type of videoconferencing service. Pelosi has stated her opposition to this in the past, even though Hoyer, the No. 2 Democrat in the House, endorsed the idea on Tuesday. “I have maintained from the beginning of this discussion that the electronics that we use, like FaceTime, Zoom, Teams — there are a number of different technologies available — millions of people are using those regularly,” Hoyer told reporters. “Frankly, if I’m in my den here in Saint Mary’s County and the clerk is looking at me over FaceTime and I say ‘aye’ and the clerk recognizes me, they mark me as ‘aye.’ I’m not asking anybody else to cast my vote for me; I’m casting it personally.” While House Republicans have registered their displeasure with the idea, with several lawmakers insisting members should be physically present to conduct the House’s business, Democrats had enough votes to pass the changes along party lines. But because such a historic proposed change to House rules would impact lawmakers on both sides of the aisle, Pelosi ultimately decided to take more time and allow Republicans to weigh in before voting on such a change.   Meanwhile, McConnell has been relatively firm about bringing senators back to the Capitol in order to work on the next stimulus package.  In addition to Paul, other lawmakers, including Sens. Dick Durbin (D-IL) and Rob Portman (R-OH), have offered their own proposals for how remote voting could work. Their measure, if passed, would grant McConnell and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer the authority to declare the need for a 30-day period of remote voting during a national crisis.  “Remote voting would then be allowed for up to 30 days, and the Senate would have to vote to renew remote voting after every 30-day period afterward,” they write in a Washington Post op-ed. “This limitation will ensure that voting remotely cannot become the norm without a consensus around the continuity of an emergency.” Thus far, McConnell hasn’t signaled interest in backing this resolution, though Democrats could use the leverage they have in the upper chamber to put pressure on him. Since every bill in the Senate requires 60 votes to pass, for example, Democrats could potentially withhold their support on future packages in an effort to force the consideration of remote voting.  Before leaving for recess, McConnell had said that lawmakers would use other means, like trying to stagger when they vote, to maintain social distancing in the Capitol. “The current plan is to go back in session on May the 4th,” McConnell said on The Hugh Hewitt Show this week. “I haven’t seen anything that would discourage me from doing that.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   Just over half of lower-income adults in the US reported that someone in their household had either lost a job or lost hours due to the coronavirus pandemic, according to a new Pew Research Center survey. The survey, of 4,917 US adults in April, revealed that, overall, 43 percent of Americans had someone in their household lose a job or have their hours reduced because of the pandemic. That’s a marked increase from late March, when only 33 percent said so. But the job loss data is even starker for lower-income Americans. In this survey, Pew classified households making less than $37,500 as lower income, and found 52 percent of those in this income bracket said they or someone in their household had lost a job or had hours reduced. To make matters worse, just 23 percent of lower-income people had enough money saved to cover three months of expenses in case of a financial emergency, compared to 48 percent of middle-income and 75 percent of higher-income adults. Economic data from the Federal Reserve has shown the economic collapse resulting from the coronavirus pandemic has been deep and impactful. More than 22 million people have filed initial claims for unemployment insurance over the past several weeks. But this study suggests that those who were already in difficult financial circumstances ahead of the pandemic are bearing the brunt of its economic damage. And many Americans were not in as strong a financial position as they may have appeared.  For instance, the study found the economic downturn has put a serious crimp in the average person’s ability to pay their monthly bills. Just over half of lower-income adults — 53 percent — said they’d have trouble paying some of their bills this month, while about a quarter of middle-income, and 11 percent of higher-income adults said the same. 
    Related
   This result shows that recent federal stimulus may not be enough to keep American families afloat through the pandemic-related recession. While Congress and the White House agreed to send checks directly to families in the second round of stimulus negotiations, the one-time, $1,200 sent to individual taxpayers is likely not be enough to cover even a month of rent given the median price for a month of rent in the US is about $1,231. And in fact, just 46 percent of those surveyed said the stimulus checks will do a great deal or a fair amount to help them and their households. Conversely, a large majority (77 percent) viewed the stimulus as mainly benefitting large businesses. Beyond income strata, the study also found the coronavirus is having unequal economic effects on people of different ethnicities. As Fabiola Cineas reported for Vox, Americans of color are dying of Covid-19 at higher rates than white Americans, and Pew’s research finds black and Latinx Americans have shouldered a disproportionate amount of the economic injury as well.  About six in 10 Latinx adults (61 percent) said they or someone in their household had lost their job or had their hours reduced; 44 percent of black adults reported the same, compared to 38 percent of white adults.  All of this puts additional pressure on family members who do still have jobs to continue going to work and possibly get ill themselves. Grocery stores have reported that employees have started to die from Covid-19, the disease caused by coronavirus, and public transit workers responsible for getting those employees to work have also seen deaths from the virus. Since the survey was taken April 7-12, it doesn’t give a full picture of what effect — if any — developments like the Paycheck Protection Program and states starting to reopen have had. But the data clearly shows that Americans, especially those with low incomes, are in distress. 
    Related
   The survey results show that more federal aid will be needed before all of this is over. Federal lawmakers have begun discussing a number of ideas to help, from guaranteed paychecks for furloughed or fired workers to sweeping debt protection — and Congress seems poised to deliver renewed funding for the Paycheck Protection Program. But those in need of more immediate cash will likely be forced to wait. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has not been enthusiastic about more direct cash stimulus for workers and said he won’t negotiate another big stimulus bill until Congress is officially back in session on May 4 at the earliest. With bills and rent due now, that may be too late for a lot of American families. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. If and when lockdown restrictions are lifted in the US, would you agree to let the government anonymously track your interactions with people within a 6-foot radius to control the spread of Covid-19? That’s an increasingly urgent question as President Trump and state governors debate how and when to safely reopen the US economy — and as technology is being touted as a solution that would help people reenter public life.  And tech giants are stepping up. Apple and Google have announced a plan to turn phones into opt-in Covid-19 tracking machines that would, if all goes as planned, make it easier for health officials to identify and alert people if they’ve been exposed to the virus.  The idea is familiar because similar tech-based efforts have been underway for weeks and even months in countries like Singapore, China, and Taiwan, where Covid-19 hit earlier than in the US. But what works in one country won’t necessarily work in the US. Some of these Covid-19 tracking technologies — like mandatory electronic wristbands in Hong Kong that tip off authorities when people under quarantine leave their homes — seem implausible in the US, where for years civil rights advocates have fought to protect people’s online privacy and push back against government surveillance. Apple and Google’s system is being designed to protect the identities of people who use it, but concerns abound that outside parties (including the US government itself) could try to de-anonymize that data.  The stakes are incredibly high for these tools. If they work as intended, they could help end a once-in-a-lifetime public health crisis. But if ineffective, they could provide a false sense of confidence in our abilities to control the virus and allow it to spread further. On top of all that, even if these tech solutions successfully slow Covid-19’s spread in the US, they pose serious, yet-to-be-determined risks to Americans’ privacy. With all that in mind, here’s what we can learn from other countries’ tech-based responses to the coronavirus as the US develops its own.  One of the main ways technology can help stop the spread of the coronavirus is with digital contact tracing, which is the process of identifying people who may have come into contact with the virus.  Traditionally, contact tracing has required human involvement. When someone tests positive for the virus, public health investigators get in touch with them, learn about everyone they’ve been in contact within a certain time frame, and then manually track down and notify all those contacts. Digital contact tracing automates a part of this process by relying on people’s phones to map out their ongoing web of physical interactions. The Apple-Google system will use a smartphone’s Bluetooth signal to create a log of the people the phone’s user has come into close proximity with, while keeping people’s identities and locations anonymous. As Recode previously described, “It works a bit like exchanging contact information with everyone you meet, except everything is designed to be anonymous and automatic.” This type of contact-tracing technology is already helping contain the spread of Covid-19 in countries like Singapore and Taiwan — but it has limitations.  “Technology is not a silver bullet, but one way to get information,” said Anne Liu, a global health public health expert at Columbia University who worked on efforts to digitize information collected from patients during the Ebola epidemic. With that caveat, Liu went on to say of the new public health technologies we’re seeing in East Asian countries, “I do think some of this can be especially promising for something that’s moving at the speed that Covid-19 is moving.” Take Singapore. Although it’s now facing a spike in new cases, the country attracted praise early in the pandemic for its initial success at curbing the spread of the virus. In March, the country released TraceTogether, an app that uses Bluetooth technology to help public health officials do contact tracing. Much like the Apple-Google tool, Singapore’s app automated the process of tracking down every person a given person came into contact within a two-week period. It works by allowing users to log in the app if they test positive for Covid-19 and the tool then anonymously notifies everyone they’ve recently seen.  But not enough people are using  it — as of April 1, only 12 percent of people in Singapore had opted to download the contact tracing app. That figure coupled with the second wave of cases might explain why Singapore’s prime minister, Lee Hsien-loong, made a plea to his citizens to download the app in a national address on Tuesday, April 21. And while the TraceTogether app is one important part of Singapore’s overall early solution, it was only a supplement to a broader, intense series of policy interventions. Those included shutting its borders to Chinese travelers in early February, banning large-scale gatherings, imposing quarantine measures, and mobilizing a team of dedicated contact tracers to investigate cases manually. Despite all this, the country’s government still couldn’t stop the recent resurgence in new cases, which is concentrated among migrant workers living in crowded dormitories.  One of the key government officials helping release Singapore’s app explained the limitations of the technology and made the case for governments to continue investing in human beings to do manual contact tracing in addition to any tools they’re rolling out. “If you ask me whether any Bluetooth contact-tracing system deployed or under development anywhere in the world is ready to replace manual contact tracing, I will say, without qualification, that the answer is, ‘No,’” Jason Bay, the product lead for TraceTogether, Singapore’s nationwide Bluetooth contact-tracing system, wrote in a blog post on April 10.  Singapore’s experience suggests that it may be difficult to gain widespread voluntary adoption of Apple and Google’s contact-tracing tools when they are released — and even if that’s achieved — there are limits to their effectiveness. In the US, mandatory app-based contact tracing isn’t on the table for now. But in other countries, digital health-tracking is essentially government mandated. And any time technology pulls people’s health data — especially without their input — it poses serious privacy concerns.  China is an example of what is at stake. The country’s government has long employed technology like facial recognition to control the activity of its citizens, including to target ethnic minorities. Now, in response to the pandemic, it is partnering with major tech companies to expand that mass digital surveillance network and tie it to people’s health data.  As the spread of Covid-19 in China began to slow down in mid-February, local governments (outside of Wuhan, where the virus originated) began lifting strict lockdown orders. Soon after, private companies — in partnership with the Chinese government agencies — began rolling out app add-ons that help the government determine who can start safely leaving their house again without infecting others. Now, before people can do things like ride the subway or enter a crowded shopping mall, they have to prove they’re at low risk of having Covid-19. They do that by scanning a government-mandated QR “health code” on their cellphone that’s either green (likely Covid-19 free), yellow (at risk of Covid-19), or red (likely Covid-19 positive).  It’s not known exactly how the code is calculated, but it’s loosely based on information like a user’s location and their medical and travel history, which is informed in part by a government questionnaire. Tested positive for Covid-19 or have recently traveled to Wuhan? You’re in the red. Healthy and no travel to high-risk areas? You’re in the green.  Currently, people generate these codes in Alipay and WeChat, which are mega-apps in China that nearly every citizen has installed on their phones and that they use to do everything from chatting to buying basic goods to hailing rides.  And in South Korea, the government hasn’t issued people with QR health codes, but it is broadcasting detailed information about infected people’s whereabouts. When someone in South Korea tests positive for Covid-19, government health authorities send regional text alerts, notifying residents that someone near them has the disease and linking to a central website with more information. While the government doesn’t share people’s names, it does provide details on the website, such as the person’s age range, gender, and places they recently visited — which has led people to publicly speculate about their neighbors’ marital affairs and other private matters. Some have argued that this could lead to stigma around being tested for the virus and discourage people from doing so.  The contact-tracing system Google and Apple are working on is notably more privacy-centric than the methods we’re seeing in China or South Korea, but it still poses concerns. The two companies have now committed to shutting down the tool once the pandemic is over — which was a key issue for many privacy experts — but other concerns abound. There are still ways that even the randomly generated Bluetooth keys meant to anonymize users could be linked back to real identities.  Apple and Google are also leaving it up to public health authorities to develop and manage the apps that will use their contact tracing tool. It’s conceivable that those authorities could introduce their own ways to circumvent privacy protections if their governments so desire. The UK’s National Health Service, it was recently reported, was looking into ways to identify users of a contact-tracing app it was developing. In the US, Sen. Richard Blumenthal, who is typically on the side of pro-privacy legislation, has already asked Apple and Google how the companies will assure users that the tool protects their privacy. That said, the tool ticked off many of the American Civil Liberty Union’s boxes for what a privacy-friendly contact-tracing tool must do. For any technological contact-tracing tool to work, it has to have a high percentage of the country using it.   But just how high? Experts aren’t sure yet. A Singapore government official working on the country’s contact-tracing app said it would need to see something like two-thirds of the population or more using it. One researcher at Oxford University who has been modeling the effects of digital contact tracing apps told the Wall Street Journal that you need about 60 percent of the population to opt in for such a tool to be effective. In a press call last week, Apple and Google cited that Oxford research and a similar range for their system to potentially be effective.  In China, health-tracking digital QR codes are used by wide swaths of the population. In the Zheijang province, which is home to 50 million people, the local government says about 90 percent of residents signed up for a code. Of course, that’s because those apps are all but necessary to get around and do basic day-to-day activities like go to work, enter the market, or ride public transit. In countries where the apps are opt-in rather than mandatory, we’re not seeing adoption rates nearly that high yet. This raises questions about how the US will be able to convince enough people to download the app, as compared to China’s more mandatory enforcement. Having an app tell you you’ve been exposed to Covid-19 is helpful, but it’s only the first step we’re seeing in effective international responses to controlling the pandemic.  For these notifications to be of any use, people need access to proper testing, health care systems, and financial support to get through a period of quarantine and potential illness, public health experts cautioned. If you don’t have that, you risk social unrest. South Korea, for example, had early success flattening its curve thanks to aggressive testing that has been free of cost to its citizens. It also pioneered the drive-through testing model that other countries like the US have followed.  But access to these resources may be harder to roll out at scale in the US, where there’s still a shortage of tests and delays in lab processing, and where health care systems in hot spots such as New York City are overwhelmed. The US has surpassed South Korea in the total number of tests, but adjusted for population, has tested at just 74 percent of the rate of South Korea.  Apple and Google say that in their digital contact-tracing system, once someone is notified they may have been exposed to Covid-19, they’ll receive a message urging them to get tested and self-quarantine. But being cautioned to get tested is one thing; actually having easy access to a test is another.  “If you start coming into contact with someone Covid-19-positive, what is the ability for someone to be evaluated and also tested?” said Dr. Andrew Chan, a  professor of immunology and infectious disease at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. “Contact tracing won’t be helpful in and of itself if we can’t act on the information we gather.” Chan recently helped create a mobile app that helps people self-report and track Covid-19 symptoms. The app has been used to confirm previously unknown symptoms of the disease, such as loss of smell and taste, and to understand where the disease is spreading without relying on people getting tested. He said he’s hopeful about the US implementing new technologies around contact tracing but emphasized the need for public health agencies to provide adequate resources to follow up on this new data. Extensive contact tracing is less useful in a region that’s in the middle of an outbreak — like New York and California — where there’s widespread community transmission and people are already sheltering in place in their homes. But, in the future, when the number of cases in those states eventually declines and when businesses begin to reopen, contact tracing can help people safely reenter society. If someone is deemed high-risk because of exposure to an anonymous contact, they would stay at home for two weeks before they go back to the office or anywhere outside their home. With contact tracing like that, Liu said, “you can do more of a targeted quarantine, because it can target who to keep in quarantine rather than everyone,” said Liu. “Once you have the contacts [of someone who is diagnosed with Covid-19], then you know who should go into quarantine.” That’s happening by force in places like Taiwan, where most people are free to go to work, restaurants, and public places. But for the tens of thousands of people in Taiwan who are under quarantine, the government is “geofencing” them in their homes by tracking their cellphone signals and using police enforcement. China has a similar approach: If your QR health code is red, you have to stay put in your home. But no system is absolutely effective, and it’s plausible to see a world where the US adapts certain parts of different countries’ strategies to use technology to reopen the economy.  New technology will only help if it’s complemented by sound policy and swift leadership, two things President Trump’s administration has botched, with disastrous consequences. Successfully using new technology will also require open-mindedness and cooperation between the private and public sectors — without violating people’s basic rights to privacy. And it’s not just the US that faces this challenge. Places outside Asia, such as the UK, Australia, and Iceland, are all considering using similar digital contact-tracing tools, and they face the same policy challenges. It’s an unprecedented task for an unprecedented time — but taking into consideration what other countries’ methods are working well, and with what consequences, can help US leaders better understand how to create a system that may work for everyone.  Update, April 22, 2020, 3:40pm: This post has been updated to include information about a second wave of cases in Singapore. Open Sourced is made possible by Omidyar Network. All Open Sourced content is editorially independent and produced by our journalists. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. President Donald Trump has told states they’re free “to implement a reopening, very powerful reopening plan.” And despite warnings from epidemiologists and public health experts who say coronavirus testing needs to at least triple — if not increase tenfold — before states can safely relax restrictions on businesses and social distancing guidelines, a number of governors are ready to go.  Last week, Florida’s Gov. Ron DeSantis, a staunch Trump ally, ordered beaches and parks be reopened. Minnesota’s Gov. Tim Walz reopened some sports stores and said residents could resume outdoor activities like shooting, hiking, golfing, and fishing. On Monday, the Republican governors of three other states said they have no plans to extend shelter-in-place orders beyond late April, when they are set to expire: Tennessee’s Gov. Bill Lee, Georgia’s Gov. Brian Kemp, and South Carolina’s Gov. Henry McMaster.  “Reopening” will mean different things in each state, but, generally, outdoor spaces are once again fair game. Tennessee and Georgia will also allow most businesses to open by April 27; business and beaches in South Carolina reopened Tuesday.  Kemp says that opening up means “we’re probably going to have to see our cases continue to go up, but we’re a lot better prepared for that now.” But critics argue the new measures in some states are premature because it isn’t clear the states have the necessary testing capability or are seeing the downward trend in cases that White House guidelines say are one of the requirements for relaxing coronavirus-related restrictions.  
    Related
   While none of these states have seen as many confirmed coronavirus cases as New York or Illinois, they also have far more than states like Wyoming: as of April 22, Tennessee had 7,394 confirmed cases and 157 deaths; Georgia 20,740 confirmed cases and 836 deaths; and South Carolina, 4,608 confirmed cases and 135 deaths.  And hanging over the governors’ decisions are political realities that might be affecting their calculations, from the demands of the leader of their party to the desires of their supporters.  Tennessee, Georgia, and South Carolina are all reopening, but what that means exactly differs by state.  Tennessee’s new regulations will actually cover only 89 of its 95 counties initially. The Associated Press notes its governor can only issue guidance for those counties controlled by the state government’s health department — the counties that house the state’s largest cities, like Memphis and Knoxville, have their own health departments and have not yet signed on to Lee’s initiative.  Still, most of the state’s parks are set to reopen Friday, and Gov. Lee said select businesses will be allowed open on April 27 — what those businesses are will be announced later this week; however, Lee said Monday the reopening “will be phased, it will be smart and it will be strategic.” Georgia and South Carolina are both being more aggressive, stressing the need, as Georgia’s Gov. Kemp did Monday, to get citizens “back to work safely.” Kemp said Georgia will allow the following to open on Friday: “gyms, fitness centers, bowling alleys, body art studios, barbers, cosmetologists, hair designers, nail care artists, estheticians, their respective schools, and massage therapists.” He said he chose these businesses in particular because “unlike other businesses, these entities have been unable to manage inventory, deal with payroll, and take care of administrative items while we shelter in place.” And on April 27, movie theaters, private clubs, and restaurant dining rooms will be allowed to reopen as well. These measures pose serious public health risks. Kemp argued these risks will be minimized by through mandatory “screening workers for fever and respiratory illness, enhancing workplace sanitation, wearing masks and gloves if appropriate, separating workspaces by at least six feet, teleworking where at all possible, and implementing staggered shifts.” But the fact remains that there is no such thing as a socially distant massage, nail artists can only do so much digitally, and screening can’t catch asymptomatic carriers. This has led other political leaders in Georgia to raise concerns — Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms told CNN she and other mayors are “at a loss” as to why Kemp believes it is safe to reopen, and said, “I am concerned as a mother and as the mayor of our capital city.” But mayors who would like to keep restrictions in place to protect their citizens won’t be allowed to do so. Kemp said Georgia will require local government to follow state guidelines, and that “local action cannot be taken that is more or less restrictive.” South Carolina’s new regulations, which were enacted Tuesday, are similar, and similarly risky.  There, Gov. McMaster ordered beaches as well as stores selling furnishings, clothing, shoes, jewelry, luggage, sports equipment, books, craft goods, music, and flowers be allowed to reopen. He also said flea markets could reopen — hardware stores will have to remain closed, however.  His order requires people to continue to practice social distancing, and for stores to ensure no more than five customers per 1,000 square feet of retail space are allowed inside (or 20 percent of the store’s maximum occupancy, if that’s less). Unlike Kemp, McMaster said local governments can close beaches if they feel doing so is “necessary to preserve or protect public health.” And unlike Georgia, the businesses reopening in South Carolina don’t necessarily require close contact — although places like flea markets aren’t always the most spacious. In both cases, however, it isn’t clear that there will be any economic benefit to these places reopening. Poll after poll has found most Americans aren’t yet ready to resume normal life — and a Morning Consult poll taken April 17-19 found nearly half of its sample of voters believe the coronavirus is a severe health risk in their state. Essentially, businesses may open in these states, but they might not have any customers.  While all these governors have couched their reasoning for reopening in economic terms, there also seem to be some political considerations at play.  Broadly speaking, Republican governors like Lee, Kemp, and McMaster were slower than their Democratic counterparts to issue shelter-in-place orders for their states; South Carolina’s shelter-in-place order, for instance, had only been in place for two weeks when McMaster announced the state would reopen. Lee and Kemp were similarly slow to close businesses, doing so on April 2 and 3, respectively.  And Republicans, from the White House to the party’s base, have had a tendency to push to reopen as quickly as possible. Trump originally suggested reopening the country by Easter — he then reportedly advocated for May 1, a target South Carolina, Tennessee, and Georgia will meet.  When asked at an April 13 coronavirus press briefing about states reopening, Trump told reporters governors would end lockdowns when he told them to, because “when somebody’s the president of the United States, the authority is total.” Governors, legal experts, and lawmakers disabused the president of this notion, leading him to empower states to make their own decisions about reopening just days later. But it would seem that although Trump cannot personally force states to bend to his will, some GOP governors — many of them Trump allies — appear to be fulfilling his vision. And beyond Trump, there are local political issues to consider as well. These reopenings occur as well-publicized, conservative anti-shelter-in-place protests spread across the country, including in Georgia and Tennessee — and as they are covered and promoted on Fox News. As Vox’s Laura McGann has noted, these protesters represent a minority of Americans — most want stay-at-home orders to remain in force — but some recent polls suggest Republican voters are becoming less concerned about premature reopenings than they once were. For instance, a NBC/WSJ poll taken April 13-15 found a plurality of Republican voters — 48 percent — are more worried the US will be too slow to reopen business than too quick. This suggests that governors like Kemp, McMaster, and Lee are under pressure not just from the president, but both activist and more mainstream members of their bases. And then there’s the fact that stay-at-home order extensions would undercut a number of Republican aims. Supporting large numbers of unemployed people requires an expanded role for government, a strengthened social safety net, placing further stress on already taxed budgets, and could even lead to raised taxes to fill coronavirus-related holes in those budgets. And it is difficult to see a Republican — like first-term Govs. Kemp, Lee, and McMaster — performing well with their base having done any of those things. These reopening have experts concerned. Former Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Jeffrey Koplan told the Washington Post he sees Georgia’s plans as “dangerous.” “There’s talk of it tapering off into a plateau and talk of it looking better than the models, but it feels very premature,” Koplan said of declining case counts. “This is no time for this kind of experimentation.” All three states have said they will continue to encourage social distancing, but the fear is that these new guidelines will create a second wave of cases. Avoiding this will require a level of testing it isn’t clear the states are able to do.   Most estimates of how much testing is needed to safely reopen businesses and end social distancing have focused on the US as a whole, as Vox’s Umair Irfan has written: One of the lower-end benchmarks estimates the US will need 750,000 tests per week. The high-end proposal, from Nobel laureate economist Paul Romer, starts at 22 million tests per day and goes up. And not just one test per person, but repeated testing over time. But by looking at how many tests those estimates are per capita, we can get some idea of how many tests Tennessee, Georgia, and South Carolina would need to do per day in order to quickly identify and suppress new outbreaks as they happen.  That lower end US testing estimate translates to 33 tests per day per 100,000 people; on the high end, it’s 6,676 tests per day per 100,000 people. Testing capacity has waxed and waned in all three states, but looking at historical data collected by the Covid Tracking Project, over from April 16-20, Tennessee has been doing about 57 tests per day per 100,000 people; Georgia, about 38; and South Carolina about 22. This would suggest that should Tennessee and Georgia be able to keep up their recent average testing volume — and should that lower end benchmark be correct — the citizens of those states ought to be reasonably well protected against a large second wave of infection. Should a figure closer to that high-end estimate be necessary, however, the citizens of both states will likely find themselves in great danger of infection. And concerningly, testing in South Carolina doesn’t currently meet the minimum possible standard — in the past week, there were two days in which it failed to conduct any tests at all.   And given Tennessee, South Carolina, and Georgia will allow their residents greater freedom of movement, should new cases emerge in a similar fashion, the virus could easily spread across those states — if not farther. As the Harvard Global Health Institute’s Olga Jones recently told Vox’s Jen Kirby about a second wave of infections in Asia, “Epidemic or pandemic control in the world very much depends on the weak links. The whole system is as good as its weakest links.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.     The most immediate economic cost of the the coronavirus pandemic is obvious: At least 22 million Americans are newly unemployed, putting them and the people in their households at financial risk. But the downturn is having a secondary effect that could make the recession even worse. It’s forcing states and local governments to cut spending and raise taxes just at the moment when that would do the most damage. As my colleague Emily Stewart has documented, state budget shortfalls could exceed $500 billion this year, an amount that easily swamps the $283 billion in lost revenue that states experienced in the aftermath of the Great Recession. New York State alone is expecting between $10 billion and $15 billion in lost tax revenue, and Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine has proposed slashing up to 20 percent of his state’s spending to make up for its shortfalls. The mayor of Los Angeles announced upcoming furloughs for city workers on Sunday. And despite this mounting pressure, efforts to include more federal aid to states and local governments in the latest stimulus package failed in congressional negotiations Tuesday night. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has suggested states should be able to declare bankruptcy instead. We know a lot about what effects this kind of state financial crises can have, both on the economy and essential services like higher or K-12 education. Much of what we know comes from the 2008-’09 downturn, when state tax revenues cratered. Because almost all states have balanced budget requirements, they were forced to make deep cuts. Research found that this weakened the recovery and did lasting damage to the nation’s schools. The prospect of another crisis like that should alarm all of us and push Congress to pass another relief package — this one for states and cities. The basic problem for states and local governments is that when the economy craters, spending increases and, more importantly, tax revenue falls. People’s incomes are down, so income taxes raise less money; people spend less, so sales taxes raise less money; property tax revenue is more stable, but if housing prices fall, property taxes eventually raise less money too. At the same time, state- and locally funded social services, like Medicaid or Temporary Assistance to Needy Families or general assistance programs, face increased demand and cost more. The federal government faces these same dynamics, and sees tax revenue fall and the cost of programs like food stamps and Medicaid (a shared state/federal program) rise. But the federal government is able to borrow money at will and can currently borrow for cheaper than free — if it borrows $1 trillion today, it will have to pay back less than $1 trillion because interest rates are so low. It can run large deficits during downturns, with a lack of political will from Congress as the main impediment to doing so. By contrast, 46 out of 50 states (plus DC) had laws or constitutional amendments requiring balanced budgets as of 2015, and even most of the four remaining states have strict rules: Virginia doesn’t require the legislature or governor to pass or sign a balanced budget, for example, but bans deficit carryover, which de facto requires a balanced budget. Arizona and Indiana ban taking out debt altogether, also de facto requiring a balanced budget. Colorado and Nebraska also ban taking out debt, and at least 12 other states require voter approval of new debt, greatly limiting legislatures’ ability to borrow. On a deeper level, state and local governments cannot print new dollars. The federal government can always, in principle, pay its debts because they’re denominated in dollars, of which the federal government is a monopoly issuer. If worst comes to worst, it can always print the money necessary to pay its debts. State and local debt is thus riskier and comes with higher interest rates, further raising the costs of running deficits. During the Great Recession, as the federal government spent some $1.4 trillion total in stimulus measures from 2008 to 2012, states and local governments adopted austerity measures to obey their balanced budget rules. Tax revenues fell off a cliff in the aftermath of the recession, as the Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center’s Tracy Gordon, an expert on state and local fiscal policy, tracked in this chart: Unlike the 2001 recession, revenues did not rebound rapidly either: This was partially offset by the $145 billion included in the 2009 stimulus package to buffer state and local budgets, but as Gordon noted, “Federal funds did not [fully] offset state and local revenue” and stimulus programs then expired. States were thus forced to raise taxes and slash spending, in many cases dramatically. International Monetary Fund economist Jiri Jonas, in a 2012 working paper on state austerity during the Great Recession, noted that states raised their income taxes by $11 billion, sales taxes by over $7 billion, and various other taxes by $6 trillion in fiscal year 2010 alone. Twenty-nine out of 50 states enacted tax increases. Overall spending also fell as tax rates increased. “General fund” spending (the largest category of spending for states, excluding that from funds set aside for specific purposes) fell by nearly 4 percent in fiscal year 2009 and 6 percent in fiscal year 2010, which was, as Jonas noted, “an unprecedented decline in state history and the first nominal decrease since 1983.” One budget area that experienced particularly dramatic cuts was higher education, where states made deep slashes to spending and pushed more costs onto students in the form of tuition, which rose an average of $2,484 a year at public colleges and universities, per the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. That average masks a lot of heterogeneity. In some states, like Louisiana and Arizona, per-student spending on higher education fell by about half. Only in natural-resource heavy states like North Dakota, Wyoming, and Montana did per-student spending grow from 2008 to 2017; in most states, including relatively blue states like Illinois and New Jersey, it fell substantially. Among other consequences, this shifting of costs to tuition helped fuel the rise of student loan debt for graduates and attendees of public colleges and universities. These figures go until 2017, by which point the economy had recovered substantially and some states had started to boost funding again. The numbers looked much worse in 2012 or 2013, when economic conditions were still dire. K-12 education also saw deep cuts. In 2018, economists C. Kirabo Jackson, Heyu Xiong, and Cora Wigger estimated that per-pupil spending on K-12 public schools fell by about 7 percent in the aftermath of the Great Recession. Jackson, Xiong, and Wigger found that this large reduction in spending caused a significant decline in test scores and college enrollment rates — and the effects were worst for students in poor neighborhoods. Despite federal stimulus measures, the austerity practices at the state level worsened the Great Recession and likely lengthened it as well. This is true partly as a matter of arithmetic: State spending is a component of gross domestic product (GDP), and as such, lower spending at the state and local levels reduces GDP. Here’s how the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy estimates the contribution of federal and state governments to the economic recovery. The blue bar is federal purchases, the purple bar states, and the green bar tax and safety-net programs (mostly federal). Note that from 2008-2010, the federal government is quickening the recovery, while states and local governments are dragging it down: You have to adjust those figures, however, by what economists call the “fiscal multiplier”: the fact that $1 in government spending doesn’t necessarily increase economic activity by $1. It can increase economic activity by less than $1, perhaps because the spending is financed (or expected to be financed) by a future tax increase. it can also increase economic activity by more than $1 by spurring further private-sector economic activity. One review of the research from Harvard economist Gabriel Chodorow-Reich estimated the multiplier of about 1.7 or above. Another review by University of California San Diego Valerie Ramey put the estimate lower, at 0.6 to 1 for government purchases, but even higher for changes in taxes. But whatever multiplier estimate you take, state and local governments took hundreds of billions of dollars out of the economy during the Great Recession. Per the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, state budget shortfalls totaled $690 billion from 2009 to 2013. If the multiplier on the set of tax increases and spending cuts they used to fill those shortfalls was 0.5, then this cost the economy $345 billion. If the multiplier is 2, it cost the economy nearly $1.4 trillion in lost output. The CBPP anticipates an even deeper shortfall in 2021 than in 2010, the worst of the Great Recession. This means that unless the federal government makes up for states’ lost revenue, the coronavirus recession will worsen and the recovery will weaken dramatically. Another way to look at state and local austerity is through its effects on jobs. Direct employment by these governments fell dramatically during the crisis: But the effects weren’t limited to government jobs. Chodorow-Reich estimated that each $100,000 in additional Medicaid spending created 3.8 jobs for a year (or “job-years”), including 3.2 outside government, health, and education, implying that the spending spiraled out to the rest of the economy. Harvard economist Daniel Shoag estimated that every $35,000 in additional state spending during the Great Recession generated one job. The Chodorow-Reich estimates suggest that the $690 billion shortfall added up to about 6.9 million in lost job-years due to state austerity. Shoag’s estimates suggest that filling the shortfall in 2010 entirely would’ve lead to about 6.5 million additional jobs. The CBPP estimates that states face shortfalls of as much as $360 billion going forward due to coronavirus. That’s after taking into account the $110 billion in state aid included in the CARES act, $35 billion in additional Medicaid funding, and a $30 billion Education Stabilization Fund. (It also doesn’t account for the “substantial new costs they face to combat” the coronavirus pandemic.)  The situation is worsened if the Treasury interprets CARES’ language as barring the usage of the $110 billion to close revenue gaps, as seems plausible given the department’s admonitions that states not use the money for costs incurred pre-coronavirus. To prevent this will require massive action by Congress and the Federal Reserve, the latter of which has already committed to buying hundreds of billions of dollars’ worth of state and municipal bonds — a program it’s reportedly weighing expanding to include more smaller cities, which would remedy an equity problem wherein cities with large populations of African Americans have not benefited from the program. But four states are outlawed from taking out debt to begin with, and a dozen more have strict limitations on the debt they can incur. That means you need direct federal grants to states, not just commitments by the Fed to keep interest rates on debt low. There are several forms that this aid could take. Perhaps the easiest method of fiscal relief is through increasing the Federal Medical Assistance Percentage (FMAP), or the share of state Medicaid budgets covered by the federal government. Increasing that to 100 percent so that states don’t have to worry about their Medicaid budgets during this downturn would open up a lot of fiscal space and prevent damaging cuts to Medicaid and education. Another option is bailing out state and local mass-transit systems, which are suffering from a loss of ridership that’s putting them in deep fiscal jeopardy. The Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center’s Gordon has argued for permanently tying Medicaid funding to economic indicators (such as state unemployment rates or the employment-population ratio) and increasing federal Medicaid funding when those indicators of economic distress increase. Sociologist Joshua McCabe has proposed emulating Canada’s “fiscal equalization” transfer system, which offers lightly restricted cash to provinces — with more going to poorer provinces — to cover much of their budgets. That approach could be especially valuable in a recession by letting the federal government take over more of states’ fiscal burdens. But whatever approach you take, the takeaway is clear. The federal government needs to be directing much, much more money to state governments. Sens. Bill Cassidy (R-LA) and Bob Menendez (D-NJ) have a bipartisan plan to add $500 billion to state and local coffers. That’s a good start — but in case we need more, adding in automatic triggers as Gordon has proposed would be worthwhile. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.On Friday, a group of six US senators, including Kamala Harris and Cory Booker, sent a letter to the Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of Investigation demanding immediate anti-bias training for law enforcement officials amid the coronavirus pandemic. The senators wrote with urgency, spurred by recent reports from black men who say they were racially profiled for wearing protective face masks, a measure the CDC recommends to prevent Covid-19.  In a video that went viral earlier this month, an officer in Miami stepped out of his squad car to arrest a black man with a face mask moving items near a van filled with equipment. It took the unmasked officer just over 60 seconds to put the man in handcuffs and detain him. It’s now known that the man, Armen Henderson, was a doctor who has volunteered to test homeless people for Covid-19.   In Wood River, Illinois, last month, two black men wearing surgical masks recorded themselves being trailed by a cop, who was occasionally gripping his gun, in a Walmart store. One of the men said that when the officer approached them, he wrongly told them that there was a national and state order banning the wearing of face masks. The local police department has opened an investigation into the incident and told the Washington Post that the officer followed the men because he believed they were “acting suspiciously.” In the video, the men expressed dismay: “We’re being asked to leave for being safe.”  Not wearing a protective face covering has gotten a black man into trouble, too. A video out of Philadelphia earlier this month shows a black man being forcibly removed from a public bus by at least four officers just a day after the city’s transportation authority required that all riders wear face coverings while on public buses, trolleys, and trains. The video, which shows the police first swarm the man then yank him from the bus, is especially jarring during an already tense public atmosphere. Following the incident, the transit authority announced that face coverings were no longer mandatory.  “These alarming reports highlight the fact that racial biases — implicit or otherwise — don’t cease and in some ways are heightened during a national crisis,” Sen. Booker told Vox in an email. “The truth is, black men in this country are unfortunately all too familiar with racial profiling by law enforcement. It is especially important during these difficult times that these harsh truths continue to be exposed and revealed so that we can continue to work to eradicate bias in policing.”  Booker says he and his colleagues wrote the letter because “we can’t afford the dire consequences of not addressing this issue.”  The police targeting of black men is a longstanding American tradition, one that has naturally incited antagonism and black distrust of law enforcement. This relationship, molded by decades of unequal treatment — as seen through traffic stops, wrongful arrests, officer-involved shootings, surveillance, stop-and-frisk, incarceration, and much more — could prove even deadlier for black people at a time of widespread societal fragility.  Black communities are already disproportionately challenged during the coronavirus pandemic. Data from the CDC as of April 20 (albeit incomplete; racial demographic info has not been reported for many patients) shows that about 34 percent of Covid-19 patients are black. That’s despite black people making up only about 13 percent of the country’s population.  The same trend is bearing out in available city and state data: In Chicago, where black people are just 32 percent of the population, 55 percent of the city’s Covid-19 fatalities were deaths of black people, as of April 21; in Detroit, black people make up 78 percent of the population, and have had 75 percent of Covid-19 deaths, based on information available on April 22.  These statistics reveal what has been the larger lesson in the pandemic: The coronavirus pandemic is amplifying structural inequality and bringing to greater light the fact that racism along with its bedfellow — deep poverty — has left black people with underlying health conditions (diabetes, hypertension, kidney disease, and more) that are risk factors for the disease. Now, one of the few practices that could potentially save more black lives — wearing masks — could create the opposite effect. In early April, when the CDC first recommended that all Americans wear face coverings in public, black men were quick to express hesitation: wearing face coverings would intensify racist perceptions of criminality, especially to police. In essence, black men have to pick their poison — risk their lives (and the lives of others) to Covid-19 by not wearing a mask, risk their lives to police officers who see them as suspicious while wearing a mask, or some tragic amalgamation of both. Their fear and enterprising coping mechanisms (some men are turning to printed and bright-colored face coverings) are not without reason. In likely every measure of the criminal justice system, from arrest figures to incarceration rates, black people are overrepresented. At the root of the disparity is the longstanding belief that blacks are America’s crime problem. From slave patrols to Jim Crow to present-day policing, racism has motivated the country’s interpretation of crime, leading America to value punishment (incarceration) over prevention (working with the community). And law enforcement culture continues to act on these beliefs, whether covertly or overtly. “There’s a very long and disturbing history in many locations where police are seen as an intimidating presence rather than a support to black communities,” Marc Mauer, the executive director of the criminal justice research and advocacy nonprofit The Sentencing Project, tells Vox. “It is counterproductive for public safety because these communities are less likely to have trust and confidence in police and less likely to report crime.” According to Mauer, the distrust exists because of policies rooted in discriminatory policing, like stop-and-frisk, in which officers stop and interrogate people on the basis of “reasonable suspicion.” According to data from the American Civil Liberties Union of New York, in 2011 — the peak of stop-and-frisk in New York City (more than 685,000 stops were recorded) — black and Latinx people made up 87 percent of those stopped by police and 88 percent of those stopped overall were deemed innocent of suspected crimes. Two years later, a federal judge would rule that the policy was “indirect racial profiling.”  Stop-and-frisk is just one of many reasons why black people have come to distrust law enforcement. In a pandemic, fears of being profiled and stopped may force them to forgo key safeguards like wearing a facemask or calling on police for help. Plus, wearing a face mask may lead to more stress that comes with being a perpetual victim of racism. In turn, stress exacerbates the aforesaid Covid-19 risk factors; then comes death. “Before the pandemic, there was always this issue of implicit bias with police officers and quite frankly with everyone — criminal defense attorneys, prosecutors, and judges — in the criminal system,” says trial attorney Kobie Flowers. According to Flowers, who took on police brutality cases as a former civil rights prosecutor at the DOJ and now sues police departments for wrongful conviction cases, implicit bias is only going to be amplified by the pandemic.  “Implicit bias is a shortcut our brains take to make decisions when we have to make thousands of decisions. But if you’re unaware of how your brain is operating, you can make bad decisions,” Flowers told Vox, adding that the pandemic, with everyone already on edge, is a recipe for a lot of bad decisions.  In the case of traffic stops, Flowers points to a Stanford University study of data from 2015 that found that blacks are more likely to be pulled over and searched for illegal substances than white Americans. This is because of implicit bias, Flowers says, not because black drivers are more likely to be carrying illegal substances. “Now add people wearing masks. My experience, rooted in empirical evidence, suggests that bad decisions by law enforcement due to implicit and even explicit bias will only get worse [during the pandemic].” And since black people fill many essential worker roles, they can’t just hide at home. (Not that home is safe for black people in the face of law enforcement.) “If you’re at the bottom of the economic ladder, you can’t afford to stay home,” says Kami Chavis, a professor and director of the Criminal Justice Program at the Wake Forest University School of Law. “Black and brown people are the home health aides, the food workers, the sanitation workers who take public transportation and are at greater risk of exposure,” she added.  Plus, the combination of being shamed and treated like scapegoats and a lack of access to medical care spells disaster. Nationwide, black people are more likely to be uninsured than whites.  Chavis tells Vox that the stress on poor marginalized communities will be met with the pressure that officers are facing. “Twenty percent of officers [in New York City] have Covid-19. Why? Because they are face-to-face with people, doing hard work and morale is low,” Chavis says, which can lead to officers lashing out and exhibiting violence. So far, the reports of racial profiling are anecdotal and there are just a known few. But did the incident occur if it wasn’t caught on camera? Shelter-in-place orders might be limiting the presence of public watchdogs. “One of the greatest advances in police accountability hasn’t been a police body camera or surveillance; it’s the people filming,” Chavis says.  “People react differently when they know they’re being watched.” While the senators called on the nation’s top law enforcement officials to provide anti-bias training, the training, if implemented, might not make even a small dent.  As Flowers points out, black people have perished at the hands of police departments that had already been engaged in anti-bias training and working on bolstering community relations. “Even with training, you still had [the shooting of] Tamir Rice. Even with training, you had [the death of] Freddie Gray,” Flowers says. Doubling down on anti-bias training is a start, but preventing more black deaths amid the Covid-19 pandemic will take a culture change. “As with any job, there are written rules, the do’s and don’ts. But then there’s also a culture that isn’t written down — people will engage in certain behavior regardless of what the training says because of a job’s unwritten culture,” Flowers tells Vox. “Until you have that change requiring officers to look at their jobs as guardians of the people — not warriors against the people — the current police culture will continue to overtake any training and bad decisions will continue to be made.” Greater transparency is a step on the way to culture change. Similar to the recent national push for Covid-19 data disaggregated by race and ethnicity, there must be a push for regular information about coronavirus-related arrests by race and other markers like socioeconomic status. Mauer says we must question how police agencies might be defining crime differently right now. For example, if someone is arrested while wearing a mask, or for not wearing a mask, we must first understand how police departments are identifying this as a crime.  “Agencies must review what their practices are and define what they are charging people for,” Mauer says. “They should review statistics on a monthly basis and disseminate the data. If there seems to be disparities that emerge, they need to determine whether it reflects actual patterned behavior or patterns of law enforcement. And they must engage with leaders in the black community.”  For Chavis, changing culture is ultimately about investigating people’s values going forward — and rethinking who should join the police force in the first place. “We need to be careful about who we give a badge and a gun to,” she says. “We need to know their education level and their psych profile. We need to be more careful with what we’re asking them to do.”   Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.After weeks of hyping it as a potential coronavirus miracle drug, President Donald Trump and Fox News have suddenly lost faith in hydroxychloroquine. A study of coronavirus patients in Veterans Affairs hospitals released Tuesday found more deaths among those treated with hydroxychloroquine than those treated with standard care. Researchers reported finding no benefit to its use.  The study, which the National Institutes of Health posted to its website and is the largest of its kind, was not peer-reviewed. The authors concluded more rigorous studies are needed before adopting widespread use of the drug.  Asked about the findings during the White House briefing hours after it was published, Trump dodged, saying “I don’t know of the report,” and tried to distance himself from the drug. “We’ll be looking at it, we’ll have a comment on it at some point,” he said. JON KARL: Are you concerned about this VA study showing that hydroxychloroquine can be fatal?TRUMP: "I don't know of the report." KARL: Are you concerned that the NIH is recommending against treatments you recommended?TRUMP: "We'll take a look at that." pic.twitter.com/PhYSBMZLzS Those comments represented a remarkable reversal for Trump. Seemingly tantalized by the possibility of wriggling his way out of the coronavirus mess with the help of a miracle drug, the president urged coronavirus patients and their doctors to use hydroxychloroquine repeatedly earlier this month, saying things like “it’s looking like it’s having some good results,” “I haven’t heard a bad story,” “it doesn’t kill people,” and “I hope they use it because I’ll tell you what, what do you have to lose?” Here is Trump giving potentially deadly medical advice in bizarre, hushed tones pic.twitter.com/acOCdJ9I9M Even if it helped Trump provide hope to the public that an effective coronavirus treatment wasn’t far away, it was clear at the time that this rhetoric was irresponsible. Hydroxychloroquine is an effective treatment for malaria, but doctors have long warned that taking it can result in drug-induced cardiac arrest for a small subset of the population. There is at least one documented instance of a man dying in Arizona after he tried to self-medicate with chloroquine phosphate. HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE & AZITHROMYCIN, taken together, have a real chance to be one of the biggest game changers in the history of medicine. The FDA has moved mountains - Thank You! Hopefully they will BOTH (H works better with A, International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents)..... Those risks might be worth taking if it turned out that hydroxychloroquine was effective in helping people recover from coronavirus infections. But health officials said at the time the research to determine that hadn’t been conducted.  A day after Trump called the drug a “game-changer,” his top health official on coronavirus, Dr. Anthony Fauci, told the press it was too soon to say whether the drug was safe or effective. “The information that you’re referring to specifically is anecdotal,” he said. “It was not done in a controlled clinical trial. So you really can’t make any definitive statement about it.” Clashes between Trump and government public heaths experts over unproven drugs led to the abrupt exit of Dr. Rick Bright as director of the Department of Health and Human Services’ Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority, the federal agency tasked with developing a coronavirus vaccine. On Wednesday, Bright sent a statement to the New York Times indicating he was pressured to give the green light to hydroxychloroquine treatments. “While I am prepared to look at all options and to think ‘outside the box’ for effective treatments, I rightly resisted efforts to provide an unproven drug on demand to the American public,” Bright said “I insisted that these drugs be provided only to hospitalized patients with confirmed Covid-19 while under the supervision of a physician.” “Sidelining me in the middle of this pandemic and placing politics and cronyism ahead of science puts lives at risk and stunts national efforts to safely and effectively address this urgent public health crisis,” he added. The new study is not a controlled clinical trial, but researchers argue their work confirms more study is necessary before embracing wide use of hydroxychloroquine.  The Associated Press write-up provides details:  Researchers analyzed medical records of 368 male veterans hospitalized with confirmed coronavirus infection at Veterans Health Administration medical centers who died or were discharged by April 11. About 28% who were given hydroxychloroquine plus usual care died, versus 11% of those getting routine care alone. About 22% of those getting the drug plus azithromycin died too, but the difference between that group and usual care was not considered large enough to rule out other factors that could have affected survival. Hydroxychloroquine made no difference in the need for a breathing machine, either. Researchers did not track side effects, but noted a hint that hydroxychloroquine might have damaged other organs. The drug has long been known to have potentially serious side effects, including altering the heartbeat in a way that could lead to sudden death. Trump’s infatuation with hydroxychloroquine can be traced back to a controversial French study released in March on a small number of Covid-19 patients that found hydroxychloroquine could lessen the duration of infection. As Media Matters for America has detailed, the French study and similar anecdotal evidence from China was covered by Fox News, amplified by Trump, with Trump’s amplification in turn being covered by Fox — in other words, it was the perfect illustration of the Fox-to-Trump feedback loop.  As it became clear that the United States was going to be especially hard hit by the coronavirus pandemic, Trump became insistent that the drug could be a savior, despite Fauci’s position.  "I answered this 15 times. You don't have to answer." -- Trump prevents Dr Fauci from answering a question about hydroxychloroquine pic.twitter.com/8R1K1hDsaX While Trump hyped hydroxychloroquine during the briefings, Fox News hyped it morning, afternoon, and night. To cite just a couple of notable examples, trade adviser Peter Navarro went on Fox & Friends for an interview earlier this month in which he said of the debate between Trump and doctors, “I think history will judge who’s right on this debate, but I’d bet on President Trump’s intuition.” A guest on primetime host Laura Ingraham’s show went as far as to suggest the coronavirus outbreak was all but finished.  After sharing some information on Hydroxychloroquine, a doctor on Laura Ingraham says “I think this is the beginning of the end of the pandemic. I’m very serious. pic.twitter.com/AkIkTD7bXJ But these talking points didn’t gain traction on other networks, where hype about unproven and potentially dangerous drugs by people who aren’t doctors was treated with the skepticism it deserves. NAVARRO: Would you take hydroxychloroquine if you got sick?@JohnBerman: I would listen to my doctor, not someone involved with trade policy. Do you want a doctor striking trade deals?NAVARRO: ToucheBERMAN: That's my point! pic.twitter.com/GCjEzoWUV1 But just as Trump and Fox News have tried to do with the months-long period in January, February, and March in which they downplayed the coronavirus, they’re now trying to put their hydroxychloroquine hype down the memory hole. On Wednesday morning, Dr. Oz — who just weeks ago was writing op-eds touting “the tantalizing possibility that hydroxychloroquine may prevent infection” and asserting that “doctors around the world are choosing hydroxychloroquine more than any other solution” — went on Fox & Friends and said he thinks it’s important for wait for more studies. “We are better off waiting for the randomized trials Dr. Fauci has been asking for,” he said. Dr. Oz, on Fox & Friends, says the VA study on hydroxychloroquine shows that "we don't know" if it works and "we are better off waiting for the randomized trials Dr. Fauci has been asking for."Just an astonishing turnaround for a network that has been aggressively promoting it. pic.twitter.com/9EzzzNAzrQ Dr. Oz’s more measured comments aren’t an aberration — Media Matters reports that “promotion of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine on Fox has plummeted in recent days: In a five-day period from April 11 to April 15, the treatment was mentioned on the network 87 times. Over the next five days, April 16 to April 20, it was mentioned only 20 times — a 77 percent decrease in coverage.” To be clear, it’s good that Trump and Fox News are now urging caution until the research is more definitive. But the study of VA patients shouldn’t have been necessary for them to get there. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   Politicians hoping to jolt the economy back to life might be in for some disappointment when they discover governors can let businesses reopen but they can’t force people to patronize them. This week, governors in states like Florida and Georgia are moving to reopen bowling alleys, nail salons, and dine-in restaurants in an effort to get economic life moving again. And an organized campaign by conservative economic interests is underway to lift restrictions faster in more places.  This will be an experiment, of course, but the best available evidence casts doubt on the idea that enough customers will return to make it possible for small businesses to stay viable without additional government assistance. For example, we know customers began abandoning America’s restaurants before they were ordered closed, that the handful of states that have avoided broad lockdown orders are still feeling economic pain, and that huge swaths of the economy that have not been shut down are nonetheless experiencing a precipitous decline in sales. The problem is a question of fear. Americans fear spreading or contracting infection, so much so that they’ve overwhelmingly participated in social distancing measures. They tell pollsters by wide margins that they fear lifting those restrictions too soon much more so than too late. They’re willing to stay put even if it harms the economy.  They also fear economic hardship. That’s led prudent people, even those left relatively unharmed by the downturn so far, to delay nonessential purchases, like new cars, appliances, clothes, and other goods.   Whatever choices state officials make about opening things up, there’s not going to be a vibrant economy until real steps are taken to address those dual sources of fear.  The online reservation booking service OpenTable has thoughtfully provided the public with data on reservation volume in every city where they operate. The conclusion: There are some reckless people, but the typical human being is not that interested in risking her life for a dinner out.  This table shows, day by day, how much reservations and seated walk-ins fell from the day one year before in a range of domestic and global cities. And it demonstrates clearly that bookings were tumbling in all kinds of places before mayors and governors ordered their restaurants closed. In Atlanta, for example, Mayor Keisha Bottoms announced on March 19 that she would ban in-house dining at noon on the following day. By that time, OpenTable bookings had already fallen by over 90 percent.  This is not purely an American phenomenon. In Ireland, the national restaurant association itself called for a closure order on March 16, citing overcrowding in some pubs. The government swiftly took their advice, but OpenTable bookings in Dublin had already fallen by 71 percent.  When states start to allow restaurants to resume sit-down service, some customers will come back. But it seems many won’t.   The restaurant business is competitive. It operates on low margins, with new restaurants infamously prone to failure. And as with many businesses, the fixed costs of operating a restaurant are relatively high. You need to pay rent and utilities, and you need to cover other overhead like insurance and the interest on loans you took out to get the business started in the first place. Forcing these businesses to stay take-out only indefinitely will force them to close without government help, but letting them reopen for sit-down dining only marginally changes the calculus as long as customers are wary of actually showing up. I asked a half-dozen restaurant owners from DC to Austin to central Pennsylvania if their businesses could survive the 20-30 percent decline in bookings that OpenTable was showing before the shutdown started. The only one who thought he could owns the building he operates in, giving him lower operating costs than a typical restaurateur. To save the industry, governments need to actually address the virus. Until that time comes we need to put restaurants on life support — simply letting them reopen empty isn’t going to work. Beyond restaurants, the Trump administration’s relatively aggressive opening plan will still leave large segments of the economy largely shuttered.  In particular, Trump’s “Phase 1” plan — echoed by Republican governors — calls for white-collar workers to continue working remotely and calls for Americans as a whole to continue avoiding “non-essential” travel. Those are reasonable steps of caution that will continue to take a hammer to the economy. It can’t be fixed by reopening personal service businesses. Hotel vacancy rates, for example, had already fallen by 25-50 percent as of mid-March while revenue per booked room fell by a third. This isn’t going to recover until people are told it’s safe to travel again. At $218 billion in annual revenue, the hotel industry is nearly triple the size of the combined hair and nail salon industries.  
    Related
   The $171 billion dollar airline industry is not currently shut down and thus can’t be “reopened” by fiat, but passenger volumes have fallen by 95 percent in the US. That’s an enormous loss to a large industry, plus secondary losses to related businesses like airport shops and rental car companies. As of a month ago, taxi companies in New York had lost two-thirds of their customers. And while New York City was unusually hard hit by the virus, it also has by far the lowest car ownership rate of any place in the country and thus the largest share of people who may have no better option than to hop into the back seat of a stranger’s car. By the same token, the International Air Transport Association’s survey data indicates that just 14 percent of the public say they’re likely to resume flying as soon as restrictions are lifted — with 40 percent of the population saying they’re likely to wait six months or more. Here's the full chart on the @IATA  survey showing that 40% of pax will wait 6+ months post-lock down before traveling. Note that it also shows slipping confidence from the February version. Not good news for airlines or associated industries. #AvGeek pic.twitter.com/c43cZHzFfX Travel businesses, in other words, are hampered by people’s reasonable fears of infection and aren’t poised to come roaring back the moment restrictions come off.  Similarly, while keeping office workers home wherever possible is sensible, it has inevitable knock-on economic consequences. Downtown lunch spots have no customers if nobody is working downtown. People don’t need to get clothing dry cleaned as frequently if there are no business meetings. And office management companies will shed janitorial staff if there’s nobody to clean up after.  And with large segments of the economy ailing, simple lack of money is going to be an increasingly prominent problem. Polling by CNBC in early April shows that 11 percent of Americans say they’ve lost their job during the pandemic and a further 30 percent have lost wages.   This is about to get worse. The Center on Budget and Policy Priorities predicts that state governments are facing a bigger hit to their budget than what we saw during the Great Recession of 2008-2009. Local government data is harder to come by, but it should be roughly in line with what states are seeing. When state and local governments lose revenue, they need to cut spending — furloughing workers or reducing benefits and widening the share of Americans who experience lost income. The same CNBC poll showed that 65 percent of Americans worry that their incomes will fall, and they should be worried.  What people do when their income falls— or when they fear that it might fall — is cut down on big-ticket purchases. They decide to forget about their plan to renovate the kitchen, and they hang on to their existing cars until they become completely unusable rather than upgrading. This is what we’re seeing right now. New car sales are plummeting even though dealerships are still open to sell cars. Some of this could be the inconvenience or fear of going to a dealership, but dealers are trying hard to offer people good options for contactless home delivery and opportunities to test drive. Financing offers and other deals are excellent right now because inventory is piling up and dealers want to move it.  The problem is that one family’s spending is another family’s income. And while there’s nothing wrong with being prudent, a whole national cycle of prudence is self-defeating. One prudent family doesn’t buy a car, so the salesman doesn’t buy a fridge, so the appliance workers lose shifts. Declaring that we can all risk our lives to go to the movies next weekend doesn’t alter the basic dynamic. What proponents of a quick reopening are hoping for is a better economy that works without further stimulus or intervention. That’s just not realistic.  Even plans to “reopen” involve keeping large swaths of the economy on ice. The travel sector isn’t currently shut down but it’s almost completely collapsed anyway. Reopened restaurants and personal services like hair and nail salons won’t get all their customers back as long as the virus is still circulating. Devastation to state and local budgets is already baked into the cake. And many people are losing income and paring back on unnecessary spending, prompting further rounds of lost income. There’s no way out of this that doesn’t involve curing the dual fears of infection and income loss. The former requires real public health victories, not just vague assurances. And the latter requires much more in the way of financial support for ailing businesses, local governments, and households. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Weeks of record job losses have left the United States with an unemployment rate that’s widely estimated to be higher than at any time since the Great Depression.  That shocking reality naturally invites analogies and raises what is perhaps the most important economic question of our time: How long will the bad times last? After all, what made the Great Depression so great was not just the severity of the slump but its extraordinary length — beginning in the United States in the second half of 1929 and not really ending until almost 10 years later.  Policymakers are hoping that the modern economy will come roaring back when things “open up,” but disagree about when that can or should happen and exactly what it means. Although very severe recessions are sometimes short, America’s most recent recessions — even the milder ones — have tended to be long, and the most recent one was both long and deep.  A prolonged collapse akin to the Great Depression is by no means inevitable, but it’s not impossible either. The fate of the American economy will rest not just on the course of the virus but on economic policy choices. Will Congress and the Federal Reserve provide the kind of dramatic stimulus we need to return to full employment, or will they opt to just muddle through? The most striking thing about the American economy in the 1930s is that the Depression went on and on and on. There are a few different ways you could look at this, but probably the simplest is to consider the unemployment rate.  Here’s a chart showing joblessness calculated in two ways. One is the official unemployment rate from Stanley Lebergott of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the other line is a more optimistic model constructed years later by economist Michael Darby, who argues that the official statistics of the day improperly classified people with unemployment relief jobs as not working. The Lebergott-Darby gap of roughly 5 percentage points makes a difference, but either way, it’s a long depression. Even using Darby’s numbers, the unemployment rate never got low during President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal programs. After getting steadily worse under President Herbert Hoover in the early 1930s, the economy got better under Roosevelt, which is why he won reelection overwhelmingly in 1936. But things were still really bad during the New Deal’s best moments.  Then it got worse, because in 1937, the US stopped making progress and fell into a new recession within the depression. Policymakers corrected some of the errors that led to the 1937 recession (more on that later), and the unemployment rate started falling again.  But even by 1940, the labor market was still in shambles. It’s only the extraordinary events surrounding World War II that really brought the Depression to an end. And that resolution shows us two things.  One is that if politicians had been willing to try more drastic things earlier, they may have been able to generate the rapid recovery that took place in 1940 earlier, too. The other is that if war hadn’t broken out, the very modest and unsteady pace of recovery that was happening under Roosevelt might have just continued for years more. Nothing about the nature of an economy guarantees that it will “bounce back” from bad news. But it does sometimes happen. Macroeconomic forecasters often talk about the idea of “V-shaped” recessions — recessions where a swift decline is followed by a swift recovery.  And America has had a lot of recessions like that. In July 1981 the unemployment rate was 7.2 percent, surging to 10.8 percent by December 1982, but then tumbling back to 7.2 percent by June 1984.  That was the worst of the V-shaped recessions, but they used to be fairly common — especially in the 20 years following the end of World War when we had four of them in a row. These recessions all have an underlying dynamic, where the Federal Reserve starts to worry that the economy is overheating and inflation is rising so they raise interest rates. Then interest-sensitive sectors of the economy rapidly start to shrink, and unemployment soars. When the time is right, the Fed flips the switch and things pick up again.  America’s more lingering recessions — like the one that sparked by the financial crisis but also the much more mild but annoyingly long-lasting one touched off by the collapse of the 1990s stock market bubble — tend to have more complicated dynamics. The Fed tries to fight them by cutting interest rates, but the Fed didn’t cause these recessions by raising rates, so taking them all the way down to zero doesn’t necessarily get the job done. Today, the Fed has already taken rates down to zero and the economy is still heading south, so there’s reason to worry that once again we won’t get a “V.”  But there’s also a case for optimism.  The recurrence of the phrase “opening up the economy” in contemporary politics reflects the view that current economic problems are caused by top-down closure orders. When restrictions are lifted, the hope is the economy will come roaring back.  With this view, you might see the economy as sort of like a spring. It’s been compressed, for now, for the sake of flattening the curve. But when pressure abates — whether because of policy shifts or medical breakthroughs — it’ll bounce right back. Former Treasury Secretary and National Economic Council director Lawrence Summers tentatively endorsed something like this view in early April, analogizing the current depression to a seasonal downturn or a long weekend. He acknowledged, though, that this was “only an optimistic guess” and he was “not sure” if it’s right.  I think that if we’re able to get the public health under control that normality will return more quickly than it does after financial crises or normal recessions, but I’m not sure of that. The overall record of macroeconomic forecasting as a discipline is not very good, and in this case, economists are looking at a situation they have no real experience with.  And it’s certainly possible that this could prove correct. Simply proclaiming that America is back open for business is unlikely to produce a huge surge in growth, but real medical advances that put the public health crisis behind us could. You could imagine a tremendous amount of pent-up demand as a long-frustrated public goes out and does things they’ve been afraid or banned from doing for months.  There could also be a surge of optimism as people feel the American can-do spirit has triumphed against an “invisible enemy” and now is a great time to make risky bets on the future. Millions of Americans have been familiarizing themselves with new digital productivity tools during the extended work-from-home era and organizations may return to the post-Covid world stronger and more efficient for it.  All that said, historically speaking long downturns usually become long because they far outlast the events that precipitated them.  The recent Great Recession is an unfortunate example of the problem.  The economy initially headed into what looked like a mild recession, driven by a decline in housebuilding activity associated with the fall in housing prices. But then came a severe financial crisis that sparked concerns about widespread bank failures or a total breakdown of the financial system. That plunged the country into what became an extremely severe recession over the winter of 2008-’09. But a range of emergency measures undertaken by the Federal Reserve and the US Congress successfully saved the financial system which, by mid-2009, was clearly not going to collapse. And, indeed, by the second half of 2009 the economy was growing again — just not fast enough.  Jobs came back, but at a much slower pace than they’d disappeared, giving the recession a prolonged and asymmetrical character. A financial breakdown caused the job losses, but fixing the financial breakdown didn’t cause a rapid bounce-back. Making things worse, it took six years for total employment to return to its precrisis levels, and by the time it did, the US population had grown considerably. In 2015 and 2016, more Americans were working than at any previous time in history. But because the working-age population kept growing the labor market remained weak. It was really only in the 24 months before coronavirus arrived that the job market was finally functioning “normally” with workers quitting jobs at high rates, and employers experimenting with pay raises to retain staff or recruiting marginal candidates like ex-convicts and recovering addicts.  The shallow recession of the early 2000s was much less severe but had a similar quality — the recovery was much slower and weaker than the initial collapse, provoking much frustration. The common element that these two recessions share with the Great Depression is that none of them were deliberately provoked by a Federal Reserve trying to control inflation. Consequently in all three cases even though the Fed cut interest rates to try to help the economy, the switch couldn’t be flung hard enough to make the economy bounce back. What it took was either time or, in the case of the Depression, extraordinary measures.  The Depression lasted a long time and the recovery was uneven, so there isn’t a single unitary explanation of what ended it. Instead, there were basically four prongs: Conversely, in 1937, when public officials decided the recovery was underway and it was time to return to more conventional policy, everything slid back down quickly.  In retrospect, the United States almost certainly could have restored full employment in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis more rapidly had policymakers acted more forcefully in the spirit of 1933. What we got instead was a frustrated back-and-forth effort. Big fiscal stimulus in 2009, followed by significant austerity starting in 2011. Bold Federal Reserve initiatives like quantitative easing, alternating with statements about how eager the Fed was to return to normal.  The results were much better than in the Great Depression, but much worse than the recovery could have looked like. The basic case for pessimism about the economy in the medium term is this: Most Americans are going to exit this crisis poorer than they were at the beginning, thanks to some combination of job loss, reduced hours, pay cuts, investment losses, lost tips, or reduced sales. People who have less money than they had before the crisis can’t simply “go back to normal” when the crisis is over, they need to deal with the fact that they are poorer now by restraining their spending. But because my spending is your income and vice-versa, that collective restraint will keep holding the economy back.  If the coronavirus crisis were a uniquely American phenomenon, Americans could get out of the jam by selling things to foreigners — but the whole world is basically in the same boat.  If interest rates were high, the Fed could make them low making debt more affordable and generating a surge of debt-financed activity — but rates were low when the crisis began and they’ve already been cut to zero. That essentially leaves us where we were in the Great Depression, with an economy that’s going to be depressed simply because it’s been depressed. People with no money can’t buy things, and in a global downturn there’s nowhere to turn for customers. A solution would need to involve either unorthodox Federal Reserve actions — a search for a modern-day equivalent to abandoning the gold standard — or else the government serving as a customer of last resort, as it did during the lead-up to World War II.  To normalize the economy, it won’t be good enough to lift restrictions and address the underlying public health emergency, people are going to need sources of income. The federal government, which is uniquely positioned to spend much more than it takes in, can serve as that source of income. But for it to happen, politicians will need to avoid the kind of premature pivot to deficit reduction that happened in 2010 and 2011.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   The race to track and slow the coronavirus pandemic has been very much a numbers game.  While we watch the number of cases — and deaths — climb, experts also are closely eyeing what they call the case fatality rate (CFR). This tells the proportion of people who have been confirmed as having Covid-19 and ultimately die from the illness, and it’s a number that has been varying widely from country to country.  Some countries, such as Germany, have a fatality rate of approximately 3 percent of confirmed cases, whereas Italy’s rate has climbed above 13 percent. Even within the US, large differences have emerged: As of April 20, Michigan had reported a CFR of 7.6 percent, compared to Oregon’s 3.8 percent.  Since scientists are pretty sure the virus isn’t mutating very quickly, the pathogen itself shouldn’t be more deadly in one place than another. So why the variation?  Figuring out what is driving these disparate numbers reveals differences not just in population demographics but also in health care capacity and government response. Understanding CFRs might also help us slow deaths around the world — especially for the most vulnerable countries and individuals.  Before diving into the details from different countries, it’s worth looking at some of the broad reasons why death rates can look so starkly different from place to place.  First, we know that there are big differences in the risk the virus poses to different age groups. For this coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, older individuals are far more likely to become critically ill or die from the disease. In a paper in The Lancet Infectious Diseases, researchers concluded, when looking at data from China and elsewhere, that people between the ages of 40 and 49 have an estimated CFR of about 0.4 percent; for those 80 and older, it’s 13.4 percent. This gulf of survivability is already playing out in some countries with older populations, such as Italy.  Additionally, Covid-19 has been demonstrably deadlier for those with existing health conditions, including lung disease (often caused by smoking), cardiovascular disease, severe obesity, diabetes, kidney failure, and liver disease. So countries — or regions — with less healthy populations might also be seeing big differences in the rates at which people are dying from the illness.  Beyond the varying impacts of the illness itself, there are lots of variables in how numbers are being gathered and reported. Perhaps the biggest factor here is testing. When experts calculate a basic fatality rate, it can be as simple as dividing the number of deaths by the number of confirmed cases (although — and we’ll get to this later — it really shouldn’t be).  Since the international spread of the novel coronavirus, countries have varied widely in their ability and willingness to roll out testing. So that means the denominator (the number of cases) can be closer or further from an accurate count of how many people actually have the virus. The larger the percentage of a population that has been tested, the more complete picture we will get of the virus’s actual fatality rate there.  The other issue with the poor testing rates is sampling bias. Tests that are available are usually saved for the sickest and riskiest cases. This pushes the fatality rate higher than it actually is because the testing is more likely to omit mild or asymptomatic cases and instead overrepresents those who are more likely to die. So, as testing becomes more widespread in various countries, their fatality rates will drop.  That is no reason for optimism, as the authors of the study in The Lancet note. The researchers offer an overall CFR for Covid-19 at 1.38 percent, which reflects their estimates for lack of testing and other factors, including potential censorship. This number, they noted, is still “substantially higher than for recent influenza pandemics (e.g. H1N1 influenza in 2009)” — “swine flu” — which had a case fatality rate of 0.1 percent. Their estimated CFR, “combined with likely infection attack rates (around 50-80 percent), show[s] that even the most advanced health-care systems are likely to become overwhelmed.” It is clear that this is far worse than the seasonal flu.  Another way to look at death rates — in the absence of widespread testing — is to compare the number of Covid-19 deaths to a country’s total population, which is what researchers have done here.  In another effort to make up for incomplete testing (and possibly incomplete reporting), researchers are attempting to estimate what percentage of actual cases have been reported (as of a couple weeks ago) for each country. The other factors likely impacting the vastly different fatality rates include a country’s resources (particularly its health care capacity), its organization (such as how easily it can institute effective, widespread public health measures), and how forthcoming it is with data.  We will likely see other factors emerge as the pandemic rages on and more data comes in. But here’s what we know so far about some of the key countries and their fatality rates for Covid-19 based on the number of confirmed cases.  For each country, we are using April 20 data from the University of Oxford’s Center for Evidence-Based Medicine, which has been updating its statistics on dozens of countries’ fatality rates daily. You can find their full list of countries, which includes data on how confident they are in their estimates, here.  Estimated CFR: 5.6 percent Early on in any pandemic of a potentially fatal infectious disease, the death rate is going to be high for numerous reasons, including: health workers are not looking for the new disease and will miss cases early in their progression; there aren’t established treatment protocols for the illness; and people don’t yet know how it is spread (and, thus, how best to contain it).  In the first few dozen patients in China, all of whom were already hospitalized, the CFR was 15 percent, a paper in The Lancet noted. Although the rate has pushed down over subsequent weeks, as the origin of the outbreak, China’s relatively high overall rate is not a surprise.  Even though the first reported Covid-19 death occurred there January 11, experts still do not agree on what the country’s actual CFR should be. One group of researchers reported in Nature Medicine that, as of the start of March, the fatality figure there should be 1.4 percent of symptomatic cases. Another team, writing in The Lancet, estimated it should be 5.6 percent.  These sizable differences come from balancing considerations of estimating the capacity of health care systems to identify cases and deaths, determining the ability to approximate actual rates of infection (including those not tested), and accounting for the time delay between onset of illness and death (tabulating current deaths with current infections might be misleading because of the two- to eight-week lag from early symptoms to death), among other factors. Clearly, finding the CFR is not as easy as an exercise in long division.  China’s governmental response, facilitated by being relatively centralized, likely played a large role in eventually slowing the outbreak — and lowering the fatality rate — there. As more people were able to be tested and the hotspot of Wuhan was put on lockdown, fewer cases emerged, and those that did could be detected earlier. New evidence, though, also reveals that China has underreported the number of cases and deaths from Covid-19.  Estimated CFR: 13.22 percent Italy currently has the highest fatality rate for Covid-19 of any country with a major outbreak. Why? One factor in this, experts have suggested, is the relatively older population of the country. The novel coronavirus is considerably more fatal with each passing decade of life. As a March 23 viewpoint in JAMA noted, those 60 and older in Italy have a 3.5 percent chance of dying if they get Covid-19; those 80 and up face a 20.2 percent chance.  And Italy has one of the oldest populations in the world. According to the World Bank, nearly a quarter of the country’s population is 65 or older, a higher percentage than any other country except for Japan. (There are also numerous other factors, including a cultural tradition of physical closeness, that could be contributing to Italy’s overwhelming number of cases and high death rate, as this piece from The Conversation points out.) But that doesn’t entirely explain the country’s high number. (As we’ll see below, Germany, which also has a fairly old population, has a relatively low Covid-19 fatality rate.) Some of Italy’s dire death rate might be due to how slow it was to do widespread testing.  Italy has now performed a lot of tests — about 22 per 1,000 people as of April 20 (compared to about 11 per 1,000 in the US). But it was, compared to countries like Germany and South Korea, relatively slow in the early stages of its outbreak to make large numbers of tests available, allowing the virus to spread undetected for crucial periods of days and weeks while people went about their daily lives, unaware that a crisis was looming.  Estimated CFR: 3.19 percent Experts are not sure why Germany has managed to maintain a relatively low fatality rate for Covid-19.  As HJ Mai reported in Vox, part of it does likely have to do with their aggressive early testing:  The [country’s Robert Koch Institute] early on recommended broad testing to detect cases as soon as possible and to slow the outbreak. “This is probably why we started to see cases very early, also mild ones, which in other circumstances might have been missed,” RKI’s [deputy spokeswoman Marieke] Degen said. “If you start seeing deaths, it indicates that the virus has already been active in the community for some time.” Another benefit of the widespread early testing is that they were able to locate a larger number of cases — adding to the denominator — many of which were milder and less likely to lead to a death. As Mai wrote, “The majority of cases in Germany have been detected in people between the ages of 35 and 59. That most coronavirus cases in Germany are being detected in an age demographic that is not considered part of the high-risk population could be a further contributing factor” to the low fatality rate.  But there is another question of timing here, and that is when a country’s outbreak started. Germany’s outbreak began later than Italy’s, with Italy topping 1,000 cases by March 1, when Germany still was reporting just slightly over 100. And with the current estimates suggesting Covid-19 deaths occurring up to eight weeks after the onset of symptoms, as Mai notes, “That means there’s a chance Germany and other nations in a similar stage of the outbreak could soon see a spike in deaths.” Indeed, their fatality rate has been climbing slowly over the past weeks, rising from about 1 percent at the beginning of April.  
    Related
   Estimated CFR: 2.21 percent Widespread and early testing, however, is not all that it takes to keep infection and death rates low. The results of those tests also need to be swiftly acted upon to have the most benefit.  South Korea has been largely lauded for its rapid, robust, and coordinated response to its outbreak. In addition to having tested about 3 people per thousand by March 5  (which was days before the US even started testing anyone in the general population), they put the results of those tests to use right away, an article in Science explained. Positive cases were isolated. Additionally, that person’s contacts were traced, and they were themselves considered potential cases and asked to quarantine at home, as NPR reported. New daily confirmed cases there spiked to their highest level March 1 — at 730 per day — and then dropped off, reaching an average of just 67 new cases per day by April 1. (By comparison, the US had 777 reported new cases per day on March 15 — and, as of April 15, had more than 26,500 new cases per day.) To facilitate this massive undertaking, the country used GPS data from people’s phones (because your phone is better at remembering where you were and who you were near than you are). The approach raises privacy concerns, as Science pointed out, but it is also credited with helping to sharply curtail the country’s outbreak.  Estimated CFR: 2.19 percent Japan, a country with more than 35.8 million people 65 or older, has many global health experts worried. The government has lagged on testing as well as on instituting strict social distancing guidelines. As of late March, many shopping malls in Tokyo were still open and busy. And as of April 15, the country had performed just about 1 test per thousand people (which pales in comparison to even the paltry efforts of the US’s 10 tests per thousand people by the same date).  As Eric Margolis reported for Vox, these facts do not bode well: “Thus far, Japan has managed to escape exponential growth, but the worst may be yet to come. ‘This may be the tip of the iceberg,’ said John Ioannidis, professor of disease prevention at the Stanford School of Medicine. ‘If you don’t test, you find no cases and even no deaths.’” What has people puzzled is the country’s relatively constant numbers of reported Covid-19-related deaths, despite rising case numbers. (There have been some questions as to whether Japan is thoroughly testing those with pneumonia, a common outcome and cause of death for severe Covid-19 cases.) Some attribute this to effective contact tracing that was done of cases early on in the outbreak or the country’s strong health care and elder care systems, Margolis noted.  Time — and increased testing — will tell whether Japan has efficiently controlled the virus and deaths as South Korea has managed to do. Or if it was a case of delayed detection and containment leading to a much larger disease burden.  Estimated CFR: 5.31 percent Where does the US stack up in all of this? Given that testing rates have been exceedingly low especially early on, as in Italy, undetected cases continued to spread the virus. As Dylan Scott and Rani Molla of Vox have written, case numbers in the US were more in line with Italy and Iran in mid-March, and “far outpaced places like Hong Kong and Singapore, where the governments mobilized more quickly.” The US is now on an even sharper trajectory of new cases than Italy or Iran. And that means a spike in deaths may well be coming next.  That is one of the other factors that can lead to a higher CFR: a sudden jump in the number of severe cases. When that happens, it “adds to the strain on the healthcare system and can overwhelm its medical resources,” wrote a team of researchers in The Lancet. That can result in not being able to save as many lives. (Hence the call to “flatten the curve.”) The US might be looking at this scenario in many places. New York City is already running out of hospital beds, with the projected peak outbreak there predicted to still be weeks away. And other cities and towns might face similar fates.  Risk map of #COVID19 in America? Here's mine: Any urban center with areas of high population density, esp those with #poverty/crowding where practicing social distancing can be challenging. So far it's been a good predictive map: NYC, Chicago, Detroit, NOLA, ATL, LA, SF, Seattle pic.twitter.com/WuQGMb7z1u Within the US, too, the rates of mortality are varying widely. As of April 20, Michigan had a CFR of 7.6 percent — compared to Oregon’s 3.8 percent. The reasons for these emerging regional disparities are yet to be determined, but they will likely end up including the same factors that lead to countries’ different rates, such as the area’s healthcare resources and containment policies as well as the overall age and health of the population. (Current counts for states’ case and fatality numbers can be found here.) It will be some time before testing catches up and we have firmer numbers for countries’ actual CFRs. Even when that happens, there will likely remain sharp contrasts among nations. As researchers noted in a March 20 Science report, “The patchwork reflects different phases of the epidemic, as well as differences in resources, cultures, governments and laws.”  As we learn more about the fatality rates for different populations of people, though, it will hopefully help governments make the best decisions about public health policies — as well as the best allocation of resources to protect and treat the most vulnerable.  A country’s response, so far, appears to have among the largest impact on the severity of an outbreak and the subsequent number of deaths, as demonstrated by South Korea’s apparent success (which was also achieved without broadly shuttering daily life). And as Vox’s Alex Ward writes: “Saving lives is ... about how quickly, thoroughly, and effectively the government responds to the brewing crisis. Any delay, it seems, is very costly.”  One of the big questions that remains to be answered is how the overlapping factors of a country’s age demographics and its health care resources impact the fatality rate. Going off of median age or the proportion of the population 65 or older may or may not end up being the next strongest predictor.  Countries with older populations tend, on the whole, to be wealthier and healthier, with better health and social infrastructures to begin with (for example, the notoriously rich country of Monaco boasts the highest media age: 55). Countries with younger populations, on the other hand, are often places where health care and other resources are scarcer and people are already not as likely to live to late adulthood (see Niger as the country with the youngest median age, at 14; and consider that in Uganda, only 2 percent of the population is over 65).  So, as the Covid-19 pandemic continues its global spread, experts will be closely watching not just countries with a large proportion of octogenarians but also those with higher poverty rates and already-stressed systems.  These countries might also be more likely to lag behind in test availability, logistics, and reporting, so it is possible that accurate data will be delayed or perhaps never be collected to know the true numbers of those infected or who perish from the illness. But even in the US, as the Atlantic reported, we might never know the true number of deaths this coronavirus causes. Because how we determine the ultimate cause of someone’s death is often not clear cut.  Will we ever know the pure case fatality rate of SARS-CoV-2? Some scientists are looking to the natural experiment that took place aboard the Diamond Princess cruise ship, which was quarantined for more than a month. During that time, about 19 percent of the ship’s passengers and crew fell ill and were confirmed to have Covid-19. Of those 705 people with the virus, seven died, providing a CFR in a well-tested group of people of 0.99 percent. The cruise ship demographic did skew older, so, as researchers pointed out in The Lancet, “the CFR in a healthy, younger population could be lower.”  Whatever they end up being, the numbers from this pandemic will doubtlessly be studied for decades to come. As in a laboratory experiment where researchers set up different versions of the same test, changing this variable or that, the world’s countries are now part of this global test case.  With hindsight and thorough analysis, we will eventually be able to more carefully plot out steps and missteps and what combinations of factors from these experiments came to mean for different populations. And hopefully, with that knowledge, we will be able to better head off the next pandemic threat, which could be even more virulent.    Part of the Pandemic Issue of The Highlight, our home for ambitious stories that explain our world. The flaws in America’s health system have been evident for decades to anyone who cared to look, but the coronavirus pandemic has left no more room for doubt: People will die because the US refuses to treat health care as a public good and a universal right. They already are.  Our decentralized system, with independent providers and many different payers, was not nimble in responding to this stealthy pathogen. These problems weren’t the only reason more than half a million people in the United States have contracted Covid-19 and tens of thousands have died. But America was particularly fertile ground for a virus to run wild. Only in America could a man and daughter placed under mandatory government quarantine then be hit with a $4,000 hospital bill. Only in America could somebody without health insurance — a situation, all on its own, foreign to other rich countries — receive a bill for Covid-19 treatment that tops $30,000. Only in America would a dying patient ask in his final breaths who will pay for the care that could not prevent his death. The US is the richest country in the world, and yet millions are uninsured or have insufficient benefits. It has fewer hospital beds, doctors, and nurses per capita than its economic peers. 
    Related
   The response to the current pandemic has been portrayed by President Trump and journalists as a war-like mobilization effort. Historically, wars lead to reconstruction. But for decades, the US’s slipshod system has resisted efforts to build a more universal and socialized model, with the government guaranteeing coverage for everyone and overseeing costs for the whole country, as seen everywhere else in the developed world. Even the coronavirus may not be traumatic enough to change that underlying reality.  Nonetheless, the pandemic will leave its mark on US health care long after the immediate threat passes. There is no doubt about that. Vulnerable hospitals are being drained of their reserves, patients are embracing health care from the socially distant safety of home, and Congress and the White House are desperately trying to patch up holes in America’s safety net. Change is already well underway. Hospitals of every type — private and public, urban and rural — are paying a heavy price to Covid-19. Not only are they trying to keep their patients and doctors healthy despite a shortage of supplies, but many have canceled or postponed elective surgeries, such as heart surgery or even cancer treatments. Those procedures typically account for much of their annual revenue, and without it, hospitals are laying off staff (temporarily, for now) to keep afloat. Rural hospitals especially depend on outpatient services for much of their revenue — about three-quarters of it on average, according to a Chartis Center on Rural Health analysis. Most of those services are now on hold. Making matters worse, hospitals in rural communities generally had only a month’s worth of cash on hand for a crisis like this — and the extension of social distancing guidelines until at least the end of April will “increase the likelihood that we will see rural hospitals run out of cash,” the Chartis researchers wrote. Before Covid-19 reached the US, one in four rural hospitals was already vulnerable to closure. Congress is funneling tens of billions of dollars to hospitals, and elective surgeries will resume at some point. But it still might not be enough to save some of these institutions. “Even with all of that, there are going to be hospitals that close because of this,” says Susan Dentzer, senior policy fellow at Duke University’s Margolis Center for Health Policy. The hospitals that will be best positioned to weather the crisis, on the other hand, are larger hospitals and those that are part of a system with several facilities.  “They typically are better capitalized and have more access to capital, have deeper reserves, and have endowments, and investments ... that while currently losing value, will almost certainly rebound,” says Karen Joynt Maddox, co-director of the Center for Health Economics and Policy at the Institute for Public Health at Washington University in St. Louis. Primary care has also taken a massive, if less-noticed, drubbing during the pandemic, says Andy Slavitt, who oversaw the repair of HealthCare.gov in 2013 and later took over as Medicare and Medicaid administrator for President Obama. Patients are no longer going in for routine check-ups, and doctors aren’t reaping the income they normally would if they perform surgeries at a hospital. “What happens to the structure of primary care? I fear you could end up with a very different-looking structure, with many [practices] shuttered. Many of them could be bought by insurance companies,” Slavitt says. “I could see a real decimating of independent primary care, and specialists impacted, as well.” The most obvious effect of the pandemic might paradoxically be the most mundane and the most significant. Telemedicine has struggled for years to realize its full potential, hindered by a combination of bad policies (limited Medicare coverage, states’ restrictions on practicing across state lines) and patients’ attachment to the old-fashioned “laying on of hands” kind of medicine. But as government officials have sought to keep otherwise healthy seniors away from doctor’s offices and hospitals where they might be exposed to the coronavirus contagion, telehealth has experienced a boom. Those visits surged by 50 percent in March as social distancing went into full effect, and the total number of phone or video interactions is expected to exceed 1 billion total by year’s end. Estimates from 2019 had indicated only about one in 10 Americans were taking advantage of telehealth in the pre-pandemic era. The Trump administration has relaxed Medicare rules — which previously only covered phone or video calls between doctors and seniors in rural areas — to pay for telehealth visits for all seniors insured through the program. Many private health insurers have done the same, boosting their payments for telemedicine consultations; previously, doctors would often be reimbursed less for virtual visits, discouraging its practice. “In terms of many of the encounters people need for their daily lives and how many of them can be done through telehealth,” patients will begin to find telemedicine more convenient, says Nancy DeParle, who oversaw Medicare and Medicaid in the 1990s, when the strict rules for Medicare’s telehealth coverage were approved by Congress. “I just don’t see that going back.” For a permanent paradigm shift, however, insurance companies will have to commit to continuing to covering telemedicine as they are now. “If providers can get paid for it, then I think it’s reasonable you’ll see a huge bump,” Austin Frakt, a Boston University health economist, says. “It’s more convenient. People like it.” Cuts to the Centers for Disease Control and related surveillance programs that monitor nascent outbreaks around the globe made it harder for the US to anticipate the coming crisis and develop plans to combat it. Congress tends to invest money in preparedness after a crisis like this; after the Zika virus outbreak of 2015, lawmakers set aside more emergency funding so federal outbreak response could launch quickly when the next pathogen arrived on the scene. But those investments can also be fleeting. Public health tends to be first on the chopping block when the fiscal hawks take power; the cuts under the Trump administration are a grim reminder. 
    Related
   “One would hope that public health will be less of a neglected stepchild in our health care system coming out of this crisis,” says Larry Levitt, executive vice president at the Kaiser Family Foundation. “At least for a while, there may be lasting investments in public health, until memory of the pandemic fades and we go back to underfunding it.” Slavitt says the US should be investing in a new “sentinel system” that would help to detect emergent outbreaks where they are rising. “We should end up building some more sophisticated intelligence systems to detect and monitor disease outbreaks,” he says. The pandemic “is a case study in how it’s detrimental that we can’t do anything close to real-time surveillance,” Frakt says. “I could see movement. It’s very weedy. Nobody is going to go to a presidential debate and talk about how we need better data-sharing. But there are tech nerds who would love to figure this out.” When Covid-19 appeared on the world stage, it triggered a race to find vaccines and treatments. Academic researchers and for-profit pharmaceutical companies have rapidly scaled up clinical trials in search of breakthroughs that could alleviate the pandemic’s human toll and allow society to begin returning to normal. But antiviral (and antibacterial) research investment historically has not been a priority for the major drugmakers whose participation is necessary for the mass production of any new medication. The Wall Street Journal reported Pfizer had to reestablish its antiviral research department for its Covid-19 work because the unit was disbanded in 2009. Novartis ended its antiviral and antibacterial research in 2018. The market has been dominated by Gilead (best known for its hepatitis-C cure) and GlaxoSmithKline.  One systemic review of the last 30 years of antiviral research found “only a few drugs were approved to treat acute viral infections” in that time. “Antibiotics and antivirals are both areas that haven’t seen a tremendous amount of new drug development because the economic incentives haven’t justified significant R&D in this area,” says Caroline Pearson, senior fellow with NORC-University of Chicago. “I wonder if the FDA might consider new ways to encourage and promote pharmaceutical innovation in areas with high public health value but relatively lower market value.” Another option, Pearson says, is for Congress to seek to expand federal authorities allowing the government to require drug and device manufacturers to produce drugs and supplies in an emergency. The elephant in this proverbial room is America’s embarrassingly high uninsured rate — above 10 percent before the crisis started and significantly higher now that millions are unemployed and losing their health insurance.  This is the fundamental immorality of US health care that the coronavirus has exposed again: How can anybody in the richest country in the world lack financial protection in a medical emergency?  
    Related
   A crisis like a worldwide pandemic historically has been an opportunity to repair such structural problems. “Many of the biggest coverage expansions both in the US and in similar countries happened in the context of wars and social upheavals, as well as financial crises. One theory is that those circumstances redefine social solidarity, thus expanding views of the role of government,” says Cynthia Cox, director of the Peterson-Kaiser Health System Tracker. “I think one factor that will determine the permanency of these changes is how long this disruption continues. The longer this goes on, the more likely this social solidarity becomes ingrained.” Targeted fixes passed by Congress now cover the costs of Covid-19 testing and treatment for uninsured Americans, and some health insurers have waived cost-sharing for their customers during the pandemic. But that only raises the question: If those costs should be waived for an acute viral outbreak, then why should somebody diagnosed with cancer or heart disease have to fork over thousands of dollars for the care they need? If Joe Biden becomes president, empowered with a Democratic Congress, he would likely have a mandate to pass another health reform that patches up holes revealed by the recent crisis. Any legislation would have to be negotiated in Congress, but during the campaign, Biden has proposed a new public insurance option that would be available to uninsured people, people who live in states that don’t expand Medicaid, and people who buy insurance on the Affordable Care Act’s marketplaces. People with employer-sponsored coverage would also be permitted to buy into the new government plan, if they choose. But any significant expansion of health coverage probably depends on the outcome of the 2020 presidential election.  “The answer to that question,” says Jacob Hacker, a Yale University political scientist who has studied how traumatic social events change political attitudes, “is gonna influence what’s possible in terms of large-scale health policy changes as much as anything else.” Even if President Trump were to be reelected, it is conceivable that Republicans will have less appetite for their preferred proposals that pare back health coverage. Already, some GOP-led states have put Medicaid work requirements on hold, given the crisis and the surge of Medicaid enrollment resulting from high unemployment. But more structural changes would require the right political environment. What nobody knows for sure, not even the people who have followed US health policy closely for years, is whether the coronavirus pandemic leads to any permanent political realignment. “In more normal times, I’m a very staunch ‘nothing ever matters, nothing ever changes’ kinda guy,” Frakt says. “This is such a rare event with no comparable experience in 100 years, and I don’t think it’s fair to compare anything that happened 100 years ago to now. Basically, we don’t know.” Dylan Scott covers health care for Vox.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.President Donald Trump made a number of false and misleading claims on Tuesday to advance his case that the US is not only over the worst of the coronavirus outbreak, but nearing the point of being ready to reopen for business. Most concerning was his insistence that the US has mastered what public health experts say must be step one to reopening: widespread testing. The US’s daily testing capacity has been flat for about a month, and experts say it needs to triple before it’ll be truly safe to reopen businesses.  To hear Trump tell it, however, the US has actually conducted more tests than all other countries combined. “I think I read yesterday a report that we’ve done more than everybody — every other country — combined,” Trump said on Tuesday, adding later: “We’ve tested more than every other country in the world even put together.” Asked why the federal government hasn't lived up to Pence's promises about testing, Trump lies and says the US has tested more than all other countries combined (this is not true) pic.twitter.com/QmpvxnB0Mq This is a whopper. According to Worldometer, a site that tracks coronavirus data by country, the US has, in fact, done more testing than any other individual country that reports data — the number of tests conducted in China, for instance, isn’t available — but the US is nowhere close to doing more testing than all other countries combined. Well over 20 million tests have been conducted across the world, and just over 4 million have been done in the United States.  So Trump’s claim isn’t even close to correct. It also overlooks that while the raw number of tests conducted in America sounds impressive, it lags behind countries like Germany and Canada in terms of tests per one million people.  The reality is that while US coronavirus deaths are growing at a slower rate than they were a week ago, it’s still too early to say whether the worst is already in the rearview mirror.  NEW: Tue 21 April update of coronavirus trajectoriesDaily deaths:• Still too early to say if US has peaked• Beginning to look like UK has• But descents look much slower than ascents• Successes in dark blue: Australia, Norway, AustriaLive charts https://t.co/JxVd2cG7KI pic.twitter.com/jHrg49Uamp But with the economy in ruins and a tough reelection fight on the horizon, Trump has reasons to reopen businesses quickly. Characteristically, they don’t jibe with reality. Perhaps Trump’s most egregious lie on Tuesday was saved for his comments about anti-stay-at-home protests he’s encouraged in states like Michigan, Minnesota, and Virginia — protests that are essentially against his own policies. “I’ve watched some of the protests,” Trump said. “They’re separated, there’s a lot of space in between. They’re doing social distancing, if you can believe it.” Trump on anti-stay-at-home protests: "They're separated, there's a lot of space in between. They're doing social distancing, if you can believe it." (Many protesters are not doing social distancing.) pic.twitter.com/NEiReWWFYI Fox News’s coverage, however, has made it abundantly clear that many of the protesters are not only not social distancing, but seemingly thumbing their nose at the notion and thereby putting their friends, family, and neighbors in danger of contracting the virus.  Consider this screengrab from Fox’s coverage of a North Carolina protest on Tuesday — coverage that led the noon hour: These stills from last Friday’s coverage also show protesters packed together in a manner that could spread the virus. Fox News just showed a protest against social distancing with someone holding a sign saying "COVID-19 IS A LIE" pic.twitter.com/mcgVBJy9DZ Trump, however, seems willing to say whatever it takes to make reopening business at this juncture seem like a reasonable option, and he’s getting help from other members of the White House coronavirus task force in this effort.  On Tuesday, for instance, task force coordinate Dr. Deborah Birx made the case that Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp’s (R) move to reopen hair salons and tattoo parlors as soon as this weekend could make sense — if workers are able to give haircuts or tattoo people while remaining socially distanced. “If there’s a way that people can social distance and do those things, then they can do those things,” Birx said. “I don’t know how.” Asked how it's possible for hair salons and tattoo parlors in Georgia to reopen, Birx says "if there's a way that people can social distance and do those things, then they can do those things. I don't know how." pic.twitter.com/Qx7YgPUPSV At another point, Trump was asked how people in South Carolina could be protected from the governor of Georgia’s decision if it turns out to be a bad one. “We’re going to find out,” he said in response. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   President Donald Trump and other conservative leaders have been calling for states to ease social distancing guidelines and reopen the economy since the White House released its “Opening Up America Again” plan last Thursday, and it appears that three states — Georgia, South Carolina, and Tennessee — will be the first to do so. What that reopening will look like in each state is variable. Some, like Georgia, are charging ahead more quickly and will allow restaurants to be open for limited dine-in service on April 27. Tennessee, meanwhile, has released very few details on its reopening plans at all. But there are some unifying themes. Most outdoor spaces like beaches and state parks will open in each state. Another big similarity: the uncertainty of just how many establishments will listen to the governors and return to business as usual. The three states going first to reopen haven’t necessarily been as hard hit as New York or Illinois, but they have by no means gotten off lightly in the pandemic. As of Tuesday afternoon, Tennessee had 7,238 confirmed cases and 152 deaths; Georgia 19,398 confirmed cases and 774 deaths; and South Carolina, 4,439 confirmed cases and 124 deaths.  And it’s not clear that any of them have achieved any of Trump’s guidelines to begin reopening, which call for several key measures to be met, including a downward trajectory in confirmed cases of Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, over a 14-day period. Reopening too early or haphazardly could trigger a resurgence in cases — and deaths — from the virus.  Even if leaders encourage people to resume their normal lives, it’s not a guarantee that the people will follow their lead. A Gallup poll released last Tuesday showed that just 20 percent  of US adults would resume normal activity right away once shelter-in-place orders are lifted, while 71 percent said they’d take a wait-and-see approach and 10 percent said they’d continue remaining at home.  That being said, here’s exactly what each state is allowing in its reopening. First-term Republican Gov. Brian Kemp was one of the last governors to impose a shelter-in-place order on his state, and he will be one of the first to lift it. Public health officials criticized the governor for the hasty reopening, saying the state does not meet the White House criteria to do so. According to an executive order released Monday, Kemp will lift the state’s restrictions for large swaths of the economy in three swift steps. Consistent with the governor’s previous shelter-in-place order, businesses are required to maintain “minimum basic operations,” which includes staying open to the public subject to social distancing requirements. Opening immediately: Opening Friday, April 24: Opening Monday, April 27: All businesses choosing to reopen must observe social distancing and hand-washing guidelines and monitor employees for signs of respiratory illness or fever over 100.4. Any employee displaying symptoms must stay at home. Employees must be provided with Personal Protective Equipment whenever necessary to complete their jobs. Further, no business may allow more than 10 people to gather in a single location at a time and everyone must maintain at least 6 feet of separation between themselves and another person. The guidelines are responsible, but some are fairly labor- or cost-intensive. As a result, some businesses may choose to remain closed, but they’ll no longer be required to. The state’s shelter-at-home order expires at the end of April and Kemp has said that he will not renew it. Republican Gov. Henry McMaster announced Monday that he would take an aggressive approach to reopening the state, despite not having met the White House standards for beginning the process. “We want to be able to slingshot around the competition and get back up to full speed as soon as we can,” he told reporters Monday. It appears that South Carolina’s guidelines for employees of reopened businesses aren’t quite as protective as neighboring Georgia, and the state will allow more business sectors to open sooner, according to McMaster’s executive order. Opened as of Monday, April 20: Open as of Tuesday, April 21: But as with Georgia’s order, McMaster requires that businesses maintain social distancing guidelines that might make it economically unsound for some businesses to reopen. Any that choose to are prohibited from having more than five customers per 1,000 square feet of floor space, or 20 percent of maximum capacity according to the local fire marshall. Additionally, businesses must ensure that customers maintain at least 6 feet of space between themselves and other people in the establishment and must thoroughly sanitize public spaces in accordance with CDC and state and local health guidelines. Republican Gov. Bill Lee announced Monday that he would not be extending his previously issued “safer-at-home” order, which expires at the end of the month. By letting the order expire, businesses in 89 of the state’s 95 counties will be allowed to begin reopening. Lee’s order only applied to states that are overseen by Tennessee’s Department of Health. It will be a different situation in Davidson, Hamilton, Knox, Madison, Shelby, and Sullivan counties, which are home to the state’s biggest cities and have their own city health departments. Each city’s health department will make its own decision on when — and how — to reopen. “Our Economic Recovery Group is working with industry leaders around the clock so that some businesses can open as soon as Monday, April 27,” Lee told reporters Monday. “These businesses will open according to specific guidance that we will provide in accordance with state and national experts in both medicine and business.” Opening Friday, April 24: Opening Monday, April 27: Some businesses (details are still being worked out by the governor’s economy recovery team and are expected to be released later this week) Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.After weeks of infighting, the Senate has passed another deal aimed at tiding over small businesses during this economic downturn.  The legislation, which lawmakers are describing as an “interim” spending package before the next major stimulus bill, includes roughly $480 billion in funding, $380 billion of which is dedicated to small business loan programs. It’s a much-needed boost for hundreds of thousands of small businesses, as the money that Congress previously allocated for forgivable loans and grants has run out. It’s worth noting, however, that some of the same loopholes that enable larger corporations — like Ruth’s Chris Steak House — to apply for these loans still remain.  In addition to the funds for small business loans, this bill also includes $75 billion for hospitals — which are experiencing severe revenue shortfalls as they combat the coronavirus — and $25 billion to establish testing programs, money that experts say is much needed in order to build out the country’s testing capacity.  This package doesn’t contain, however, several priorities that Democrats had previously emphasized, such as additional funding for states and cities that are also struggling financially during this crisis. These omissions have prompted some progressive members, including Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-NY), to signal opposition to the proposal. “We have not seen the final text of this bill, but what I can say is that if it matches up with what has been reported, I will not support this bill personally,” Ocasio-Cortez said on Monday.  The size of this “interim” spending bill, while much smaller than the $2 trillion stimulus that passed in March, is still significant: In 2009, the entire cost of the Recovery Act was pegged at around $840 billion. The bill now heads to the House, which is slated to consider it as soon as Thursday.  If it’s approved there, lawmakers will turn their attention to the next stimulus package, which Democrats are pushing to include more comprehensive support for essential workers along with funding for states. “As soon as [the interim bill] has passed in the House, we will advance CARES 2, which must be transformative and far-reaching,” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer said in a statement.  Due to Democratic pressure, the “interim” funding bill has expanded notably since Senate Republicans’ initial proposal.  The original Republican offer, announced roughly two weeks ago, was limited to $250 billion in funding for the Paycheck Protection Program, which provides forgivable grants to businesses and nonprofits. The newer version includes $320 billion for PPP, and $60 billion for the Economic Injury Disaster Loan program, which offers emergency grants that can expedite relief. Of the $320 billion allocated for PPP, there’s also a $60 billion carve-out for community-based lenders, as well as mid-sized banks, which can better serve smaller businesses and minority-owned firms, organizations that are less likely to have an existing relationship with a larger bank.  Additionally, the deal contains $75 billion for hospitals, which have been overwhelmed by the simultaneous costs of preparing for the coronavirus and the revenue declines that have resulted as elective procedures are postponed. Another $25 billion is intended to help ramp up the country’s testing capacity, a development that experts view as vital to determining when to reopen the economy more fully. The main Democratic demand that has been omitted from this deal is the additional funding that lawmakers would like to see go to cities and states, many of which are facing incredible financial strain given reductions in tax revenue. Mnuchin signaled that this issue would be addressed as part of negotiations for the next funding bill. “The president has heard from the governors and he’s prepared to discuss that in the next bill,” Mnuchin said during an appearance on CNN’s State of the Union. Trump’s reluctance to consider state funding in the current bill is the result of a couple of factors, according to Politico. Among them: The administration is concerned that it would have less leverage over the states regarding when they reopen their economies if they had more funding to help them weather this period. A vote in the House is expected Thursday, when lawmakers will consider some procedural changes, too.  Because most members have been working remotely during the pandemic, votes have posed a unique challenge. When lawmakers were weighing the CARES package in March, for example, Rep. Thomas Massie (R-KY) demanded a quorum — or a majority of the House — be physically present for the vote. It is possible that Massie or another member might make the same request again this week, meaning some members would have to travel back to the Capitol. House Democrats have already urged lawmakers to be prepared to do so.  Pelosi has also said that the House could consider the use of proxy voting for future bills if members continue to work from their districts during the pandemic. Were members to move forward with this approach, the House would have to vote on a rule to approve proxy voting. Like the name suggests, proxy voting enables members to allow someone who’s physically present in the House chamber to vote on their behalf, so not everyone would have to travel back to Washington. Both the votes on proxy voting and the interim spending bill are expected later this week. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. President Donald Trump’s administration is preparing a wide-ranging rollback of business rules and regulations in an attempt to mitigate the shock of the worst economic collapse in a generation, according to a Washington Post report. Though the specifics have yet to be finalized, two people familiar with the plans told the Post’s Jeff Stein and Robert Costa that the administration is going to focus on small businesses; targeted regulations could include environmental policy, labor policy, workplace safety, and health care. The administration is also reportedly interested in expanding a program that requires federal departments to roll back two regulations every time it introduces a new one. The economic deregulation fits into a larger pattern from the White House during Trump’s first three years in office, one that’s continued even as the pandemic has gone on. The administration, for instance, eased clean air requirements in early April despite the fact that cleaner air would help Americans better deal with respiratory illnesses like Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus. The latest deregulatory plans are being worked on by a team of high-level administration officials, who hope to release them by the end of April or early May, per the Post: The White House National Economic Council and its director, Larry Kudlow, are working closely on the plan with Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin and other officials at the Treasury Department. The Council of Economic Advisers and incoming White House chief of staff Mark Meadows are also involved, as is White House counsel Pat Cipollone and Office of Management and Budget acting director Russell Vought.  More than 22 million people in the US have filed initial claims for unemployment over the last three weeks, triggering the biggest economic shock since the Great Depression. White House officials claim that undoing government regulations for small businesses will help encourage investment in a down market.  Several conservative groups, including the Heritage Foundation, recently released plans for the administration to pursue deregulation. Among the Heritage plans the White House found intriguing was a call for the president to ask agencies not to enforce small business regulations altogether. “A presidential call for a wide-scale policy of non-enforcement would send a very strong signal to businesses that the government is not going to come down hard on them as they try to get back up and running,” the Heritage plan said. Left-leaning policy experts disagree. “This sounds exactly like the type of opportunistic political move that absolutely should not be attempted right now,” Jared Bernstein, a former adviser to presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden, told the Post. “Correlations between regulations and economic activity are far shakier than they assume, and I don’t believe this idea will help at all.” The White House hopes to marry the deregulatory plan with a payroll tax cut — another of Trump’s long-desired financial policy goals, but one that would need congressional approval in the next round of stimulus bills. This isn’t the first time the Trump administration has used the economic collapse caused by Covid-19 to push back regulations across multiple government agencies. Much of the effort thus far has focused on easing environmental regulations, which has been a priority throughout most of Trump’s first term. In early April, the administration finalized its rollback of Obama-era requirements for vehicle fuel efficiency. And on March 26, the Environmental Protection Agency issued a directive saying it would “not expect to seek penalties for violations of routine compliance monitoring, integrity testing, sampling, laboratory analysis, training, and reporting or certification obligations in situations where the EPA agrees that Covid-19 was the cause of the noncompliance.”  The move allows air polluters to flout federal law without fear of penalty, right when clean air is perhaps most important for the health and safety of everyday Americans. Respiratory illnesses like Covid-19 are exacerbated by air pollution, as explained by Vox’s Matthew Yglesias:  Danielle Braun, Francesca Dominici, Rachel Nethery, Ben Sabath, and Xiao Wu used a pretty standard research design looking at long-term air pollution levels as recorded in about 3,000 American counties that cover approximately 98 percent of the population. They then looked at county-level Covid-19 deaths, adjusting for hospital beds available, smoking and obesity rates, and standard demographic factors. All else being equal, they found that an increase of one microgram of fine particulates per cubic meter is associated with a 15 percent increase in the Covid-19 death rate. That’s about 20 times the statistical association between fine particulate exposure and increases in the normal all-cause mortality rate, reflecting the commonsense view that coming down with Covid-19 greatly elevates the importance of your baseline respiratory and cardiovascular health. It is well known among people who study air pollution that African American neighborhoods are much more likely to have high levels of contamination — the result of a multifaceted historical process. The link between air pollution and Covid-19 fatality could be a partial explanation for why African Americans seem to be dying at a disproportionate rate. It could also partially explain why things got so bad in Italy, which has about double the concentration of air pollution in the United States. In policy terms, we cannot cope with the pandemic by going back in time to reduce background levels of air pollution. But we can use the data to spot and help the most vulnerable. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.More than 1,500 people in the US died from the coronavirus on Monday, bringing America’s death toll to nearly 43,000, according to the Johns Hopkins coronavirus tracker. But you wouldn’t know that from looking at President Donald Trump’s tweets Tuesday morning. In a string of posts that began a bit after 6 am Eastern time, Trump lambasted MSNBC in particular, and the “Lamestream Media” in general, ghoulishly bragged about his “great ‘ratings’” during daily press briefings ostensibly about a pandemic, fudged polling numbers to inflate his popularity, and promised to bail out the US energy industry. To close out the morning, he retweeted posts from someone with the handle @SexCounseling. The president’s only reference to the coronavirus was to brag in passing about the purportedly great job he’s doing handling it. He didn’t have a single word to say to Americans with loved ones who are ill or who have died, or who are worried about getting sick themselves. Taken together, the tweets paint a picture of a president who’s obsessed with himself at a time when Americans are losing their jobs and lives. They illustrated that Trump is fixated on fighting his perceived political foes at a time when governors, even Republican ones, are becoming increasingly disillusioned about the federal coronavirus response — or lack thereof. Trump’s Tuesday morning tweets came hours after he abruptly announced he’s signing “an Executive Order to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States” because of unfounded worries that immigrants are coming to the country during a pandemic and taking the “jobs of our GREAT American Citizens.” In light of the attack from the Invisible Enemy, as well as the need to protect the jobs of our GREAT American Citizens, I will be signing an Executive Order to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States! But travel bans and closed consulates mean immigration is already at historic lows. Even if this wasn’t the case, the US has the most coronavirus cases in the world, and the job market is in ruins because a pandemic has shuttered many people inside their homes — not because of immigrants. So Trump’s immigration ban announcement was widely seen as an effort to toss some red meat to his base. If that tweet indicated the president might be focused on the wrong things, Trump didn’t help matters when he followed that up by retweeting a string of posts from Fox News personality Gregg Jarrett attacking Hillary Clinton, as well as law enforcement and intelligence community officials involved in the Russia investigation.  Trump apparently kicked off his Tuesday by watching a bit of Morning Joe on MSNBC. The opening segment featured a discussion about how the federal government isn’t doing enough to develop a coronavirus testing capacity sufficient to safely reopen businesses and schools — a viewpoint widely shared by public health experts.  “Everybody has been talking about testing, Mr. President,” host Joe Scarborough said. “Until you get widespread testing, you can’t really reopen the government safely.” Trump, however, didn’t appreciate the criticism and responded with an unhinged personal attack on Scarborough.  Watched the first 5 minutes of poorly rated Morning Psycho on MSDNC just to see if he is as “nuts” as people are saying. He’s worse. Such hatred and contempt! I used to do his show all the time before the 2016 election, then cut him off. Wasn’t worth the effort, his mind is shot! More than 20 minutes after posting that tweet, Trump was still stewing. He posted another bashing the media.  It is amazing that I became President of the United States with such a totally corrupt and dishonest Lamestream Media going after me all day, and all night. Either I’m really good, far better than the Fake News wants to admit, or they don’t have nearly the power as once thought! These attacks on the press come as Trump routinely lashes out at reporters who ask him straightforward questions about his own past statements during his nightly White House coronavirus briefings. Those briefings are ostensibly about the pandemic that has claimed tens of thousands of lives across the country, but Trump seems more concerned about how many people are tuning in to watch him. As the news value of the briefings have diminished, CNN and MSNBC have increasingly cut away from live coverage of them to avoid giving Trump a platform to lie and try to pin blame on others. Nonetheless, on Tuesday morning the president tweeted, “I’ve had great ‘ratings’ my whole life, there’s nothing unusual about that for me. The White House News Conference ratings are “through the roof”(Monday Night Football, Bachelor Finale , @nytimes) but I don’t care about that. I care about going around the Fake News to the PEOPLE!” I’ve had great “ratings” my whole life, there’s nothing unusual about that for me. The White House News Conference ratings are “through the roof”(Monday Night Football, Bachelor Finale , @nytimes) but I don’t care about that. I care about going around the Fake News to the PEOPLE! The president closed out this session of what his schedule usually refers to as “executive time” by seemingly making up a poll showing that his approval rating in the Republican Party is 96 percent — recent polls indicate his approval among Republicans is high but not that high — and then used that fabricated data point to make a case that “[t]his must also mean that, most importantly, we are doing a good (great) job in the handling of the Pandemic.” 96% Approval Rating in the Republican Party. Thank you! This must also mean that, most importantly, we are doing a good (great) job in the handling of the Pandemic. One would think, however, that the number of coronavirus cases and deaths would be a more appropriate metric to use to evaluate the president’s response to the crisis than polling numbers or television ratings. Trump’s tweets are certainly not reflective of a well-adjusted adult operating with a basic sense of empathy for others. They’re ugly, and it’s tempting to ignore them. It’d be easier to do that if there was a presidency going on beyond the tweets. But in Trump’s case there really isn’t. On Monday, Trump had nothing on his schedule other than the daily White House press briefing, which is more about ego-stoking and sparring with reporters than it is about conveying useful information to Americans. On Tuesday, Trump has nothing on his schedule other than a meeting with New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo (D) and the briefing. Television and Twitter appear to be taking up large swaths of his time. Essentially, the tweets are the presidency. As the coronavirus crisis in the US continues into its second month, state governors have by and large figured out that Trump is of little use to them, and have starting working together — or even with foreign countries — to obtain coronavirus testing kits and other medical supplies. The president, meanwhile, sits in the White House and broods about his favorite topics — his own popularity and petty beefs. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The $1,200 stimulus checks from the government have quite a loophole. Banks and loan sharks can seize the money before it lands in your account — a wrinkle that favors debt collectors over the vulnerable people the checks are supposed to help. Sens. Elizabeth Warren (D-MA) and Sherrod Brown (D-OH) are calling for Congress to put a stop to it in the next coronavirus package out of Capitol Hill.  The plan is part of a broad set of proposals, shared exclusively with Vox, that the pair of senators are releasing on Tuesday to help consumers manage debt — be it mortgages and rents, student loans, credit card debt, or auto loans — during the coronavirus crisis and accompanying economic downturn. “Consumer spending drives our nation’s economy, and we will emerge from the current crisis,” the pair wrote in their proposal. “But if Americans are left drowning in debt at the end of it, our recovery will be hampered as people will spend less on goods and services.” Millions of Americans were already in dire straits before the global pandemic hit, and millions more have been sent into a spiral. Roughly 22 million people have filed new jobless claims over the past month, and as economic shutdowns across the country continue and unemployment systems catch up, that number is likely to go up. And America was already heading into the crisis deeply indebted: US household debt hit a record $14 trillion in 2019. Sometimes, the word “consumer” can feel fuzzy, but the truth is, a consumer is everyone. “A consumer is anyone who is paying a mortgage or medical bill. It’s anyone who has student loan debt or credit card bills or car payments. This crisis is affecting all of us. Tens of millions of Americans have filed for unemployment and many more could lose their jobs or be unable to afford their bills,” Warren said in a statement to Vox. “Providing immediate relief is an important safety net that will be good for families and good for our economy.” The pair of senators are laying out six proposals to address that reality, building on the limited protections enacted in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act, last month. Some — like not letting creditors take people’s relief checks  — address the first law’s oversights. Others — like broadly canceling student debt — are long-standing progressive goals. And still others are a decidedly Warren-esque response to the crisis the United States is facing, like ramping up the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (the CFPB)’s oversight.  To be sure, these proposals might not go far enough to protect people — the lawmakers even acknowledge that families will probably wind up filing for bankruptcy, whatever happens. And that’s if they make it into law. Republicans have long been skeptical of the CFPB’s mere existence and the idea of being too lenient on debt. Some in the GOP have accused Democrats of exploiting the current crisis to push forth a progressive agenda. And even within the Democratic Party, not everyone is aligned on issues such as student debt cancellation. Warren and Brown, however, say now is the time for big ideas. The CARES Act, the $2.2 trillion stimulus package signed into law in late March, provides some protections for consumers, but it could go further. For example, it entails a foreclosure moratorium and right to forbearance, meaning a pause on all payments, for federally backed mortgages. It also protects renters from eviction for 120 days, assuming they’re living in a building with a federally-backed loan or are part of specific government programs. But 70 percent of home mortgages are backed by a federal agency, meaning 30 percent are private and left out. Student loan debt has been handled in a similar situation. The CARES Act suspended most federal student loan payments and put federal student loan interest rates at zero percent, but it leaves out students with private loans, let alone touching the idea of debt cancellation. “So, while the government is making trillions of dollars available to large companies, Congress offered no relief for Americans with auto loans, credit card debt, payday loans, or other debt,” Warren and Brown write. The pair lay out six proposals for Congress to include in the next coronavirus relief package, which is still being debated among Washington lawmakers: They have proposed the Small Business and Consumer Debt Collection Emergency Relief Act with Sen. Cory Booker (D-NJ), which would extend debt protections to small businesses. They outline a number of steps the CFPB can and should be taking, including financial institution examinations (even if not on-sight), data gathering and monitoring, and focusing on industries that can be particularly bad actors — debt collectors, mortgage servicers, and payday lenders. It also has enforcement powers. Warren and Brown aren’t the only figures sounding the alarm about the CFPB — earlier this month, former CFPB Director Richard Cordray warned of the threat coronavirus poses to consumers and called on the bureau to step up.   We are in an unprecedented moment in America. The pandemic has brought the economy to a halt, and millions of people are hurting. Debt isn’t a personal problem, it’s a collective problem — the system is set up so that ordinary people are at a disadvantage to powerful institutions. And once this is over, the worse shape people are in, financially, the longer the recovery will take. But Congress has an opportunity to go big in the next stimulus package, and proposals like this are how they’ll take it. It takes a really long time to get a grant for scientific research. Official advice from the National Institutes of Health (NIH), which is the largest source of grants for science research in the US, recommends that grant planning begin nine months in advance of the deadline for the grant. Time surveys suggest that top researchers may spend as much as half their time writing grant applications. That’s an inefficient system in the best of times. During a crisis like the current one, when researchers in critical biology, medicine, and epidemiology want to attempt to answer pressing questions immediately, it’s disastrous.  That’s why, two weeks ago, Patrick Collison, the CEO of the payments company Stripe, and Tyler Cowen, an economist at George Mason University, launched Fast Grants. The concept is this: Scientists can submit an application for a grant in 30 minutes or less and get a response within two days. They can request between $10,000 and $500,000. The initial money was put up by some of Silicon Valley’s biggest names, including Stripe founders Patrick and John Collison, Y Combinator founder Paul Graham, and LinkedIn co-founder Reid Hoffman. The response was as you might expect: Fast Grants was immediately swamped by applications. After less than a week, the group stopped all applications, having granted all $12 million they initially had available. They may reopen applications if they secure more funding to distribute. Fast Grants are now funding a whole range of projects: vaccine development at Kyoto University; a University of Toronto study to validate a saliva test for the novel coronavirus; a project at UC Berkeley to conduct a randomized study of spread and infection rates in the Bay Area; research at Vancouver General Hospital to study heart injury in Covid-19 patients; a study at Stanford University to develop better point-of-care tests; and 62 others. This sort of approach — giving out lots of money, very fast, with a very streamlined process for understanding what makes a grant opportunity valuable — is called rapid-response grant making. It can be a great way to put money in the hands of those who need it fast and without bureaucracy. It also raises some bigger questions about the world’s coronavirus response and about the whole way we do science. Grant making, in general, happens slowly. That’s true of grants from foundations for philanthropy and grants from the government for basic research. The months-long process of securing funding absorbs the time and attention of people whose work is sorely needed. Faster grants could be better for everyone.  There are trade-offs to compressing a months-long project into a matter of hours. Each grant can’t get in-depth review, and promising ideas will inarguably be overlooked. So far, because of the overwhelming demand, less than 1 percent of grants were funded, which is a much worse rate than in typical grant making. (The team is at work securing more funding to offer some of the most promising projects that were left out.) But despite those problems, there’s reason to believe that fast grant making beats slow grant making — and not just when we’re in the middle of an emergency. A process with quick turnaround is much more respectful of everyone’s time and ultimately healthier for science and for society. “Fast Grants is about restoring our capacity to respond to emergencies, and I believe the future will show that we will need this capacity time and again,” Cowen told me.  To be eligible for a Fast Grant, you have to be a principal investigator at an “academic institution” already at work on a project that could help in the next six months with the Covid-19 pandemic and in need of additional funding to complete it. When you submit a proposal, it’s assigned to a volunteer reviewer from a team of 20 academic experts led by Stanford biochemistry professor Silvana Konermann. The application, she told me, was “designed to take maybe 30 minutes, maybe up to an hour” for scientists, because “the people who are really busy working on Covid, they don’t have time right now to be working on grants.”  You do not need to work in the United States, and many grants have been made to researchers in other countries. Fast Grants promised that your part of the application — where you explained the research that you were conducting — should take around 30 minutes. They then promised that their part — reviewing the grants and offering money to the most promising ones — would take less than two days (except for the very first grants, which were not made for five days so that the team of specialists reviewing the grants would have time to get a sense of how strong the average application was).  That’s a dramatic change from how most research grant making works. It takes months to prepare an application for an NIH grant. It used to be the case that more than 50 percent of NIH grant applications were approved, but research has grown and the pool of grant money hasn’t, so now it’s only about 20 percent. That means researchers have to apply to lots and lots of potential grant sources if they want to keep their projects funded. Grant applications fill a quarter to a half of a scientist’s working hours. But there is historical precedent for the Fast Grants model. During World War II, the US created the National Defense Research Committee (NDRC), whose job was to fund research and development for weapons we’d use in warfare. By most criteria, it was an astonishing success: It funded the research that became critical wartime tools like radar, as well as early research into the atomic bomb. And the NDRC made grants practically overnight. The Fast Grants website, which cites the NDRC as an inspiration, quotes a memoir by Vannevar Bush, who led the program at the time. “Within a week NDRC could review the project,” he wrote. “The next day the director could authorize, the business office could send out a letter of intent, and the actual work could start.” Why the obsession with speed? When it comes to the coronavirus, days matter. Epidemiologists have suggested that if we’d started social distancing just a few weeks earlier, tens of thousands of deaths could have been averted. And helping an effective test, treatment, or vaccine get developed faster could mean reopening the economy sooner — which will mean millions more Americans have jobs, food, and material security. Getting money out to scientists as fast as possible is always a matter of life or death, but right now the stakes are higher than ever. Skeptics of rapid-response grant making argue that cutting down the approval process typically means that reviewers are forced to rely on vague signals of research quality instead of deeply digging into the relevant medicine and evaluating projects on their merits. They might, for example, approve all applications from prestigious researchers or universities, excluding important research done by a less-established researcher. There’s some merit to this criticism, but it misses an important point: Standard grant making also has this problem, despite the months-long delays in the process at various points. In fact, studies show that above some threshold of grant quality, there is virtually no agreement among reviewers about which projects are the best ones. There’s also almost no correlation between how projects “scored” and how often the research that resulted from the projects was cited.  That suggests that lots of review time is effectively wasted. Sorting the “pretty good” projects from the bad ones is worthwhile, but after that, even spending a lot of time doesn’t result in funding the best of the best. That makes research grants uniquely well-suited for a fast grant-making program that, in an emergency like this one, should just fund everything above a basic quality threshold instead of trying to tease out which projects are best. Fast Grants had a team of 20 researchers to review the applications, and each application they accepted was looked over by at least three of them. “It was very much rigorous peer review, it was just accelerated,” Konermann told me. They tried to fund a range of projects. “This is a new virus, and we don’t know what is going to work,” Konermann said. “Drug development, vaccine development, very clinical work, some basic virology, understanding the immune responses and whether people become resistant ... because we’re funding such a variety of approaches, the chances that at least one of them is going to meaningfully help is really good.” It’s great that a small group of people were able to set up and execute a project like this, distributing $12 million in two weeks to promising coronavirus projects. (Stripe provided software for the applicants and for the reviewers, Konermann’s team did the reviewing, and Tyler Cowen at Emergent Ventures, Mercatus Center, made the final decisions to distribute the money.)  It’s also deeply frustrating that they needed to. If there are thousands of projects to help with the coronavirus in progress at established research universities, many of them positioned to deliver results in the next six months, why does it take a few private philanthropists to get them the money they need? The $2 trillion US stimulus contained little money for scientific research, even though spending more on this kind of work earlier might have meant not needing to spend as much on getting businesses and consumers through a major economic downturn. Why weren’t we faster to get scientists the money for coronavirus research? And why is scientific grant funding so slow the rest of the time? I’ve written before about how, in the absence of a strong response from the US government, philanthropists are saving lives by taking on the responsibilities that the government should have handled. I think Fast Grants is yet another example of that.  And we should be frustrated that we needed such a project. “The NIH and the NSF have also started programs that are a lot faster than their normal processes, but those are generally just starting now,” Konermann told me. “They haven’t gone into effect as much for basic research. It was clear to me from talking to some colleagues that many of them hadn’t gotten funding yet, even though they were working on Covid.” No scientist whose work might produce a vaccine, a treatment, or a better test should be spending weeks on grant applications or waiting weeks for answers. The government could still step in on this front. Fast Grants ended up funding only a tiny fraction of the project proposals they got, even though Collison told me that the “median application was super strong.” In just one week, they were flooded with more than 4,000 proposals, and they spent the $12 million allocated for the project very quickly, with 67 awards made.  The coronavirus crisis highlights a system that was broken long before the coronavirus crisis began.  When it takes nine months of work to apply for an NIH grant and months more to hear back about whether you received it, when scientists at the peak of their careers are spending half their time writing grant applications, that waste and delay cost us lives even when there’s no coronavirus. It means that new cancer treatments take longer to be discovered and tested. It means that bad ideas can’t be rejected quickly and good ideas can’t be published quickly.  The crisis we’re in might also present us with an opportunity to fix a broken system. If 30-minute grant applications really give reviewers enough information to identify promising ideas, and if it’s possible for reviewers to get back to grant applicants within two days, that isn’t just something we should be doing for the duration of the crisis. It’s also the direction we should be moving research toward in general.  “I think there is space for additional mechanisms that could be faster, shorter, take less time,” Konermann told me. “This was a bit of an experiment to see if that was possible at all. It ended up working better even than I had hoped. It would be nice to have a diversity of funding mechanisms.” Scientists could have more flexibility in pursuing projects and hopefully spend more of their time doing science.  “I don’t think all scientific grant making should operate on this basis. But probably 5 or 10 percent should or maybe more. Currently just about zero percent of the system uses such a speedy yet rigorous method, and when a fast-moving problem such as Covid-19 arises, we are caught unready,” Cowen told me.  And even if the government does not make any such changes, there are some important lessons here for philanthropists. Responding quickly to grant applicants has a lot of benefits. It means you don’t waste the time of potential recipients, and projects don’t spend months lingering in limbo.  It is possible to get things done much faster than we’re accustomed to, and that’s a lesson we can hopefully carry with us long past the end of the current crisis.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Prolonged school closures associated with the coronavirus pandemic are likely to have a major and negative affect on children’s learning, according to a wide range of experts — leaving some students behind academically for years to come, and even leading to meaningful lost income over the course of their lifetimes. Problems are likely to be especially concentrated in younger children and lower-income households, but not necessarily limited to them.  Yet this has been mostly absent from the national debate over social distancing, which has tended to focus narrowly on the idea of opening up “the economy” rather than the nation’s schools. Even states that have not issued full-scale stay-at-home orders have generally closed schools, and the Trump administration’s reopening plan envisions bringing back movie theaters before educational institutions.  That’s a blinkered approach. Schools, of course, should not reopen if it can’t be done safely. But when balancing the risks and rewards of different kinds of activities, the fact that prolonged school closures are likely doing real long-term harm to an entire cohort of American children deserves more emphasis. Schools closed at different points in March in different states, but they are currently not operating anywhere in the country even in states that have made a big show of staying open for business during the pandemic. Twenty-eight states have formally canceled the entire rest of the 2019-2020 school year, with three more “recommending” closures through the end of the year and the rest — a list that includes blue states like New York and New Jersey as well as red ones like West Virginia and Wyoming — claim they’ll be reopening in May.  Virtually all of those states, however, have already postponed their initial plans to reopen, so it’s far from clear that a mid-May reopening will happen.  Washington state has formally notified schools to prepare for the possibility that they won’t reopen in the fall, as has Maryland a bit less formally. It’s hard to find a state clearly committed to being back open by Labor Day.  The Trump administration, however, wants to reopen stores, gyms, and restaurants and relax strict mandates that white-collar work be done from home as Phase 1 of reopening. A move to reopening schools would not happen until Phase 2, which requires case volumes to continue falling even as Phase 1 reopenings take place. In other words, if a state opens up over the summer and then cases start rising, schools won’t be able to reopen. States could potentially be stuck in a stop-and-go implementation of Phase 1 measures with schools left as an afterthought.    Meanwhile, school systems have been taking stabs at distance learning. But this is not something America’s corps of teachers or principals has really trained for, and implementation is spotty. The potential for distance learning also varies by the age of the student. But it also seems likely to pose particular difficulties for lower-income students, kids with unstable family environments, or kids who lack strong intrinsic motivation — exactly the populations whose educational outcomes we worry most about.  Indeed, in many circles there is worry about the impact of something as banal as summer vacation on these populations —  a starting point for thinking about the consequences of months of closures.  There is a long-standing line of research in education scholarship about “summer learning loss,” whereby kids appear to regress academically during the annual summer vacation. This seems like the best model we have for what happens when schools shut down for months at a time. (Unlike in a typical summer, however, most kids are not currently enrolled in any non-school organized activities, either.) Much of the literature on summer learning loss is especially focused on the idea that while kids from low-income families start out behind academically, the gap is especially likely to increase during the summer. This literature has provoked a long-running debate about experiments with year-long schooling (that have mostly proved disappointing) or else more targeted interventions designed to help ensure that even low-income families have enriching opportunities.  But there are also skeptics about summer learning loss theory, with Paul T. von Hippel, a professor at the University of Texas’s LBJ School of Public Affairs, leading the charge with an influential 2019 article asking, “Is summer learning loss real?”  He argues that the apparent learning loss is an artifact of old-fashioned test designs and that if you look at more modern data, there’s no real evidence of backsliding. It’s true, he says, that children don’t learn much new stuff over the summer, but this is true for both poor and non-poor kids. Gaps between the performance of poor and non-poor kids thus have nothing to do with summer vacation and, if anything, provide an opportunity to close the achievement gap by giving poor kids bonus school time over the summer.  So I asked Hippel if he had a more optimistic perspective to share that would reassure people who are worried about kids losing school time.  “I do have a somewhat different perspective, but I’m afraid it’s not more optimistic,” he said. It turns out that Hippel’s critique of summer learning loss theory is pretty narrow and technical. His view is that nobody learns much during the summer, so summer learning loss doesn’t explain anything about the achievement gap.   But the reason kids aren’t learning much over the summer is they generally aren’t trying. The current school closures are not an extended vacation. Students are, in theory, engaging in distance learning, both online and through paper handouts. But in the overwhelming majority of cases, these distance learning paradigms are likely going to be less effective than traditional school. And the problems will likely be most severe for lower-income students, whose parents are least likely to be working from home and least likely to have the personal knowledge and wherewithal to act as effective homeschoolers. Von Hippel notes that we do have evidence from other kinds of school year disruptions that all point to problems. A two-month teacher’s strike in New York in 1968 left students two months behind where prior cohorts had been when they returned to school. In 1990, the Francophone schools in Belgium closed for a strike while the Flemish-speaking ones did not. Looking at Belgian kids who were in school during the strike, French speakers were noticeably more likely to need to repeat a grade and made less progress into higher education later in life. Test scores suffered when Hurricane Katrina closed schools in and around New Orleans.  Having kids out of school is bad, and especially bad for poor children. I thought Michael Petrilli, a fellow at the conservative Hoover Institution and a profound skeptic of the status quo in public education, might have some happier thoughts on the disrupted schedule. But that’s not the case.  “All of this time away from school is going to be particularly devastating for poor and working-class youngsters,” he wrote in the Washington Post. “Their parents are often working the sorts of jobs that don’t have the option of being done virtually, and their homes are more likely to lack high-speed Internet and ample devices.” Andrew Rotherham, the co-founder of Bellwether Education Partner and an education policy staffer in the Clinton administration, offered the most optimistic assessment I found, telling me that for middle-class parents of older kids, “this will be not that big of a deal.”  Even so, he says he’s very worried about “early grades where we’re focused on literacy, which really is foundational to your experience in school and life” as well as for low-income kids of all ages. Many in this group count on schools not just for education but for a range of social services, and their parents may have limited math and literacy competency. He also notes that beyond the limited technological resources available to lower-income families, we see even some well-resourced school districts, like Montgomery County in the DC suburbs, don’t really seem to be getting the job done in terms of remote learning. Just a reminder that these are two of the highest capacity districts in the country - so should trigger some concern about what millions of students in less-resourced places are experiencing:https://t.co/FrNULvDJtI Some other districts and charter school networks are doing better than this, of course. The point is simply that both the quality of and access to distance learning are highly variable. And even when the distance curricula are good, it’s not clear how much benefit younger kids will get from them if their parents aren’t able to supervise them closely. It’s not possible to boil down the value of education to just dollars and cents. But economists who’ve tried generally have found that in high-income countries, an extra year of education is worth about a 10 percent boost in income.  If you take that literally, the implication is that two or three months worth of school closure will cost today’s cohort of schoolchildren thousands of dollars a year in lost earnings for their entire lives. Those thousands of dollars multiplied across millions of kids add up to tens of billions in lost income each year for decades.  That’s a bit simplistic, especially because, as experts all seem to agree, the harms of school closures won’t be felt evenly. But any back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that closures ought to loom larger in the national discourse as a costly aspect of social distancing — albeit one whose costs accrue over the long term rather than the immediate future.  President Trump’s guidelines for reopening the country, by contrast, have sit-down restaurants and movie theaters coming back in Phase 1 and schools not returning until Phase 2. I miss going to the movies, but the movie theater industry simply doesn’t have a very strong claim to being important to the country’s long-term economic future. Nor is the closure of movie theaters fueling vicious class divides in American society.  Schools should reopen when it’s safe to do so. But getting them back up and running should be a relatively high priority, rather than an afterthought.   Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Gov. Larry Hogan (R-MD) followed President Donald Trump’s advice and took coronavirus testing into his own hands. Trump attacked him anyway. Trump began Monday’s White House coronavirus briefing by criticizing Hogan — chair of the National Governors Association — for turning to a foreign source to buy coronavirus tests. “The governor of Maryland didn’t really understand,” Trump said, describing a call that Vice President Mike Pence had with governors earlier in the day to encourage them to do more to increase coronavirus testing on their own. “He didn’t really understand what was going on.” "The governor of Maryland didn't really understand. He didn't really understand what was going on" -- Trump begins the April 20 #TrumpPressBriefing by attacking Republican Gov. Larry Hogan of Maryland, who has been critical of the federal coronavirus response. pic.twitter.com/OTMwj6v5Sp Trump was upset because Hogan and his wife — Yumi Hogan, a Korean immigrant — not only announced earlier Monday that they purchased 500,000 test kits from suppliers in South Korea, but also because Hogan indirectly criticized him during an interview with the New York Times. On Saturday, First Lady Yumi Hogan and I stood on the tarmac at @BWI_Airport to welcome the first ever Korean Air passenger plane, carrying a very important payload of LabGun #COVID19 test kits which will give MD the capability of performing half a million coronavirus tests. pic.twitter.com/Elf0ADIRnJ “The No. 1 problem facing us is lack of testing,” Hogan told the Times. “We can’t open up our states without ramping up testing.” “It should not have been this difficult,” he added.  CNN reported that Hogan’s wife, Yumi Hogan, “not only used her native language to help secure the tests but also helped negotiate the deal.” “The administration made it clear over and over again they want the states to take the lead, and we have to go out and do it ourselves, and that’s exactly what we did,” Hogan said during a news conference on Monday. Experts say the US needs to triple its testing capacity before it will be safe for businesses to reopen, but the number of tests completed daily has remained largely flat for the past month. Trump doesn’t seem to have an answer to this puzzle other than to turn the tables on governors. For instance, Trump trolled governors on Monday by flipping through a packet of papers that he said contained information about how they can better utilize lab capacity in their states.  Trump flips through a packet of paper that's meant to illustrate all the labs state governments could use to do more coronavirus testing (in other words it's a form of passing the buck) pic.twitter.com/brkRgvwqPa But during an interview on CNN that coincided with the briefing, Hogan dismissed the value of the information Trump is sharing with governors, saying, “most of the governors already knew where the lab facilities were in their states.” Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan:“Most of the governors already knew where the lab facilities were in their states. …most of the ones that they sent me in Maryland were all federal facilities…none of which were state-owned labs or facilities where we could actually do any testing." pic.twitter.com/UpO2IbeBDw Trump, however, refuses to acknowledge there’s more he could do. Later during Monday’s briefing, the president suggested that governors like Hogan who have urged him to ramp up national testing efforts are part of a political conspiracy to bring him down. Trump suggests that demands for more testing, just like requests for ventilators, are part of a political conspiracy meant to take him down -- not necessary measures to respond to a virus that has killed more than 40,000 Americans pic.twitter.com/uFFBnqwgQP Trump’s line in recent days has been to claim, without evidence, that other countries are reaching out to the US for help because testing here is going so great. Hogan’s announcement suggested that talk is a bunch of nonsense — and Trump wasn’t pleased. At another point during Monday’s briefing, CNN’s Kaitlin Collins asked White House officials why Hogan would need to turn to South Korea for testing kits if it’s true, as Trump claims, that states already have enough testing capacity to begin the process of reopening business and schools. Nobody had a good answer.  .@kaitlancollins: If we have enough tests now for everyone to go into phase one, why is the governor of Maryland having to get tests from South Korea? HHS OFFICIAL GIROIR: "I don't know what the governor of Maryland is doing in South Korea but there's excess capacity every day" pic.twitter.com/gnIWfewtTs Later, Trump returned to the podium and said that Hogan should’ve just called Mike Pence.  “The governor of Maryland could’ve called Mike Pence and saved a lot of money,” Trump said. “I think he needed to get a little knowledge.” But if it’s true that states have much more testing capacity than they’re currently utilizing, that hasn’t yet showed up in the daily testing numbers. And until it does, governors who don’t have connections in South Korea will likely find Trump’s bluster to be cold comfort. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   Facebook is taking down some event pages promoting controversial anti-stay-at-home protests that are taking place across the US — but it’s only doing this in areas where the events violate local Covid-19 social distancing rules. Facebook’s selective response mirrors a larger fracture across the country as the Trump administration has given conflicting guidance about how and when restrictions should be lifted and has largely left these decisions up to individual state politicians.  The move comes after Facebook faced criticism for allowing people to coordinate anti-quarantine protests on its platform. Public health officials, state officials, and health care workers say these protests are putting people’s lives at risk: By bringing people together in large crowds, they increase the chances of spreading the highly contagious disease. Others, including President Trump, have defended the protests, saying in a press conference on Monday that the protesters “love our country” and “want to get back to work.” Facebook’s decision to take down these posts comes at a time when the company is trying to step up as a leader in using big data to battle the virus’s spread while also battling efforts by some of its users to spread Covid-19 misinformation.  Facebook confirmed to Recode that it will take down some posts organizing protests in areas where the events go against local law — and for now, it’s only done so in California, New Jersey, and Nebraska. In other states, such as Pennsylvania, users are continuing to promote anti-quarantine protests on Facebook, with as many as 60,000 members in one Pennsylvania group alone. In response to questions from Recode about why Facebook took down some posts but not others and concerns raised about them doing so, Facebook spokesperson Andy Stone sent the following statement: “Unless government prohibits the event during this time, we allow it to be organized on Facebook. For this same reason, events that defy government’s guidance on social distancing aren’t allowed on Facebook.”  The governors’ offices of New Jersey and Nebraska told Fox News and CNN that they had been in touch with Facebook about social distancing, but that they did not ask Facebook to take down the events.  In recent weeks, a small number of people across the US have taken to the streets to protest Covid-19 shelter-in-place orders, arguing that people should be allowed to return to work and resume normal life, despite the risks to public health in doing so. Millions of Americans are facing economic hardships after an unprecedented shutdown of public life and nonessential businesses. While polls show that a majority of Americans across party lines are afraid of prematurely ending social distancing, these protests are spreading across states. So far, anti-quarantine protesters number in the thousands, but they are a vocal minority.  These protests have been organized and gained publicity via Facebook’s events feature. While many of them appear to be organic posts started by concerned locals, reports by the Guardian and the Washington Post have revealed that many of them were actually started by established right-wing and pro-gun political groups. In photographs and videos of these protests, many people are standing closer than 6 feet apart and without masks covering their faces, which poses a known public health risk to themselves and others. In one anti-lockdown protest in Colorado, local health care workers clashed with protesters, standing in front of them in their medical scrubs and protective gear.  Protest participants have argued they have a constitutional right to assemble. That’s one of the reasons why nonpartisan policy experts have raised concerns about precedents Facebook could set in shutting down efforts to organize these protests on its platform. Facebook has historically been a powerful platform for organizing protests in the US and elsewhere, from Black Lives Matter actions to the 2017 Charlottesville Unite the Right Rally — a violent white supremacist gathering that resulted in one murder and several injuries. (Facebook eventually took down the main event page a day before the rally took place.) Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg has repeatedly defended the company’s role in protecting free speech on its platform, particularly around politics. Many are arguing that the anti-quarantine protests should fall under that protection and that people’s civil liberties are at risk if Facebook shuts down such events. But others say that while individual rights to protest are at stake, so is the health of the public. “The problem isn’t civil liberties because these groups can build their own webpages and carry out conversation there,” Joan Donovan, the director of Harvard University’s Technology and Social Change Research Project, told Recode. “The overarching question is, ‘does Facebook have a responsibility to protect their users from health misinformation?’ If you think they should, then these actions are the correct course of action.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  There is something challenging to communicate in coronavirus reporting: Nearly 41,000 people have died from Covid-19 in the United States (and many more will die), and those deaths have come despite the unprecedented social distancing measures being taken across the country. Without them, the loss of life would surely be higher. Unless or until scientists have data to back it up, though, the impact of social distancing is as much hypothesis and intuition as scientific fact. Luckily, a new study out of Hong Kong indicates that the precautious taken there — similar to those taken in the US, like closed schools, travel restrictions, mask-wearing, and general distancing — have had a measurable effect on the spread of Covid-19 and the flu. That should give people confidence that social distancing is working, even with its painful economic toll. But as Americans consider when and how to begin relaxing those measures, they will have to balance health concerns with economic ones. That’s where another new study, this one from economists at the University of Chicago and Penn State, comes in handy. It reaches a useful conclusion: The best way to ease these lockdowns and alleviate the economic losses without inviting an untenable spike in cases and fatalities is to do it gradually — over a matter of months. Taken together, these new studies offer a picture of America’s socially distant future: Even as people try to resume something resembling normal life, it will take time — and precautionary measures will have to be maintained. Hong Kong has taken many of the same steps the United States has to stave off the Covid-19 threat. It started closing schools and restricting travel from the Chinese hot spots in January. It has added new migration rules as well as mandatory quarantines for overseas travelers in the last few months and set up protocols for civil servants to work from home. In addition, the public has responded by changing their behavior. According to this new study, led by researchers from the WHO Collaborating Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Control in Hong Kong, most people say they are avoiding crowded places (85 percent in March) and staying home as much as possible (75 percent). People are practicing better hygiene, too: The percentage who said they wear masks jumped from 75 percent in January to 99 percent in March, and the percentage who say they wash their hands more than usual leaped from 71 percent to 95 percent.  And as a result, local transmission in Hong Kong appears to be quite low. The metric used to measure transmission — which estimates how many people someone carrying the virus will infect — has hovered around 1. The goal is to push the threshold below 1, which if sustained will lead to the outbreak being contained. But even holding at around 1 is a success, compared to what we’d expect in nature (the virus has an estimated R0 of 2 to 2.25, though it’s still not clear exactly how contagious it is.) The main reason Hong Kong saw a spike in Covid-19 cases in mid-March was because there was a sudden surge in cases imported from other countries (and Hong Kong started testing asymptomatic inbound travelers and requiring quarantines in response). This chart shows that locally sourced cases remain quite low and steady, allowing for the increase you would expect after people brought the virus onto the island from elsewhere. But what’s great about this study is the authors don’t just rely on Covid-19 cases. They also tracked influenza infections over the same period and they found a notable downturn compared to prior years when schools were closed but no other social distancing measures were taken. Flu transmission dropped by 44 percent in February 2020 versus the 10-15-percent drops seen in 2009 and 2017-2018 during previous flu pandemics. Our study suggests that measures taken to control the spread of COVID-19 have been effective and have also had a substantial impact on influenza transmission in Hong Kong. Although the transmission dynamics and modes of transmission of COVID-19 have not been precisely elucidated, they are likely to share at least some characteristics with influenza virus transmission, because both viruses are directly transmissible respiratory pathogens with similar viral shedding dynamics.23 The measures implemented in Hong Kong are less drastic than those used to contain transmission in mainland China, and are probably more feasible in many other locations worldwide. If these measures and population responses can be sustained, avoiding fatigue among the general population, they could meaningfully mitigate the impact of a local epidemic of COVID-19. So social distancing — as defined by general crowd avoidance and some closures, paired with sanitary precautions — certainly appears to work, if this Hong Kong data is to be believed. The next question then is: How do countries start reopening? Luckily, as the public conversation about easing social distancing picks up, economists from the University of Chicago and Penn State have come out with a statistical model that tries to find an ideal balance between relaxing lockdowns to reduce the economic toll of the pandemic while also attempting to minimize the loss of life. It’s both a simple model (as the authors acknowledge) and also a highly technical paper, so read at your own interest. They assume there is no cure available but widespread testing is. Their conclusion is pretty straightforward: “[T]he optimal policy prescribes a lockdown starting two weeks after the outbreak, covering 60% of the population after 1 month. The lockdown is kept tight for about a full month, and is subsequently gradually withdrawn, covering 20% of the population 3 months after the initial outbreak.” That’s easy enough to comprehend: To balance output and health risks, you start with a general lockdown and then gradually lighten up over a matter of months, with the most vulnerable people likely remaining in near-isolation for the longest period. But it was another passage in the paper that left the biggest impression on me. The length of the lockdown, and the rate at which you relax it, depends highly on the statistical value you assign to a human life. The authors are clear that they ascribed a lower value because the people most vulnerable to dying from Covid-19 are older and have underlying health conditions. To be rigorous about these estimates, that makes some sense. But if you start assigning more value to those lives, then the length of the lockdown that would be desirable grows substantially: The value of the statistical life we use in our benchmark case (20 times annual GDP per capita) is on the low range of the estimates in the literature. Following Hall, Jones, and Klenow (2020), our benchmark value takes into account that the majority of the victims of the virus have a below average life expectancy. A higher value of statistical life (say 30 times annual GDP per capita), makes the abandonment of the lockdown more gradual, taking a bit more than six months to be totally abandoned. Considering a much larger value, in the order of 80 to 140 times the annual GDP per capita, implies a very strict lockdown that lasts for about 9 months, and a year after still has about 15% of the population in lockdown. This is the calculation society will be asked to make over the next year or more. How do we balance the need to relax social distancing in order to begin climbing out of an unprecedented economic crisis that has affected millions, with the inevitable surge in Covid-19 cases, and deaths, that we would expect to result? The takeaway of these two papers is clear: We must maintain certain safeguards (especially hygiene and limiting crowds), and when we start to relax some of these restrictions, we must do it gradually. We must also be nimble: Hong Kong initially sent civil servants back to work but then reverted to work-from-home protocols after its March spike. Restaurants didn’t face restrictions on their capacity in late March, when other social establishments were ordered closed for the first time.  As some people have put it, the end of social distancing will not be a switch (on, then off) but a dial (more, then less, then maybe more). As Donald McNeil Jr. wrote for the New York Times, after talking to more than 20 public health experts: It was impossible to avoid gloomy forecasts for the next year. The scenario that Mr. Trump has been unrolling at his daily press briefings — that the lockdowns will end soon, that a protective pill is almost at hand, that football stadiums and restaurants will soon be full — is a fantasy, most experts said. “We face a doleful future,” said Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg, a former president of the National Academy of Medicine. Right now, the public is still on the side of preserving social distancing, despite the economic costs. But we must remind ourselves, and continue to remind ourselves, that we are in this for the long haul. This story appears in VoxCare, a newsletter from Vox on the latest twists and turns in America’s health care debate. Sign up to get VoxCare in your inbox along with more health care stats and news.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Worldwide, the number of coronavirus cases topped 2.4 million. The United States accounts for nearly 762,000 of those recorded infections, as of April 20.  The United States is very much still in the middle of a public health crisis, yet the pain of the pandemic is not spread equally across the country. That’s why protesters in some states are beginning to agitate against the lockdown restrictions that have slowed the spread of the outbreak but have also suffocated the economy.  Protesters in Colorado, Texas, and elsewhere are demanding the government reopen schools and businesses in their states, even though public health officials say doing so too soon risks a surge of infections and that any rollback must be gradual. Even though recent polling has shown that a majority of Americans fear what might happen if stay-at-home orders are lifted too soon, the fault lines are growing deeper, with some of the tumult being fomented by the president himself.  Experts say that any plans to reopen will need to include large-scale testing and contact tracing, along with ways to show who has been infected by the disease and whether they’ve gained any immunity. Antibody tests are starting to be rolled out, but questions remain about their accuracy and availability. But a little more economic relief may be on the way as Congress and the White House near another stimulus package, which will include hundreds of billions more for small businesses. The small-business assistance passed in the first coronavirus stimulus bill has already run out of money. Here’s what you need to know today. Maybe nothing sums up the current moment quite like these photographs from Alyson McClaran, a photojournalist in Denver, Colorado, of health care workers in surgical masks and scrubs standing in the middle of city streets to block people — many in cars — who came out to protest against the stay-at-home measures.  Health care workers stand in the street in counter-protest to hundreds of people who gathered at the State Capitol to demand the stay-at-home order be lifted in Denver, Colo., on Sunday, April 19, 2020. Photos by Alyson McClaran pic.twitter.com/yanunDrVKj Demonstrators across the country — from Maryland to Indiana to Texas — gathered outside state capitols over the weekend in defiance of lockdown restrictions. They’re angry about the shutdown measures that have upended the US economy, shuttering businesses and leaving at least 22 million people unemployed. These protesters are still a minority, organized largely by right-wing and anti-government activist groups. But they’re an increasingly vocal and visible minority, with echoes of the early days of the Tea Party. And they are being egged on by President Donald Trump, who tweeted last week about “liberating” states. Rolling out the federal government’s new guidelines for how to gradually reopen some parts of the country, Trump said he would ultimately defer to governors on when it was safe to open up. Yet his tweets seem to contradict that.   Public health officials in his own administration have said that attempting to lift stay-at-home measures too quickly could cause coronavirus cases to spike once again. Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease expert, told Good Morning America Sunday that, unless the US gets the virus under control, “the real recovery economically is not gonna happen.” “So what you do if you jump the gun, and go into a situation where you have a big spike, you’re going to set yourself back,” Fauci said. “So as painful as it is to go by the careful guidelines of gradually phasing into a reopening, it’s gonna backfire [if you don’t].” Right now, most Americans agree, according to a recent poll by the Pew Research Center. Some countries, including Germany, have begun to ease their lockdown restrictions, but they’re taking baby steps: allowing some businesses to reopen with limits on the number of customers allowed in and everyone still expected to follow all other social-distancing restrictions. Bars are still closed, and big gatherings are still banned.  Governors and public health experts say that taking even tentative steps toward reopening will require greater testing capacity — more than double or triple what the US is doing now. One study conducted by a panel of experts at Harvard estimated that the US must be able to complete 5 million tests a day by early June and 20 million tests per day by late July to “fully mobilize the economy.” The US is currently conducting about 150,000 tests per day, according to the COVID Tracking Project, for a population of about 330 million.  The Trump administration has said states must shoulder the testing burden. But governors have resisted, saying the lack of coordination across the country and states’ lack of resources are making that an impossible task to achieve. States need things like swabs and reagents to conduct the tests, which rely on manufacturers and supply chains.  “It’s not accurate to say there’s plenty of testing out there, and the governors should just get it done,” Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan ​said​ on State of the Union​ Sunday.​ “That’s just not being straightforward.” Hogan announced a deal with suppliers in South Korea to import 500,000 tests to Maryland. Per the New York Times, he was able to secure the deal in large part thanks to his wife, “a Korean immigrant who speaks fluent Korean, had been on the phone in the middle of the night helping to secure the final deal with two labs to sell Maryland the tests.” Trump has said he will use the Defense Production Act to increase swab production by 20 million per month (though these shortages are nothing new).  And beyond testing for new infections, the US still needs a better grasp on who might have recovered from the virus. Serological tests, which test for antibodies, might help gather this information and show who has gained some immunity. This may allow some people to return to the workforce.  There are still a lot of questions about the coronavirus, including whether and for how long it might confer immunity, but there’s hope these antibody tests can help piece together this information. And serological tests are starting to become available: New York is beginning to test antibodies this week from a 3,000-person sample. But there are a lot of questions about their accuracy and efficacy. The Food and Drug Administration has issued emergency use authorization to just four tests, but there are some 90 tests now on the market that haven’t had prior review, according to the Washington Post. Some critics are saying that it’s now such a free-for-all that it could be even more dangerous if the tests don’t work or offer false results, leading people to believe they have some immunity if they do not. This is especially worrisome if states are relying on these results to determine whether and how to lift lockdowns.  The FDA and other government agencies are now trying to vet the tests, but the risks are real. Just look at the United Kingdom, which paid $20 million for at-home antibody kits from China. They didn’t work. Last week, the Paycheck Protection Program ran out of money. The program, which earmarked $349 billion for small businesses, was included in the $2 trillion coronavirus stimulus passed in March. The initiative offers loans to businesses that are forgivable if the businesses maintain their payrolls and essential expenses. But with so many businesses shut down, demand for the program has exceeded the funds available. Congress wants to give the initiative much more cash, but Republicans and Democrats have been at odds over what to include in this latest round of stimulus. There are signs the two sides are coming close to an agreement on an approximately $450 billion package. It will include about $300 billion in additional money for the Paycheck Protection Program, some of which will be set aside for minority- and veteran-owned and rural businesses. The bill will also include an additional $60 billion for another emergency loan program, another $75 billion to assist hospitals, and $25 billion to expand testing. Both Democrats and Republicans agree that the small business loan program needs a refresher, but Democrats had held out for more money for hospitals, testing, and for states and local governments that are having to cut their budgets after the expense of battling the coronavirus. Right now, it appears as though the Democrats got the GOP to budge on hospitals, but the states may have to wait for the next stimulus package. Captain Tom Moore is turning 100 years old at the end of April. To celebrate his centennial, the war veteran walked 100 laps in his garden to raise money for the United Kingdom’s National Health Service.  Moore, who lives in Bedfordshire, England, originally wanted to raise £1,000 ($1,200). In the end, he raised more than £20 million — that is, about $25 million.  “The sun will shine on you again and the clouds will go away,” he told reporters, referring to the coronavirus crisis. He's done it!Captain Tom Moore, a 99-year-old war veteran who is walking 100 laps of his garden before his 100th birthday to raise money for the NHS, has completed his challenge!He has raised more than £12m for the health servicehttps://t.co/eUiQiX5AAP pic.twitter.com/T4WOWCAqOk Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Barack Obama left office in January 2017. The coronavirus didn’t arrive in the United States until three years later. Yet over the weekend, President Donald Trump repeatedly tried to pin blame on his predecessor for the testing failures and shortage of medical supplies that have marred his administration’s response to the pandemic. “I started with an obsolete, broken system from a previous administration,” Trump claimed during his daily press briefing on Saturday, later adding: “Unfortunately, some partisan voices are attempting to politicize the issue of testing, which they shouldn’t be doing, because I inherited broken junk. Just as they did with ventilators where we had virtually none, and the hospitals were empty.” "We started off with a broken system. We inherited a broken, terrible system. And I always say it -- our cupboards were bare. We had very little in our stockpile": Trump tries to blame Obama, who left office in 2017, for a virus that reached the US in 2020 pic.twitter.com/YwMSPkjmw8 Trump sounded the same theme on Sunday. Asked by ultra-sycophantic One America News Network if he sees the government’s testing failures as “a function of lax oversight from the Obama/Biden administration,” Trump indicated he does. “We inherited a lot of garbage,” Trump said. “We took, ah, they had tests that were no good, they had, all the stuff was no good. It came from somewhere, so whoever came up with it.” “Our stockpiles were empty,” he added. “We had horrible stockpiles, we had horrible ventilators, we had very few of them too ... CDC had obsolete tests, old tests, broken tests, and a mess.” This is totally nonsensical. The CDC couldn’t have bad tests left over from the Obama administration, because the coronavirus test didn’t exist until this year. And the stockpile was far from empty — its problem was that it was poorly maintained, an issue that rests on the Trump administration’s shoulders. Of course, it’s not surprising that Trump is trying to blame Obama. His political rise was fueled by pushing racist conspiracy theories about America’s first black president, and a central theme of Trump’s political life is trying to erase Obama’s legacy across a spectrum of issues. But even by Trump’s standards, the brazenness involved in this particular effort to rewrite history is jarring. So while it’s a sad commentary on our times that such an examination is even necessary, what follows is a look at why Obama is not, in fact, to blame for the coronavirus killing more people in America than in any other country. First of all, Trump was president for three full years before the first official coronavirus case was reported in the US on January 20, 2020. However, Trump failed to start replenishing the national stockpiles of ventilators, masks, and other medical supplies. (In fact, Trump actually fired the government’s pandemic response team in spring 2018.) Beyond that, it’s simply not the case that Obama left the national stockpiles empty. FactCheck.org recently detailed how news reports in 2016 described the warehouses that store the Strategic National Stockpile as “packed with stuff,” filled with “row after row of containers filled with mystery medications and equipment — including that one item everyone’s been talking about lately, ventilators.” Last month, Dr. Anthony Fauci said there were nearly 13,000 ventilators in the national stockpile. Some of them were broken down. That total may not have been enough to meet the demands created by the coronavirus, but even when it became clear that additional supply was required, Trump was slow to act. The Associated Press, citing a review of federal purchasing contracts, recently reported that federal agencies “largely waited until mid-March to begin placing bulk orders of N95 respirator masks, mechanical ventilators and other equipment needed by front-line health care workers.” “By that time, hospitals in several states were treating thousands of infected patients without adequate equipment and were pleading for shipments from the Strategic National Stockpile,” the AP added. So not only did Trump do nothing to replenish the national stockpile during his first three years in office, but he also waited nearly two months after the first US coronavirus case to begin addressing its shortfalls. Perhaps the federal government’s biggest coronavirus-related failure was the Center for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) testing mishaps. Instead of using kits developed by the World Health Organization (WHO), the CDC insisted on developing its own. But its initial tests didn’t work reliably, resulting in a delay that allowed the virus to spread across the country in a mostly undetected manner in February and early March. As previously mentioned, Trump on Sunday tried to blame Obama for this. Watch: "We inherited a lot of garbage ... horrible ventilators" -- Trump responds to a second question from ultra-sycophantic OAN, this one about coronavirus testing failures, by trying to shift blame to Obama (Obama left office in 2017 and the virus didn't reach the US until 2020) pic.twitter.com/II60SLGOrn But Trump’s talking point that the CDC “had obsolete tests, old tests, broken tests” because of Obama makes absolutely no sense. A test for the novel coronavirus obviously couldn’t be developed before the virus was discovered, which first happened in China in late 2019 — nearly three years after Obama left office. Responsibility for the CDC’s decision not to use the WHO coronavirus test and its subsequent failure to develop its own in January and February rest entirely with the organization and its leadership, including CDC Director Dr. Robert Redfield, whom Trump appointed to the role in March 2018. In addition, the Trump administration failed to follow a detailed pandemic response playbook put together by Obama’s National Security Council in 2016. A recent report from Politico detailed how following that document’s guidance could’ve resulted in the Trump administration responding in a quicker and more decisive manner: The playbook also repeatedly urges officials to question official numbers about the viral spread. “What is our level of confidence on the case detection rate?” reads one question. “Is diagnostic capacity keeping up?” But across January and much of February, Trump administration officials publicly insisted that their diagnostic efforts were sufficient to detect coronavirus. Officials now privately concede that the administration’s well-documented testing problems have contributed to the outbreak’s silent spread across the United States, and health experts say that diagnostic capacity is only now in late March catching up to the need. In a subsequent section, the playbook details steps to take if there’s evidence that the virus is spreading among humans, which the World Health Organization concluded by Jan. 22, or the U.S. government declared a public health emergency, which HHS Secretary Alex Azar did on Jan. 31. Under that timeline, the federal government by late January should have been taking a lead role in “coordination of workforce protection activities including… [personal protective equipment] determination, procurement and deployment.” Those efforts are only now getting underway, health workers and doctors say. Unnamed Trump officials quoted in the piece provide a variety of excuses for why the 2016 playbook was discarded — “it’s quite dated and has been superseded by strategic and operational biodefense policies published since,” one said — but let’s be real. The thought of using a playbook developed in the Obama years is antithetical to everything Trump is. Even if following it would’ve been in the best interests of the country, he wouldn’t do it. Perhaps the truest thing Trump has said during his presidency was this remark on March 13: “I don’t take responsibility at all.” Part of that approach to governance involves finding others to blame when things go wrong. In the case of the coronavirus, Trump’s list of scapegoats has included the media, Democratic governors, the WHO, China, and now Obama. Even if blaming Obama doesn’t make any sense (and it doesn’t), Trump clearly thinks it’s a politically useful talking point that takes some of the heat off him (and perhaps shifts some to Joe Biden). For this president, what matters is saying what’s necessary to win the news cycle — logical coherence or even a chronological sense of time be damned. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Don’t be fooled by Fox News, Donald Trump, or the same type of groups that produced the Tea Party a decade ago: The protesters taking to the streets against social distancing are a small minority of Americans — and their attitudes represent a fraction of public opinion.  In fact, America has done something remarkable in this moment: It has united. Last week, 81 percent of Americans told pollsters for a Politico/Morning Consult poll that the country “should continue to social distance for as long as is needed to curb the spread of coronavirus, even if it means continued damage to the economy.”  Let me repeat that: 81 percent of Americans agree. That’s an astounding figure.  An NBC poll found a lower rate at 60 percent, but still a solid majority. Large majorities of Democrats and independents are more concerned about the virus than the economy, as are about half of Republicans. This consensus is striking given that Americans live in an era when they’re divided along party lines on everything from climate change to the NFL. But continued vigilance is required. Trump will keep trying to divide Americans ahead of the election this fall. Fox will continue to air images that make the anti-social-distancing movement look mainstream. Well-funded conservative groups will gin up more events.  This is the same playbook that worked in 2009 when the conservative machine sparked the Tea Party, which shaped American policy for a decade. Tea Party politics delayed the recovery from the Great Recession, hobbled attempts to expand health care coverage that is desperately needed right now, and left the medical-supply stockpile under-funded, putting medical providers in grave danger as they fight to save the lives of Covid-19 patients.  The stakes are too high to fall for the same pantomime. Social-distancing supporters are the dominant movement. And the country needs to remember it.  Trump’s approach to the pandemic has been to crow about his administration’s imaginary successes while blaming governors for everything that’s gone wrong.  On Friday, he escalated his message, endorsing the anti-stay-at-home protests cropping up across the country — specifically the protests in battleground states run by Democratic governors.  Moments after Fox News aired a segment on the rallies, Trump tweeted their rally cry against their governors: “LIBERATE.”  LIBERATE MICHIGAN! Trump has peddled dangerous misinformation about the virus since the start. He’s undermined policies encouraged by the CDC (he told Americans they should wear masks outside but quickly added that he doesn’t plan to). This endorsement is perhaps the most dangerous thing he’s said.  There’s a lot that’s not yet known about Covid-19, but we do know that gatherings spread the virus. Again and again, when groups get together, attendees get sick. Some have died. And we don’t know the extent to which they’ve spread it to others, though we know it’s a terribly contagious virus. We also know that Americans are actually doing a good job social distancing, which health experts are crediting with a more optimistic outlook on the number of Americans who will die from the virus than initially feared.  But Fox News is trying to convince Americans that there’s a groundswell of opposition to these important measures, attempting to make small rallies look big and fringe attitudes look mainstream.  On air, they’ve displayed images that make the protests seem significant. A first glance at the map below makes it look like a huge number of rallies have already happened, but they haven’t. It’s a double-whammy: The movement looks large and Fox encourages viewers to join.  The same images were used in the early days of the Tea Party, when Fox trumped up the rallies, describing them as part of a “revolution” and urging viewers to join. Conservative groups are playing an important part, too. Three pro-gun groups are behind the largest Facebook group encouraging the protests, according to an investigation by the Washington Post.  In Michigan, a group funded by Trump ally Education Secretary Betsy DeVos helped get out the word. And the same Tea Party groups that were successful a decade ago are eager to join in.  Trump won in 2016 in part because of his success with rural white voters in states Barack Obama won and he’s ratcheting up his strategy to do it again.  The clearest example is in Michigan, where Democratic Gov. Gretchen Whitmer’s in-state popularity has soared to 15 percent higher than Trump’s. Nationally, her profile is on the rise. Her name is being floated as a possible vice presidential pick.   Whitmer has become a target of Trump’s, starting weeks ago and up until protests hit her state last week.  “We’ve had a big problem with the young, a woman governor,” Trump said in an interview with Sean Hannity. “You know who I’m talking about, from Michigan.” Trump dismissed Whitmer’s requests for the federal government to provide more medical equipment to her state and said their interactions had “not been pleasant.” Last week, conservative groups in Michigan encouraged residents to drive to Lansing and snarl traffic in opposition to Whitmer’s response to Covid-19. Michigan has been hit harder than most other states during the pandemic. It’s the tenth-largest state by population, but it has seen the third-most deaths. Whitmer has taken more aggressive steps to combat the spread of the disease than most other governors, including extending a statewide stay-at-home order by two weeks. She also ordered big-box stores like Home Depot to suspend the sale of nonessential items, like gardening supplies and paint, during the extension.  Last Wednesday, some protesters in the state capital of Lansing got out of their cars and stood together in a display that quickly turned into a 2016-style rally. Attendees wore MAGA hats, they chanted “lock her up” (referring to Whitmer) and waved pro-Trump signs.  Images from the event showed protesters ignoring social-distancing rules.  Almost no masks and no regard for social distancing guidelines outside of the Governor’s Residence. @MPRnews pic.twitter.com/8aMLHSHYzA Trump needs the same rural white voters who carried him then to come out for him again. He’s getting them fired up right now. In part, it’s an effective message because rural areas of Michigan have been hit far less hard than blue urban centers like Detroit, where most of the cases and deaths have been concentrated. (Whether it’ll stay that way with protesters risking bringing it back home is an open question.) Weeks ago, Trump warned that the cure for the disease can’t be worse than the virus itself. Many economists have since weighed in, arguing that that is a false choice. We can take steps to shore up the economy through actions by the Fed and stimulus packages in Congress while attempting to curb the virus.  At the same time, there’s no way for the economy to turn back on like a light switch. Covid-19 cases in the US are still on the rise, and most Americans say they wouldn’t go back to normal life even if the rules changed. That’s not a recipe for economic recovery.  The most-respected plan is the one Trump’s own administration has set forth. Once deaths and new cases are down for a solid period of time, once testing can track the virus’s spread, the rules can slowly start to change. It’s a cautious approach based on the best evidence available. It’s not about politics. And most Americans don’t want it to be.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. In normal times, April 20 would be 4/20, the unofficial holiday for celebrating marijuana. People would be preparing to rally near state capitols, in concerts, and at huge fairs to fill the air with thick, pungent smoke. But April 20 this year, on Monday, doesn’t come during normal times. With a coronavirus pandemic still going, much of the United States and the rest of the world are staying at home as much as possible to avoid the spread of Covid-19, the disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus. That means the large crowds and rallies that have previously taken place in Denver, San Francisco, Washington, DC, and many other places around the world are not going to happen.  Yet 4/20 will go on. Before the big day, I got emails from marijuana companies asking, for example, if I was “throwing a virtual 4/20 smoke sesh.” (No, I’m not.) One such company advertised “awesome marijuana-inspired Zoom backgrounds so you can tune in and drop out, immersing yourself fully in the 4/20 experience” — in reference to the backgrounds that can be made for the video conferencing service, Zoom, used by workplaces globally and, apparently, marijuana users throwing virtual 4/20 parties. My first reaction to all of this was, “What is this world?” But these ads also speak to the broader commercialization and mainstreaming of pot, and its growing acceptance in new realms of American life, as the drug is legalized in much of the country. That people are creating cannabis-related images for software largely linked to modern workplaces shows how far pot has come from the days when it was mostly associated with hippies and a broader counterculture movement that decried greed, corporate influences, and, really, all things mainstream. As marijuana is legalized in more states and countries, that kind of shift will continue, with more businesses trying to take advantage of the commercialization of cannabis and reach a growing base of consumers in a newly legal market. It’s a big change from what 4/20 originally was. 4/20 is, in short, a holiday celebrating marijuana. Why April 20? There are a few possible explanations for why marijuana enthusiasts’ day of celebration landed on this day, but the real origin remains a bit of a mystery. Steven Hager, a former editor of the marijuana-focused news outlet High Times, told the New York Times that the holiday came out of a ritual started by a group of high school students in the 1970s. As Hager explained, a group of California teenagers ritualistically smoked marijuana every day at 4:20 pm. The ritual spread, and soon 420 became code for smoking marijuana. Eventually, 420 was converted into 4/20 for calendar purposes, and the day of celebration was born. (A group of Californians published documents giving this theory legitimacy, but it’s unclear if their claims are valid.) One common belief is that 420 was the California police or penal code for marijuana, but there’s no evidence to support that claim. Another theory is that there are 420 active chemicals in marijuana, hence an obvious connection between the drug and the number. But there are more than 500 active ingredients in marijuana, and only about 70 or so are cannabinoids unique to the plant, according to the Dutch Association for Legal Cannabis and Its Constituents as Medicine. A lesser-known possibility comes from the 1939 short story “In the Walls of Eryx” by H.P. Lovecraft and Kenneth Sterling. The story describes “curious mirage-plants” that seemed fairly similar to marijuana and appeared to get the narrator high at, according to his watch, around 4:20. Since the story is from 1939, it’s perhaps the earliest written link between marijuana and 420. Whatever its origins, 4/20 has become a massive holiday for cannabis aficionados. What 4/20 stands for varies from person to person. Some people just want to get high and have fun. Others see the day as a moment to push for legalization, or celebrate legalization now that more states are adopting it and popular opinion is behind it. In the 1970s, 4/20 was part of a smaller counterculture movement that embraced marijuana as a symbol to protest against broader systemic problems in the US, like overseas wars and the power of corporations in America. “Marijuana was the way you said you weren’t a suit,” Keith Humphreys, a drug policy expert at Stanford University, previously told me. In recent years, marijuana legalization activists have tried to bring a more formal aspect to the celebration, framing it as a moment to push their political agenda. Organizers for the 2014 Denver rally — during the first year marijuana sales were legal in the state — put out a statement comparing the battle for legal marijuana to “the time when Jews fled from slavery in Egypt,” a moment commemorated in Passover celebrations. “This year’s rally represents the continuing fight for freedom from economic slavery for marginalized members of our community and a rebirth of creative genius that will get us there,” they wrote. Businesses are also trying to take advantage of the holiday. Eddie Miller, the CEO of Invest in Cannabis, which seeks to bring investment into the marijuana industry, told me in the early years of state-level legalization that his company was trying to build and sponsor major 4/20 gatherings around the country — similar to what other companies, some of which Miller has been involved with, have done with holidays like St. Patrick’s Day. “Our perspective is 4/20 is a real holiday — no smaller than St. Patrick’s Day or Halloween,” Miller previously told me. “It’s just nobody knows about it yet. And our company is going to let everyone know about it.” Of course, these kinds of massive celebrations aren’t going to happen — or at least shouldn’t happen — in the middle of a coronavirus pandemic in which everyone is being told to stay home as much as possible to flatten the curve. But that they’d certainly happen if we weren’t in the middle of a pandemic speaks to how much 4/20 and broader attitudes toward marijuana have changed. Originally, 4/20 was a counterculture holiday to protest, at least in part, the social and legal stigmas against marijuana. Marijuana legalization undercuts that purpose: As big businesses and corporations begin to grow, sell, and market pot, marijuana is losing its status as a counterculture symbol — and that, Humphreys speculated, could bring the end of the traditional, countercultural 4/20. “If a corporate marijuana industry adopts 4/20, it would still be a celebrated event, but not with the same countercultural meaning,” Humphreys said. “People celebrated Christmas long before it became an occasion for an orgy of gift-buying and materialist consumption, but the meaning of the holiday for most people was different then than it is now.” Companies such as Invest in Cannabis admit they’re already leveraging the holiday as another opportunity to promote the industry and its products — much like beer and other alcohol companies now do with St. Patrick’s Day. “The media is covering 4/20 as a consumer interest story,” Miller of Invest in Cannabis said. “But some portion of the media is covering 4/20 as a call to arms for the industry — so [in 2015] there are multiple competitive business conferences that are happening in Denver, the [San Francisco] Bay Area, and Las Vegas.” The pot industry has also gotten directly involved in 4/20 events. The Cannabis Cup, for example, has become a major event at a selected city’s 4/20 rally, where hundreds of vendors show off their finest marijuana products to tens of thousands of attendees. The event has steadily grown over the years, featuring big concerts from notable musicians like Snoop Dogg, Soja, and 2 Chainz, as well as a wide collection of marijuana businesses as sponsors. The Cannabis Cup has been only one of many events, which also include comedy shows (like Cheech and Chong), marijuana-friendly speed dating, and trade shows for glass pipes and bongs, offering businesses and celebrities various opportunities to push their products and brands. Things have changed this year: Due to the coronavirus, the Cannabis Cup, scheduled to take place in Oklahoma, was delayed until May 11 to 15 — and that’s still subject to further delays, depending on how the pandemic rolls on. Now, that may not mean much to the people who are celebrating 4/20 more traditionally. Some people don’t attend public festivities at all, choosing instead to stay home and enjoy a joint (or more) with their friends. For them, 4/20 remains a more casual affair void of big sponsorships and marketing. But in public, 4/20 has increasingly become a commercial holiday — with the coronavirus outbreak putting a pause on things for now. The shift in 4/20 from a counterculture holiday to a more corporate one shows how legalization is changing marijuana. To many legalizers, this is a sign of their success. Legalization campaigns often adopt the tagline “regulate marijuana like alcohol.” That this is actually happening as the cannabis industry takes a form similar to the alcohol industry is a sign that legalizers are winning. This has been true even in the middle of a pandemic. Some states, for example, have deemed liquor stores “essential” through their stay-at-home orders and allowed them to stay open during lockdowns. Some of these states have made a similar determination for marijuana stores, allowing them to stay open despite stay-at-home orders. It’s another clear way that marijuana is increasingly treated like alcohol and other legal drugs.  To some drug policy experts and legalizers, though, this is all a cause for alarm. The concern is that a big marijuana industry will, similar to the tobacco and alcohol industries, irresponsibly market its drug to kids or users who already consume the drug excessively — with little care for public health and safety over the desire for profits. To this end, many drug policy experts see alcohol as a warning, not something to be admired and followed for other drugs. For decades, big alcohol has successfully lobbied lawmakers to block tax increases and regulations on alcohol, all while marketing its product as fun and sexy in television programs, such as the Super Bowl, that are viewed by millions of Americans, including children. Meanwhile, alcohol is linked to 88,000 deaths each year in the US. If marijuana companies are able to act like the tobacco and alcohol industries have in the past, there’s a good chance they’ll convince more Americans to try or even regularly use marijuana, and some of the heaviest users may use more of the drug. And as these companies increase their profits, they’ll be able to influence lawmakers in a way that could stifle regulations or other policies that curtail cannabis misuse. All of that will likely prove bad for public health. The situation almost certainly will not be as bad as alcohol, since alcohol is simply more dangerous than marijuana. Pot’s risks, for one, tend to be nonfatal or at least much less fatal than alcohol: addiction and overuse, accidents, nondeadly overdoses that lead to mental anguish and anxiety, and, in rare cases, potentially psychotic episodes. Marijuana has never been definitively linked to any serious ailments — not deadly overdoses or lung disease. And it’s much less likely — around one-tenth as likely, based on data for fatal car crashes — to cause deadly accidents than alcohol. Given this, the focus for drug policy experts tends to be the risk of addiction and overuse. As Jon Caulkins, a drug policy expert at Carnegie Mellon University, has told me, “At some level, we know that spending more than half of your waking hours intoxicated for years and years on end is not increasing the likelihood that you’ll win a Pulitzer Prize or discover the cure for cancer.” But these risks are still risks. Yet as the marijuana industry grows, it’s likely that the dangers will be issues the industry just doesn’t care much about — and it will market its products excessively for as much profit as possible, even if it means more public health or safety problems along the way. The grim good news for those concerned with commercialization is that the coronavirus pandemic has forced a temporary halt on some of the commercial activity that could be expected around marijuana this 4/20. The bad news is it’s only a pause as the pandemic plays out — because, as the past few years of 4/20 celebrations show, cannabis really has evolved from a counterculture symbol to another commodity that companies can make a lot of money from. For more on marijuana legalization, read Vox’s explainer. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Erin Bradford still hasn’t been able to file for unemployment insurance — more than a month after she first started trying. Bradford, an actress in New York City who worked multiple jobs to support her acting career, turned to New York state’s unemployment office to file a claim for benefits when she lost her steady work on March 14. It has been a frustrating and opaque process for her, to say the least. “I have easily called an average of 100 times a day since I began the process,” Bradford told me in an email. “It feels like it’s the early 2000s and you are calling into a radio station. Most mornings I wake up early so that I can be one of the first people to call in, but apparently a lot of people have had the same idea.” Bradford is one of an estimated 1.2 million people in New York — and more than 22 million people nationwide — who suddenly found themselves out of work in the past several weeks and have been trying to access unemployment insurance as the coronavirus continued spreading across the United States. The staggering fallout of an economic crisis on par with the Great Depression has hit certain sectors of the economy, like restaurants, small businesses, and retail, especially hard. The recently passed CARES Act expanded unemployment insurance eligibility, meaning most people who have been laid off will qualify for an additional $600 a week from the federal government. The bill also established a new program — called Pandemic Unemployment Assistance (PUA) — that provides benefits for freelancers, gig economy workers, independent contractors, and self-employed individuals who previously were not eligible. The expanded benefits will continue until July, and members of Congress are already looking at options to extend it. But the rollout of these benefits has been rocky and uneven. Some states, like Ohio, won’t even start accepting PUA applications until mid-May (retroactive pay was written into the law, so people who are unable to file until then won’t lose out on their full benefits). The unemployment insurance fiasco is a perfect storm: a massive, crippling recession meeting many state programs that were underfunded and out of date to begin with. Programs in states like Florida — where former Gov. Rick Scott purposely designed the online system to make it hard for people to access, the Washington Post reported — have made it even more difficult for people to get help when they need it most. Current Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis announced Thursday that just 4 percent of people who have applied in Florida have so far received unemployment benefits — that’s 33,623 people out of more than 850,000 applicants. “These benefits are layered on top of a system that works well in some states and works terribly in others,” said Michele Evermore, a senior policy analyst at the National Employment Law Project. “When a recession rolls around, how are people surprised that it’s hard to get benefits?” Unemployment insurance benefits vary by state, but the amount you receive is not the only factor that depends on where you live. The process to get the money is faster in some states than others. Vox was contacted by a recently laid-off worker named AJ in Florida, who said he and his wife were trying to access Florida’s online unemployment system with very little success. “My wife and I try to apply for unemployment and the website does not load. The phone system also does not work,” he said. “There is no alternative, we just keep going in circles. We feel abandoned on all levels.” 
    Related
   It’s a completely different story in Washington state, where Stevie Hanna got the news she would be laid off from her job at a market research company on April 1, “which is not the day to fire people,” she added. It was a stressful time; Hanna had moved to Washington for her job and had lived there only about four months. With some confusion about whether her work history made her eligible for benefits in Washington or in her former state of Michigan, it took about a week for Washington’s Employment Security Department to process her claim. “Today everything is good, but it was touch and go for a week,” Hanna told me in a phone interview. “But at this point I’m impressed that they were able to get me through the system in a few weeks. ... I have no idea how I got that lucky. I do feel very fortunate that I am in Washington.” Brigit Stadler, a self-employed lifestyle and documentary photographer, also lives in Washington state. Her work is seasonal, and when the coronavirus hit, she had to cancel the cherry blossom photo shoots she had planned for this spring in Seattle. Because Stadler owns her own business, she couldn’t just apply for traditional UI right off the bat; she had to wait for Washington to set up its Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program. “I know others in other states are having a lot of difficulties filing, so I’ve basically just been checking for updates so as to not add to an already overloaded system,” Stadler told me. “I’ll be applying for benefits on Monday now that they’ve given us a firm date for when the system will be able to handle those of us who are self-employed.” Stadler recognizes she’s one of the lucky ones; her husband is still employed and able to help support her and their two sons. But she was just starting to turn a profit with her business, and the loss of her photography income has been a blow to her efforts to pay down student loans and have extra income to help pay for the cost of living in Seattle. “While we’re in a very privileged position, the lost income isn’t insignificant, as Seattle is still a very expensive place,” she said. In more ways than one, Washington seems to be ahead of the curve with its response to the coronavirus. Not only have cases and deaths fallen in a state that was considered an initial hot spot in the US, but Washington also announced that its expanded unemployment insurance benefits — including the PUA program for freelancers — was scheduled to be up and running by April 18. That was a lot sooner than some other states. In New York City, submitting her online application was just the first step for Bradford. Because she worked multiple part-time jobs, she had to call the unemployment office and speak to a representative over the phone to complete the process. Then the hard part began. Bradford told me that each time she called, she got one of three responses: one telling her that her call couldn’t be completed as dialed, one automated message that all lines were busy, and finally, another automated reply that asked questions about her claim (which she answered using her phone’s keypad), collected her Social Security number, and transferred her to a representative. But unless someone is available at that exact moment, callers are disconnected and have to start the process over again, Bradford said. “As someone who works in entertainment, I have many, many friends going through this process, and [I] can count on one hand the amount of people I know who have been able to get through the phone lines,” she added. Bradford got so frustrated that she called Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s office directly. The last Bradford had heard, New York had redone its website and was no longer asking applicants to call; instead, people would be contacted directly. As of April 17 — a month after she first applied — she hadn’t yet received a call. “I will be okay for the next month or so, but if this lasts into the summer, that will no longer be the case and my savings will essentially be depleted,” Bradford told me. “It has made me more cautious with my spending, and even when things go back to normal, I and many many others will have to recover from this lost income.” Congress passing expanded unemployment benefits was just the first step. The process of actually getting that money into the bank accounts of people who need it is much harder. States first have to wait for the Trump administration to issue guidance so they know they’re administering a benefit correctly. Then they have to set up their own policies and interpret them to decide who qualifies, Evermore said. Finally, states have to program the computers in their unemployment systems with the new information — and some states rely on mainframes and programming that haven’t been updated since the 1970s. “The key aspects of UI were weak going into this,” said Andy Stettner, a senior fellow at the Century Foundation. “The IT infrastructure was weak; most states hadn’t gotten off of these ancient mainframes. The concern is, they’ve never done anything with this type of volume.” A recent report by The Verge’s Makena Kelly found that at least 12 states use a decades-old coding language called COBOL in their UI offices, which means specific programmers who know how to use the language are needed to run it. With so many laid-off workers trying to access benefits at once, the old code on some of these systems is crashing websites and leading to other problems. The process is more straightforward for people who have been laid off from an employer and are eligible for regular UI, but it’s very complicated for freelancers and others who are waiting for PUA programs to be ready for applicants. Washington state, as previously mentioned, is seemingly ahead of the curve, with a goal of getting its PUA program up and running by April 18. After setting an initial date of April 30, Massachusetts announced it would start accepting PUA applications this week. Officials in Pennsylvania said freelancers and gig workers could start applying by the end of the month. But other states, including Ohio, are already looking at a May timeline before they can get their PUA programs ready to accept applications, and others haven’t released timelines. New York and Michigan, for instance, are asking people to submit PUA claims but are holding on to them until their programs are up and running. There’s consensus in Congress that another relief bill is needed, and Democrats have been talking about either extending the extra $600 a week in federal aid or adding more weeks before an individual would be kicked off regular UI benefits (without the extra $600 per week), according to a senior Democratic aide. But the problems that currently exist have led unemployment experts like Stettner and Evermore to say that Congress also needs to fund the system itself by helping states add more employees and get better technology to help connect people to the benefits they so badly need. “It’s really not a sexy item to fund UI administration,” Evermore said, noting it’s an issue that has to compete against other demands, like education funding and cancer research. “The only times any improvements have ever happened with UI has been because a recession exposed holes in the coverage.” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi recently told Vox that she recognizes the need, but also admitted it could take weeks before Congress is able to appropriate the money. (Congress is not set to return to Capitol Hill until May 4 at the earliest.) “The states need resources in order to administer the UI,” Pelosi said. “Some are much better prepared than others or just have a different timetable. So one of the things we may have to do is get more resources to the state agencies that do this.” In the meantime, the holes in the system are being blown wide open with a mammoth recession. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  More than a dozen United States experts were working at the World Health Organization and feeding the Trump administration information last December as the coronavirus spread through China, according to reporting by the Washington Post.  That reporting stands in contrast with President Donald Trump’s accusations that the WHO spent late 2019 “severely mismanaging” the global response to the virus — and that it was “covering up” information to paper over China’s inability to contain Covid-19. And it comes days after the president announced he would be freezing US funding for the WHO in the midst of a global health crisis in retaliation for these alleged failings. In fact, according to the Post, Trump administration officials helped guide WHO policy — and worked to ensure the US was informed of new coronavirus developments as soon as the international body learned about them. A top official from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) was part of the committee that advised the WHO on whether to declare a global public health emergency in late January. Two US scientists were part of the WHO’s information gathering mission to China in mid-February. A CDC official has compiled daily reports of outbreaks in consultation with WHO counterparts and passed along information to higher-ups in the organization through daily briefing calls. And upcoming WHO plans and announcements were reportedly shared days in advance with top US officials like Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar.  The WHO has been criticized for its handling of the pandemic — including whether the organization waited too long to declare a global emergency and if it has been too liberal in its praise for China’s response — but the Post’s reporting indicates that lack of early communication of the threat to the US was likely not one of its missteps.  Trump claims otherwise, telling reporters last Tuesday, “The reality is that the WHO failed to adequately obtain ... and share information in a timely and transparent fashion.” He has repeated this allegation — along with a claim the WHO didn’t want him to institute a travel ban — a number of times in recent days, seemingly in an attempt to blame the international organization for the US’s current coronavirus crisis. Trump has been criticized for weeks over his response to the coronavirus in the US, which his critics — and most Americans — have argued was dangerously slow. While weathering this criticism, the president has increasingly looked to the WHO as a party to blame for any of the US coronavirus shortcomings.   Trump’s frustrations with the organization seemed to begin in late January, when top officials in the WHO said governments don’t need to “unnecessarily interfere with international travel and trade” to stop the spread of the disease, after Trump announced he would be partially banning travel from China. The organization didn’t directly criticize the US, which wasn’t the only country imposing travel restrictions at the time.  “Travel restrictions can cause more harm than good by hindering info-sharing, medical supply chains and harming economies,” said the World Health Organization director-general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, at the time.  In early April, faced with growing scrutiny over his early response, Trump became increasingly explicit in his critiques of the organization, tweeting that the WHO “really blew it.” “For some reason, funded largely by the United States, yet very China centric,” he wrote. “We will be giving that a good look.” The W.H.O. really blew it. For some reason, funded largely by the United States, yet very China centric. We will be giving that a good look. Fortunately I rejected their advice on keeping our borders open to China early on. Why did they give us such a faulty recommendation? As Vox’s Lois Parshley reported, the criticism didn’t end there: Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus task force coordinator, and Scott Gottlieb, the former commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration under Trump, criticized its handling of China’s data and transparency. Gottlieb told Face the Nation, “Going forward, the WHO needs to commit to an after-action report that specifically examines what China did or didn’t tell the world and how that stymied the global response to this.” Senate Republicans, meanwhile, on April 13 announced a plan to investigate the origins of the virus and the global response, including the WHO’s decisions. Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee Chair Ron Johnson told Politico, “We need to know what role WHO might have had in trying to cover this thing up.” Trump’s threat to stop sending the millions of dollars the country sends annually to the WHO would be a devastating blow to the organization, which is helping to coordinate the global response to Covid-19. The US is the organization’s single largest funder, providing 22 percent of all member state assessed contributions and often hundreds of millions more in voluntary contributions.  It’s not clear whether he can stop the $116 million that’s been appropriated to the agency by Congress, but it seems he may be allowed to reroute the funding to other organizations or withhold it until next year. The WHO may continue to be a scapegoat for the Trump administration, but experts have urged him not to take it out on an agency they largely agree has avoided major missteps. “How can you threaten to withdraw funding from the world’s leading global health agency in the midst of a pandemic, with tens of thousands of people dying?” Lawrence Gostin, a professor at Georgetown University and a past critic of WHO’s director-general, told Parshley. “It’s utterly irresponsible.”  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said on Sunday that he thinks the United States economy will bounce back to the position it was in before the coronavirus pandemic in a matter of “months,” a sunny prediction at odds with many economists who see the US as entering a historic economic downturn. When asked by CNN’s Jake Tapper on State of the Union if he thinks the economy will rebound to pre-coronavirus levels of strength in months or years, Mnuchin said he believed it would be the former.  “I think it will be months. I definitely don’t think it will be years, we are going to conquer this virus, we are going to have terrific breakthroughs,” Mnuchin said. “Not just on the testing but on the medical front — we begin to have virals [sic] — there are things that are being developed for vaccines which will take a little bit longer.”  Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin on an economic rebound: "I think it will be months, I definitely don't think it will be years. We are going to conquer this virus, we are going to have terrific breakthroughs" #CNNSOTU pic.twitter.com/OuNv53kY7f Tapper then questioned Mnuchin’s optimism about the economy in light of the fact that major corporations like Facebook have canceled events through the summer of 2021, and considering the Congressional Budget Office’s forecast that the pandemic will affect unemployment through the end of 2021. The treasury secretary replied with more confidence about a return to normalcy. “This is an unprecedented time, we’ve never been in a situation where we’ve closed down the economy and I think, rightfully so, people are being cautious. On the other hand, as we get comfortable reopening the economy, I think we’ll see a big rebound,” Mnuchin said. The comments from Mnuchin, who prior to being appointed to his position worked in finance and had no policy qualifications for his job, are not in line with mainstream economic prognostications about the unfolding situation or predictions from scientists and the medical community on how long distancing may be necessary.  Due to the continued need for social distancing that could last for over a year, a historic surge in unemployment, and the specter of the collapse of countless businesses around the country, many economists see a recovery as far off and likely to be a protracted process. Gita Gopinath, chief economist at the International Monetary Fund, has said that global economic activity is not expected to fully recover even by the end of 2021 based on current trends. “The magnitude and speed of collapse in activity that has followed is unlike anything experienced in our lifetimes,” she wrote in a recent blog post. She said IMF projections predict this will be “the worst recession since the Great Depression, and far worse than the Global Financial Crisis.” Many top economists say the US and the world are already in a recession. Olivier Blanchard, senior fellow at the Peterson Institute, told the Financial Times there was “no question” that global economic growth “will be negative” for the first six months of 2020.  Recessions mark the period during which an economy is contracting; even when they end, there is an extended period of time during which economic activity and employment levels recover to pre-recession levels. That recovery period can be very long. Ten years after the global financial crisis that started at the end of 2007, there were many indicators that the US economy still hadn’t fully healed. Participation in the economy remained depressed in 2017 (some economists say it was still depressed ahead of the current crisis), and household wealth like savings and investments hadn’t recovered from the crash. The hangover from the crisis contributed to slower overall growth for the following decade.  Economists also worry that the US and other countries are not doing nearly enough to prevent a worst-case scenario from happening. Most experts believe the government needs to pursue a much, much more aggressive testing regime to reopen the economy. Without proper public health measures, sound economic policy, and a well-coordinated reopening, some economists fear a downturn that could surpass even the Great Depression in severity. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Governors of both parties are pushing back on Trump administration claims that there are enough coronavirus tests for states to begin reengaging sectors of their economy, with their critiques coming as they pleaded for the federal government to coordinate an interstate strategy to increase capacity. On Sunday morning, Vice President Mike Pence repeated the assertion that current testing levels are sufficient for “any state in America to move into phase one” of the administration’s guidelines on reopening the United States economy. This followed a claim from President Donald Trump on Saturday that the country’s “capability and capacity are fully sufficient to begin opening up the country totally.” But Republican and Democratic governors alike said Sunday that’s not true. States are still hundreds of thousands of tests away from being able to reopen their economies, a problem driven in part by a shortage of reagents and swabs needed to conduct tests.  “To say that the governors have plenty of testing and they should get to work on testing, somehow we aren’t doing our job, is just absolutely false,” said Gov. Larry Hogan (R-MD) on CNN’s State of the Union. “Every governor in America has been pushing and fighting and clawing to get more tests.” Gov. Ralph Northam (D-VA), told CNN’s Jake Tapper it’s “just delusional” to say there are enough tests to begin easing restrictions. “For the national level to say that we have what we need and really to have no guidance to the state levels is just irresponsible, because we’re not there yet,” he said.  The US has been doing around 150,000 tests daily on average over the last week, according to the Covid Tracking Project. That’s far more than the nation’s testing capacity in mid-March, but researchers at Harvard University estimate that to reopen the US by the middle of May, daily tests would need to be closer to 500,000 to 700,000. Other experts argue millions of tests would need to be conducted each day. That’s because controlling the pandemic relies on identifying people who have the virus, finding those they’ve come in contact with, and isolating them until they are no longer infectious. The only way to do that is to make testing widespread and readily available.  Without robust testing, it’s hard for officials and scientists to identify new outbreaks early and to stop them before they balloon out of control. Testing shortages also make it difficult for any state easing its social distancing guidelines to track how relaxing these guidelines affects public health — something experts say is crucial to ensuring safety and to move the economy toward its normal state.  “If there’s enough testing around and people are willing to be tested, the brushfires can be identified and put out before the wildfire,” Jeffrey Martin, an epidemiologist at the University of California San Francisco, told Vox’s German Lopez. “The only way that a society can function is if the brushfires are identified and put out.” Ramping up testing will likely take a coordinated effort and innovative solutions, but ideas on how to get there vary between state and federal officials.  Speaking with NBC’s Chuck Todd Sunday, Govs. Mike DeWine (R-OH) and Gretchen Whitmer (D-MI) offered suggestions as to how the federal government could support them in ramping up testing. DeWine pleaded with the Food and Drug Administration to make changes to the testing kit in order to ease a shortage of the materials necessary to run the tests — a problem multiple governors have cited as a challenge to ramping up capacity in their states. “I could probably double, maybe even triple, testing in Ohio virtually overnight if the FDA would prioritize companies that are putting a slightly different formula together for the extraction reagent kit,” DeWine said, referring to a shortage of the chemicals needed to extract, amplify, and detect the virus in the samples collected from patients.  “If anybody in the FDA is watching,” DeWine added, “This would really take our capacity up literally overnight.”  Whitmer, on the other hand, argued a large, federally coordinated effort will be necessary to help states meet the need for testing. She advocated for Trump using the Defense Production Act — a wartime-era law that allows the president to compel private companies to help produce needed supplies — to ramp up production of the reagents and swabs necessary to conduct tests.  “We have the capacity to double or triple the number of tests that we’re doing, but we need some of these supplies,” Whitmer said.  Trump has used the DPA sparingly during the coronavirus pandemic to compel some companies to produce more ventilators and protective masks. Many, including employees of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, have called upon him to increase use of the law to stimulate production of other needed supplies.  Thus far, the Trump administration has given no sign either recommendation is under consideration. But although it is the Trump administration that’s pushing states to begin reengaging their economies in the face of a historic economic downturn, it’s ultimately up to state governors to decide when it’s safe to do so.  Based on their governors’ statements Sunday, it seems Michigan, Ohio, Virginia, and Maryland, at least, plan to err on the side of caution — which means citizens there may need to buckle up for a little longer in isolation. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.In an effort to curb the rapid spread of the coronavirus in the Navajo Nation, the Navajo Department of Health issued an emergency public health order on April 17 mandating the use of masks outside the home, adding to existing orders that include sheltering in place and nightly and weekend curfews.  Native American communities have been hit particularly hard by coronavirus, the Navajo Nation the worst of all. As of April 18, the Nation, which spans parts of Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah, had 1,197 confirmed cases and 44 deaths. Were it a US state, it would fall at No. 3 for the number of confirmed coronavirus infections per capita, behind New York and New Jersey. And Navajo Nation President Jonathan Nez warns that the disease’s peak could still be weeks away.  The high number of confirmed cases is in part due to the Nation’s rate of testing, which is higher than all states besides New York and Louisiana. Its government also responded to the crisis faster than neighboring states, declaring a state of emergency and enacting shelter-in-place orders in mid-March.  But the Navajo Nation is far more vulnerable to the devastating effects of coronavirus than those neighboring states thanks to the United States’ long history of deprioritizing investment in Native communities. As Maria Givens previously wrote for Vox: While nearly no one in the country is safe from the coronavirus outbreak, its impact on Indian Country looks different from the rest of the US. Tribal elders are more at risk of Covid-19 because of high rates of diabetes and heart disease. Clean water for proper hand-washing is not accessible in all tribal communities, and overcrowding in Native homes is also common as many are multi-generational, creating social distancing challenges. Meanwhile, emergency federal funding for tribal health organizations has been delayed within the bureaucracy at US Health and Human Services. Then there are the negative economic effects, with hospitality businesses like casinos — often tribes’ greatest source of income — closing. Indian Country’s resources were stretched thin to begin with, and the coronavirus pandemic is exacerbating the disparities. In a livestream roundtable discussion with tribal leaders, President Nez spoke of how Covid-19 is complicating these longstanding issues. “Fifteen to 30 percent of our people on the Navajo Nation don’t have clean running water,” he said. “Yet, we’re telling our folks to wash their hands with soap and water.” And Diana Zirul, the vice chair of the Alaska Native Health Board, said, “While we consider this (intergenerational living) a cultural strength and value, it offers a unique risk of exposure to our elders and other family members who may be subjected to the virus. There’s a critical need for funding additional housing as well as facilities for quarantine isolation.”  Many minority groups across the US and the world are facing an exacerbated impact of coronavirus. Despite New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo calling the disease “the great equalizer” due to its ability to infect anyone regardless of race or status, that equality doesn’t extend to what happens after a person becomes infected. Coronavirus cases in New York City have disproportionately affected working class, non-white, and immigrant neighborhoods. Similar statistics are showing up in North Carolina, Michigan, Wisconsin, and Illinois. In the UK, one third of critically ill patients were found to be from black and minority ethnic backgrounds, despite making up 20 percent of the total population.  There are a host of complex and interrelated reasons for this: Residents of poorer neighborhoods often live in very close quarters, and many work in hospitality or other industries that don’t allow for telecommuting. These areas also often lack access to nutritious food and regular health care. While Latinx life expectancy is higher than the average population, rates of obesity and diabetes, which are associated with coronavirus complications, are also higher. Similarly, Native Americans have higher rates of diabetes, heart disease, asthma, and cancer, and often live in crowded homes, many of which lack running water and electricity.  What’s particularly frustrating about the crisis faced by the Navajo Nation and other Native communities is that they were more proactive in combating coronavirus early than many other states. Eli Leslie, public information officer for the Navajo Department of Health, told the Salt Lake Tribune that the Navajo leadership had been pushing for test kits early on, which contributed to its high testing rate. “Our numbers will go up with these rapid tests coming in, but we will have more accurate [data] and a better understanding of results and therefore we can better prepare and help get people resources,” he said.  Yet the US government’s weak response to coronavirus will impact how Indian Country fares over the next few months. Congress has allocated millions of dollars to aid the Indian Health Service and tribal organizations, but 98 percent of tribal clinics have still not yet received funds. Beyond the immediate dangers to public health, as Givens notes, the coronavirus crisis could leave an even bigger impact on Native communities who’ve only barely recovered from the 2008 recession. “If the government doesn’t act fast, tribal populations, prosperity, and ways of life could be set back for a generation,” she writes. The Navajo Nation has continued to enact safety measures like curfews and has now mandated masks in public, yet it still could be among the many casualties of a virus that hurts minorities worst of all. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Anti-social distancing and anti-stay-at-home order rallies are cropping up across the country, reminiscent of the early days of the Tea Party, when well-funded right-leaning groups lit a fire under an already outraged Republican base and helped ignite a political movement.  In fact, Adam Brandon, president of FreedomWorks, a right-leaning advocacy group that helped support the Tea Party movement back in 2009, said in an interview that “this has the same DNA [as] the Tea Party movement.” The events — some, like in Michigan, featuring thousands of attendees — are organized largely by conservative groups calling state-based measures too draconian. Some of the groups have posted links and images on Facebook that downplay the seriousness of the virus. And other leaders have advocated against following guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, like a ban on big gatherings and the recommendation to wearing face masks in certain public settings (because wearing them would be “counterproductive”). Some of the protests have taken on the feel of 2016 Trump campaign rallies, with participants wearing Make America Great Again hats and waving flags emblazoned with the president’s face. And Fox News is helping to get the word out about the protests, even promoting the protests on air. President Donald Trump spent part of Friday tweeting about them, just minutes after a protest segment aired on Fox News’s America’s Newsroom. LIBERATE MICHIGAN! The displays are tapping into Trump’s main message on the coronavirus pandemic: Governors are to blame for the crisis, not him. As the president ratchets up his reelection efforts, his argument is an effort to simultaneously put the brunt of responsibility for the coronavirus catastrophe on the shoulders of his political opponents while maintaining that he holds “total authority” over the pandemic and the states facing it.  It’s an argument that resonates best in rural, redder parts of the country, which have not yet been hit as hard by the pandemic as blue, urban areas. Trump himself has said, “We’ll be opening some states much sooner than others,” despite pushback from legislators and business leaders alike about the current lack of mass testing.   And it’s a message of division, designed to pit Republican-voting areas of states against their Democratic-voting neighbors, even rural Republicans against urban Republicans. All this is to activate white rural voters who supported Trump in 2016 and who he’ll need again in 2020. For some on the right, the plan seems simple: vilify Democratic governors and agitate for the end of shutdown orders. Then “reopen the economy” and spur a massive turnaround in the nation’s economic prospects just in time for Trump to be reelected in November. If the pandemic recedes, he can claim he was entirely responsible; but if people continue to die, he can place the blame on Democratic governors.  Theda Skocpol, a professor of government and sociology at Harvard University, put it this way: “That’s ... Trump’s entire strategy, and you can see it in the way he talks about this.”  Skocpol is the editor of the book Upending American Politics: Polarizing Parties, Ideological Elites, and Citizen Activists from the Tea Party to the Anti-Trump Resistance. She added, “I think there really is popular anger among middle-income people, particularly living in whiter, less metropolitan parts of these key states,” about stay-at-home orders, but “it’s being goosed along by some of the same advocacy groups on the free market right.”  But there’s a problem for Trump: The public, including the vast majority of Republicans, largely supports social distancing measures, and new polling shows that half of Republicans are concerned stay-at-home orders and social distancing measures will be lifted too quickly. Research shows that many Americans began social distancing before they were urged to do so by the government, and likely wouldn’t stop even if such orders were lifted. In short, the anti-shutdown-order protests don’t mirror public opinion. And in order for Trump to benefit from their potential impact, they need to — and coronavirus needs to spare rural America (which it isn’t). Coronavirus has now become part of the fabric of Trump’s 2020 reelection campaign — one aimed largely at dividing Americans along sociopolitical and cultural lines. But the biggest question remains: Will it work? Trump’s primary objective in 2020 is to win the White House, and he hoped to do so using a strong economy as an ally. But the coronavirus has put that effort in jeopardy. About 22 million Americans have filed for unemployment, and expected GDP has dropped at least 10 percent, leading to Trump arguing earlier this month that the pandemic “artificially stopped” his administration’s forward economic progress.  Trump's case for his own reelection is all about what he did before the pandemic he wasn't prepared for hit, as well as weak Obama whataboutism. Doesn't bode great for him. pic.twitter.com/K8ZoQO7xDw The case for Trump’s response to the pandemic is thin at best, particularly early in the pandemic when Trump admittedly downplayed it because, in his words, “You know I’m a cheerleader for the country.” While states hold the primary responsibility for public health under the aegis of the Constitution, the federal government, and Trump, repeatedly ignored opportunities to mitigate the virus’s spread through extensive testing. Rather, Trump said of the virus in early March, “It will go away. Just stay calm. It will go away.” Polling indicates that most Americans disapprove of Trump’s response to the pandemic.  With little federal success in stopping the virus on which to lean politically, Trump has shifted to another tactic: putting the blame for the pandemic on Democratic governors, many with higher approval ratings than the president. Skocpol told me, “The anger is being directed at the governors, and Trump is trying to put the governors front and center as targets.”  The shift is taking place as states like Michigan and New York work with other governors in their regions to develop their own plans to fight the coronavirus and plan for an economic reopening. As my colleague Aaron Rupar wrote in late March, Trump’s ire at Democratic governors has been a major facet of his daily interactions with the press: When Trump isn’t attacking Democratic governors — already this month he’s described Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer as “failing,” accused Illinois Gov. J.B. Pritzker of “blaming the Federal Government for [his] own shortcomings,” and smeared Washington Gov. Jay Inslee as “a snake” — the president has been insisting that it’s up to them to procure the supplies they need to prevent their hospitals from being overwhelmed. “They have to get that gear themselves,” Trump told Fox News on Tuesday, referring to Democratic governors, adding that “they shouldn’t be hitting us.”  But Michigan isn’t just a state with a Democratic governor (and a potential vice presidential candidate, at that) — it’s a state Trump won in 2016 by a slim margin, the first Republican to win there since George H.W. Bush in 1988. And in order to win reelection in 2020, Trump will likely need to claim the state’s 16 electoral votes once again, with the coronavirus and the federal government’s failed response standing in his way.  To win Michigan, Trump needs to not only gain the support of the same rural and suburban voters who elected him in 2016, he needs to depress support for Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, who currently enjoys high approval ratings for her response to the coronavirus.  Skocpol told me he could take advantage of in-state tensions that have festered for decades by vilifying the governor and pitting the state’s residents against one another. The Detroit area is not only more heavily populated and less white than the north and west of the state (77 percent of Detroit residents are black) but is being hit far harder than the rest of the state by the coronavirus pandemic, with more than 580 deaths reported as of April 18.  But when I spoke with Michigan Conservative Coalition president Rosanne Ponkowski about the situation in Detroit and the city’s surrounding counties, she told me, “Okay, let’s talk about people that live in Traverse City [a city in the state’s less populated north]. Let’s talk about people that live north of Lansing. That’s a whole other half of the state.” Grand Traverse County, which includes Traverse City, currently has 18 cases of coronavirus. “Trump always knows how to get at exactly the fault lines of class and ethnic tension,” Skocpol said, “and there’s plenty of tension in Michigan between the middle part of the state and the Upper Peninsula and even some of the western parts of the state and Detroit.”  And that’s where the rise of anti-stay-at-home-order protests comes in, protests that don’t necessarily reflect the will of the vast majority of Americans, or even conservatives, but do reflect the intentions of the president of the United States and some of his biggest supporters.  As I wrote earlier this week, the protests in Michigan originated in part from the extension of Michigan’s stay-at-home order in response to the coronavirus: Conservatives in Michigan were already growing agitated with Whitmer’s aggressive response to the virus when she took another step that seemed nonsensical: Big-box hardware stores (larger than 50,000 square feet) were told they must close off aisles dedicated to paint supplies and lawn care until the end of April. They can still sell other goods deemed essential. “If you’re not buying food or medicine or other essential items, you should not be going to the store,” Whitmer said in a press conference earlier this month. Some rally attendees complained to Fox News that Whitmer’s order seemed arbitrary. They can’t buy lawn fertilizer from Home Depot, visit siblings, or get their hair done, but lottery tickets are still for sale and liquor stores remain open. Seely told Vox, “Do you want people to leave their homes and risk infecting themselves and other people to get a lottery ticket? But I can’t go to the hardware store and buy grass seed for my lawn, buy a gallon of paint so that I can find myself doing a home project so I don’t go absolutely insane being locked at home. I mean, none of that makes any sense.” But many of those involved in the protests are connected not by mere concern regarding Whitmer’s policies, but by their efforts to reelect the president.  Take the Michigan Conservative Council, for example. As the Associated Press detailed: The protest there was organized by the Michigan Conservative Coalition, a group founded by a pro-Trump state representative and his wife, Meshawn Maddock, who is on the advisory board for an official Trump campaign group called “Women for Trump” and is also the co-founder of Michigan Trump Republicans. Their daughter is a field organizer for the Michigan Republican Party. Another in-state group helping organize protests against the shutdown order is the Michigan Freedom Fund, led by Greg McNeilly. McNeilly is a longtime Republican operative (formerly serving as executive director of the Michigan GOP) and a friend of the powerful DeVos family. He worked as campaign manager for Republican Dick DeVos’s 2006 gubernatorial campaign; Betsy DeVos, Dick DeVos’s wife, currently serves as US secretary of education. In Wisconsin, the main anti-shutdown group, Open Wisconsin Now, was organized by the Committee to Unleash Prosperity and FreedomWorks. The Committee to Unleash Prosperity was founded by Arthur Laffer and Stephen Moore, co-authors of Trumponomics: Inside the America First Plan to Revive Our Economy. Moore also served as president of the Club for Growth and was nominated by the president to serve on the board of the Federal Reserve before withdrawing after misogynistic remarks Moore made in the early 2000s were surfaced by reporters.  In an interview with the Washington Post, Moore spoke of the protests his group was helping to organize, saying, “There’s a massive movement on the right now, growing exponentially. In the next two weeks, you’ll see protests in the streets of conservatives; you’ll see a big pushback against the lockdown in some states.” When I spoke with Brandon, he said FreedomWorks’ involvement with anti-shutdown protests was similar to that of the group’s involvement in the Tea Party protests; he said it “just so happened a lot of our activists were organizers.”  “We’re not organizing any of these events, but we do know a lot of people who have come through our training and who are part of our community,”  Brandon said. In response to questions about the group’s involvement in Wisconsin, FreedomWorks’ Peter Vicenzi told me that while they supported those protests, they were not providing funding.  POW!   #TeaParty-style protests break out across the country against [tyrannical, unconstitutional] stay-at-home orders! #ReopenAmerica    #ampFWhttps://t.co/bDvHUzPnUr I spoke with Angelo Carusone, president and CEO of Media Matters, a left-leaning group that tracks right-leaning media. To him, the anti-shutdown protests bear striking similarities to the early days of the Tea Party movement, with smaller events promoted by radio hosts and local conservative figures that are then “heavily promoted and amplified by Fox News and the rest of the right-wing echo chamber,” in his view.  While he told me many of these groups were “very real” — “they’re not being driven by sophisticated operatives, necessarily” — they are receiving additional amplification through Fox News, “throwing some kindling” on the protests, in his words. Carusone told me that in contrast to how Fox News reports on left-leaning protests (for example, this 2017 Fox News report that blames a Black Lives Matter effort to encourage black Americans to shop only at black-owned businesses on billionaire George Soros), the anti-stay-at-home-order protests are being covered approvingly, with any extremism (or violations of social distancing taking place) minimized.  Telling me that we’re in the “proto stage” of these protests currently as they gain wider attention, Carusone described the effort as a three-step process for Fox News: “Raise awareness about it to make it into like a broad national movement, a cauldron of energy. Carry some of the water for [the protests]. And don’t mention any of the extremist ties.”  Michigan’s protests, for example, featured militias and members of the Michigan chapter of the Proud Boys, an extremist group whose former leader made a series of anti-Semitic and racist statements. (When I spoke with an MCC spokesperson, he said he had asked the police to remove the Proud Boys and militia members from the protests.)  Protests in Texas have featured conspiracy theorist Alex Jones, who recently settled a defamation lawsuit after repeatedly claiming that the Sandy Hook school shootings were a hoax. And the website for protests against Idaho’s stay-at-home order links to a site for readers to learn “what is really going on” that compares the coronavirus to “white racists” (arguing that both are the creation of “propaganda”) and claims the coronavirus is the “scam of 2020.” And Carusone told me, “The other thing that [Fox News] does that I think is more important in some ways is they provide the narrative framework” for the protests — making them about liberty in the face of “martial law” or a “police state,” for example.  It was great to join @DLoesch from the police state of Michigan today. Under Gretchen Whitmer’s power grab, you can’t mow your grass but you can smoke it. We all want safety, but her authoritarian measures have gone way too far. pic.twitter.com/rev63tj3Ep But these protests aren’t reflective of public opinion — far from it. The vast majority of Americans are continuing to support social distancing policies and are more worried about stay-at-home restrictions being lifted too soon. As conservative writer Matthew Continetti wrote in the Washington Free Beacon: Americans are not avoiding unnecessary physical proximity to people outside their household for the fun of it. Nor have they radically altered their daily routines because Gretchen Whitmer said so. They have seen the rate at which the coronavirus spreads. They have read or watched the virus kill young and old, black and white, rich and poor. They do not need Hobbes to remind them of their fear of violent death. It was not media-induced panic but common sense that modified American behavior. The public is split on whether to trust the media. It is united in its embrace of social distancing.  In fact, many Americans would continue to avoid crowded events and social gatherings even if stay-at-home orders were lifted, “police state” or no. In a recent poll by Seton Hall, 72 percent of Americans, for example, say they will not attend sporting events until a vaccine for the coronavirus is identified. The coronavirus, not “martial law,” is guiding how people act. As Alan Blinder wrote in the Wall Street Journal, “Swaths of the economy—restaurants, travel, retail shops—were already shrinking before governments ordered them shut, because people were afraid to dine, travel or shop. These fears will abate gradually, with the pace dictated by the course of the virus, not by anybody’s decree.” When I spoke to conservatives about the issue, even those who have voiced some support for the protests said the fight against the coronavirus was more complicated. For example, I talked to Dana Loesch, a conservative radio host and a former spokesperson for the National Rifle Association who interviewed GOP Chair Ronna McDaniel about the protests.  When we discussed rural conservatives arguing that their regions remained unaffected by the pandemic, she said, “They can’t really necessarily discount that this is just a Detroit problem or just a New York problem because it really isn’t. It will affect them. So everyone is dependent upon each other. I know that they want to get back to work and maybe they’re not affected. And maybe there’s a way that that can be figured out.”  But even in rural areas where the economic impact of the pandemic shutdown may be more searing than the disease itself, cases of the coronavirus are beginning to escalate. States like South Dakota and Idaho are beginning to see increasing infection rates and deaths, and in many rural areas, even a relatively small number of coronavirus cases could stretch rural hospitals and health networks to their limits.  Trump’s political gambit requires that the coronavirus becomes a pandemic of Democratic governors and the fault of blue states while other states get right back to business as usual, but the virus refuses to listen — and so do the vast majority of Americans.  That doesn’t mean the efforts to further spur division will stop, particularly from those who believe such a strategy will lead to a Trump victory in November. Skocpol told me, “I think we’re in for a hellish period in this country. I think the attempts to stoke the ethnically and racially charged geopolitical divisions that are built into American federalism are going to be off the scale for the next six months.” And a deadly pandemic will continue to kill Americans, regardless of political party.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Conservatives’ frustration over state stay-at-home orders continued to boil over into the streets with protests in Texas, Indiana, New Hampshire, Nevada, Maryland, Utah, and Wisconsin taking place on Saturday — reflecting simmering tensions about state governments’ responses to the coronavirus, but not necessarily widespread views, research indicates. The protests followed other similar events last week in Florida, North Carolina, Virginia, Michigan, Minnesota, Idaho, Kentucky, and California. At each of those events — and at the protests Saturday — demonstrators walked around in close contact with one another, carrying signs decrying their governors, as they questioned the threat the coronavirus poses while demanding to be allowed to go back to work.  “Keep America Free, wake up sheep,” read one Utah protester’s sign Saturday, while a New Hampshire woman’s poster read “Free people make their own risk assessments.” At a gathering in Austin, Texas, protesters cheered on Alex Jones, the founder of right-wing conspiracy theory website Infowars, as he drove by shouting, “Everybody knows we’ve been attacked by biological weapons” on a megaphone. Alex Jones at the Austin rally pic.twitter.com/zGX4qomoRa Conspiracy theories aside, the majority of the protesters were people chafing under weeks-long closures of workplaces. Stay-at-home orders have largely shut down businesses deemed nonessential, resulting in economic distress for millions of Americans — and in mass layoffs around the country.  According to the latest Labor Department report, more than 22 million Americans — around 14 percent of the US workforce — have filed jobless claims since mid-March, when most restrictions began going into place for for states across the country. While Congress has approved additional unemployment benefits with its CARES Act, many newly unemployed Americans have struggled to access those benefits: There are widespread reports of delayed checks and people struggling to get through to unemployment offices with the surge of claims.  President Donald Trump has promised a swift economic recovery, and announced his administration’s plan to reopen US businesses on Thursday — though the decision will ultimately be left up to states. Multiple states began easing some restrictions on Friday — such as reopening beaches, parks, and golf courses, and earlier this week, multiple governors on the East and West Coasts and in the Midwest announced regional pacts to come up with a plan to reengage economies. But despite the protests in recent days, and federal pressure to begin loosening social distancing guidelines, it would appear most Americans are not yet ready to return to normal life. Demonstrators may have made a lot of noise this weekend, but polling indicates they’re in the minority.  Between April 7 and 12, the Pew Research Center asked nearly 5,000 people whether they were more concerned restrictions on public activities would be lifted too quickly or not quickly enough. The answer was overwhelming: 66 percent said they feared social distancing would be cut short too soon.  More than 80 percent of Democrats were worried about restrictions ending quickly, but a slight majority of Republicans — 51 percent — also shared that view.  And a Gallup poll taken between April 10 and 12 of around 2,500 people revealed that more Americans are worried about getting Covid-19 than are worried about experiencing severe financial hardship due to the restrictions.  While both effects of the virus — tens of thousands of deaths, and historic economic setbacks — are devastating, experts say things will only get worse if states ease restrictions too quickly and cause a second surge of cases before health care systems are prepared to handle it.  Public health experts argue the best way to ensure there is no resurgence in cases upon relaxing restrictions is to conduct widespread, robust testing. Unfortunately, scientists say the US is still a long way off from being able to do this.  According to the Covid Tracking Project, the US has averaged fewer than 150,000 tests per day over the last week. Researchers at Harvard University estimate that to reopen the US by the middle of May, daily tests would need to be closer to 500,000 to 700,000. And other experts argue millions of tests would need to be conducted each day. “The whole point of this social distancing is to buy us time to build up capacity to do the types of public health interventions we know work,” Natalie Dean, a biostatistics professor at the University of Florida, told Vox’s German Lopez. “If we’re not using this time to scale up testing to the level that we need it to be … we don’t have an exit strategy. And then when we lift things, we’re no better equipped than we were before.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The United States government has ordered 20 million N95 masks for health care workers through a set of suppliers that are overwhelmingly unproven and untested, according to a new report from the Wall Street Journal. At least 80 percent of the masks, which are due to be delivered by the end of May, are being ordered from vendors which either haven’t done business with the government before or haven’t previously provided medical equipment specifically to the government. The government’s heavy reliance on untested suppliers of medical equipment raises questions about the quality of the masks, and whether they will be delivered in a timely fashion. Some of the vendors have already missed delivery deadlines and dropped out of the process because of supply problems, according to the Wall Street Journal. Additionally, the parent company of one vendor is going through bankruptcy and has been accused of fraud in lawsuits. The masks are being purchased for about $6 each through the $110 million contract — a price that is more expensive than the typical price of an N95 mask before the pandemic began, but is roughly in line with current market rates.  The fact that the government is counting on untested suppliers for a crucial piece of personal protective equipment (PPE) for health care providers is a worrying prospect at a time when there are widespread shortages of masks, gowns, gloves and other critical equipment for health care providers dealing with the coronavirus pandemic.   N95 masks are more complex — and more complicated to make — than a surgical mask. As Recode’s Rebecca Heilweil explains, certified N95 masks are “special”: Unlike a conventional surgical mask, N95 masks are built so that 95 percent of very small airborne particles can’t get through. These masks also need to be approved by the CDC’s National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health and, depending on the type, the Food and Drug Administration. In order to fulfill those requirements, N95 masks must be constructed so that they seal tightly around one’s mouth and nose, unlike surgical or cloth masks which are loose-fitting. ... The masks themselves are difficult to make, in part because they require specialized equipment to meet stringent regulatory standards.  The federal government has placed separate PPE orders from traditional suppliers as well — including orders for 600 million N95 masks from huge, prominent vendors like 3M and Honeywell International Inc, according to the Journal. But those orders extend through next year, and those vendors also supply masks to many other clients.  Taking a gamble on untested suppliers has already proved troublesome for other governments. For example, the British government spent $20 million on coronavirus antibody tests from an unknown manufacturer that turned out to not work. When the government makes rushed contracts with less well-known vendors they also may be more likely to be susceptible to attempted fraud. The Justice Department recently disrupted a foreign criminal scheme in which two people or organizations attempted to fraudulently sell nearly 40 million N95 masks to health care providers in the US.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Nearly two-thirds of Americans believe President Donald Trump acted too slowly in responding to the coronavirus in the United States, according to a new report from the nonpartisan Pew Research Center, reflecting a disconnect between how the public and the president views his performance. The study — which featured 4,917 US adults, and was taken from April 7 to 12 — did find a partisan split in attitudes on the president’s early response. Republicans overall were more likely to agree with the president’s claim that he acted “way too early” in responding to the threat posed by the virus, with 66 percent saying they feel Trump reacted quickly. Among Republicans who described themselves as moderate or liberal, however, a slight majority — 53 percent — said Trump acted too slowly.  Similarly, Republicans living in counties with high death tolls were also less aligned with the president’s view of his response — 43 percent of those living where there have been a high number of deaths said Trump should have done more, sooner.  Democrats everywhere, and of all ideologies, found fault with Trump’s early response, with 92 percent of Democrats overall saying the president should have acted faster. When asked about how they see the president now, the poll found that 39 percent of the public thinks Trump is telling the truth about the pandemic, 52 percent believe he’s pretending the situation is better than it is, and 8 percent feel he’s overexaggerating the seriousness of the situation. And the researchers found, as others have this week, that most Americans (in this case, 66 percent) are concerned that state governments will lift social distancing restrictions too quickly — even as conservative groups protest stay-at-home orders across the country.  Americans’ criticism of Trump stands in contrast with his own assessment of his work: He’s said he’s acted quickly to combat the virus, citing his decision to restrict travel to China on January 31 as proof of his decisive action. As Vox’s Aaron Rupar has noted, however, “the fact of the matter is the virus was already spreading within US borders by this time, so at best, the travel restrictions bought the federal government time that it didn’t use particularly well.” Beyond that decision, the Trump administration has downplayed the severity of the virus from the beginning, and largely failed to take early widespread actions that could have slowed the spread of the disease in the US, which instead is now projected to kill tens of thousands of Americans.  National security advisers warned Trump about the virus’s expected spread through the country in early January, shortly after cases began spreading in China. As weeks ticked by, Trump minimized the problem in his messaging, did little to address testing shortages, and delayed declaring a national emergency to unlock aid funding. And while his tune has changed in recent weeks, experts say the early sluggish response likely has had lasting effects on the virus’s spread in communities and how deadly it has become. The US’ problems handling the coronavirus pandemic began in April 2018, when the Trump administration began disbanding the team that handles pandemic responses as he repeatedly called for cuts to the budget for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. By the time the coronavirus came to the US, officials had to rebuild a coordinated response team they had dismantled years before.  The Trump administration restricted travel from China in late January, the day after the World Health Organization declared a global health emergency. He has often cited this as an example of an early, decisive move to help stop the virus. But as the virus ravaged China, South Korea, and Italy through late February, Trump officials said the virus was contained in the US and that the country was “pretty close to airtight.”  Throughout February, the administration seems to have done little to prepare for the pandemic to come, and as Rupar noted, did not have anything to highlight from that month in a White House video produced to highlight Trump’s coronavirus accomplishments. And by late February, as US officials warned of major disruptions ahead, Trump insisted “it’s going to disappear. One day, it’s like a miracle, it will disappear.” Even in March, as people began dying in Washington state and elsewhere, administration officials assured the public that the US was “way ahead of the curve” on preparing for the virus, said that “the vast majority of Americans are not at risk for this virus,” and the Trump campaign refused to cancel campaign rallies.  Finally, in mid-March, Trump agreed to recommend social distancing around the country and declared a national emergency, which unlocked $42.6 billion in funding to help states get more resources as medical supplies in some states were already running thin. Supplies have continued to be hard to come by, which experts have said is due in part to the dismantling of the pandemic preparedness team before the crisis began.  “The US … was not prepared,” Jen Kates, senior vice president and director of global health and HIV policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation, told Vox’s German Lopez. “A good preparedness plan would have helped address this.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) failed to follow appropriate manufacturing procedures while developing the United States’ coronavirus test, resulting in contamination that delayed making tests available nationwide, according to an investigation by the Washington Post’s David Willman.  News of the mishap comes as states are grappling with how and when to reopen their economies. That can’t be done safely until widespread testing is available, and experts say the US is woefully behind.  The CDC violated its own standards when developing the testing kits in a lab that was also working with synthetic coronavirus material, the Post reported. This led to contamination of one of the components used in the tests, which is believed to have caused false positives in the first batch of tests. The CDC took more than a month to correct the issue, hindering efforts to limit the early spread of the coronavirus in the US. Federal officials told the Post the Department of Health and Human Services is investigating the development of the original kits, which was first flagged in January when 24 of 26 test kits sent out to public health departments showed false positives.  The error — and the delay in fixing it — likely contributed to a delay in testing that allowed the virus to spread undetected.  The genetic sequence for the coronavirus, which allowed scientists to begin developing a test to detect it, was made available worldwide on January 12. In countries like China, Germany, and South Korea, scientists used this information to make rapid, widespread testing available, which helped officials track the virus and develop containment strategies. But in the US, scientists developed a more complex test aimed at distinguishing the novel coronavirus that causes Covid-19, SARS-CoV-2, from other coronaviruses — such as the one that causes SARS. The test component used to do so was likely the one that was contaminated, the Post reported. And even though distinguishing SARS-Cov-2 from other coronaviruses was eventually deemed unnecessary, there was a lengthy delay in jettisoning that component. On February 28, nearly 50 days after the virus’s genetic sequence was made available, the Food and Drug Administration approved the CDC’s existing tests to be used in the US, and an outside contractor manufactured the rest of the tests the agency had planned to provide.  The next day, the first person in the US died from the virus. Now, there are more than 716,000 confirmed cases and more than 37,000 deaths as of April 18. The CDC did not immediately respond to a request for comment from Vox, but spokesman Benjamin Haynes told the Post there was insufficient “quality control” in its test development and said that diagnostic kits were being used in every state by late March. The US began testing slowly, and didn’t regularly hit more than 1,000 tests performed daily until nearly mid-March.  Prior to that point, the coronavirus was spreading throughout many communities without reliable detection. Many states also waited until mid-March to begin ratcheting up social distancing restrictions designed to slow the spread of the virus.  If testing had been available sooner, it may have made a difference in how quickly and how far the virus spread by allowing officials to track it, to isolate people confirmed to be infected, and to quarantine anyone those people came into contact with.  “If there’s enough testing around and people are willing to be tested, the brushfires can be identified and put out before the wildfire,” Jeffrey Martin, an epidemiologist at the University of California San Francisco, told Vox’s German Lopez. “The only way that a society can function is if the brushfires are identified and put out.” Since mid-March, testing capacity in the US has surged. But experts say at least three times as many tests would need to be performed daily nationwide before social distancing restrictions could be safely eased. Without this sort of increase in testing, it will be impossible for officials to assess the decline of the disease with certainty. “I want to be able to identify everybody who is even mildly symptomatic,” Ashish Jha, the director of the Harvard Global Health Institute, told Keith Collins of the New York Times. “So when I wake up one morning and have a sore throat and a fever, I should be able to go get tested. And then I want to be able to test all of my contacts if I turn out to be positive, so that I can do the test, trace, and isolate strategy that’s so critical to allowing us to open up and stay open.” That’s bad news for state governors, who are stuck between protecting public health by continuing stringent statewide quarantines, and being pressured to reopen businesses under what’s shaping up to be a globally catastrophic economic downturn. Multiple state governors are choosing to ease some restrictions — such as allowing access to parks and golf courses — this week, and regional consortiums of governors say they’re working on plans to allow people to go back to work.  But epidemiologists say there’s a possibility that states reopening businesses and easing social distancing requirements too quickly could lead to a second wave of cases and deaths — in a worst-case scenario, that could mean up to 1.7 million Americans dead. With more testing, it would be easier for scientists to determine whether it’s safe to return to some semblance of normalcy. But as state and local officials struggle to get the supplies they need to do widespread testing, it’s likely that any reopenings that do occur will carry more risk than they should, and that many Americans should prepare to spend yet more time at home. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Oregon Gov. Kate Brown signed an executive order on Friday that prohibits debt collectors from seizing federal stimulus checks meant to help Americans endure the economic shock caused by the coronavirus pandemic. Brown’s order is the latest state-level effort to protect the relief measure from being taken by debt collectors under a process known as garnishment — something creditors can legally do given neither Congress nor the Treasury Department took steps to ensure the checks are exempt from seizure. “Many Oregonians, through no fault of their own, are struggling to pay their bills, their rent, or even buy essentials like groceries and prescription drugs,” said Brown in a statement. “These recovery checks were meant to provide relief, not reward debt collection agencies for preying on Oregonians who have lost their livelihoods.” As the Hill notes, Brown’s order protects the stimulus checks, which can be up to $1,200 for an individual, from garnishment the way other federal aid is, like Social Security, disability, and veterans’ benefits. Earlier this week, the governors of Illinois and Washington state also signed orders to protect stimulus checks from garnishment. “That stimulus check should help to pay for the necessities — food, rent, that type of thing,” said Washington Attorney General Bob Ferguson after Gov. Jay Inslee issued a protective proclamation on Tuesday. “It should not be garnished to pay for medical bills. That would not be right.”  Inslee’s proclamation suspends statutes allowing for consumer debt collecting through bank account garnishment and wage garnishment, while the Illinois proclamation restricts asset discovery as well as summons for wage deduction and garnishment.  Under the CARES Act that authorized the stimulus, the checks are protected from being collected by most federal and state debt collectors. (Notably, they’re not exempt from unpaid child support.) But the checks are not shielded from private creditors collecting debt on things like medical bills, credit card bills, or private student loans.  A group of 25 attorneys general wrote a letter to US Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin last week calling for him to exempt the stimulus checks from private debt collection. But as David Dayen has reported for the American Prospect, the Treasury Department was aware of the debt collection provision, and appears to have given collectors a green light. About 70 million consumers report being in debt or being contacted about debt, according to a 2017 survey by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. Experts believe millions of Americans are likely to have their stimulus checks garnished by private lenders — and those likely to be targeted are those who need relief the most. “The folks who owe people money, who are disproportionately poor, are the ones at greatest risk. Ironically, those are the same folks who are most in need of the checks and may be most in need of assistance to provide their families shelter, food and medicine,” Brent Adams of the Woodstock Institute, a Chicago-based economic development agency, told ABC News. Exacerbating the problem further is that many people who believe they have wrongfully had their bank accounts dipped into won’t be able to seek legal recourse any time soon, since courts in many states have closed for nonessential business. As Dayen reported for the American Prospect last week, it’s not just private collectors that are able to garnish the stimulus checks: The Treasury Department “effectively blessed” the idea of banks garnishing stimulus checks during a webinar with banking officials earlier in April. Banks were reportedly told they would be “first in line” to take money from the stimulus money to cover things like delinquent loans or past-due fees. Consumer advocates have been outraged by the maneuver. “At a time when people are desperate to buy food, the idea that anybody would grab [the $1,200 payments], let alone the banks they trust with their money, is appalling,” Lauren Saunders, associate director with the National Consumer Law Center, told the American Prospect. A number of Democratic senators — as well as Republican Sen. Josh Hawley — have requested the Treasury Department bar private collectors from garnishing the checks. At the moment, however, it’s looking like the only successful efforts to shield recipients of the stimulus checks is taking place on a state level. But even in states where governors are taking action, consumer advocates are calling for more sweeping measures. For example, in Illinois, where Gov. J.B. Pritzker has announced a suspension of debt collection laws, consumer advocates have called for the governor to issue an order that would force debt collectors like payday lenders to manually, rather than automatically, obtain payment from debtors, and to charge no late fees. They also called on the governor to threaten to take away business licenses from companies that don’t comply. In some states, there are existing laws that could protect the stimulus checks. Ohio Attorney General David Yost, for example, has warned creditors that the checks can’t be garnished under state law. Nebraska’s attorney general told creditors to “proceed with caution.” If the purpose of the stimulus really is to help people who have lost income and get them to spend money, it would seem that a federal solution handled by the Treasury Department would be the most efficient way to deal with the issue. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The IRS officially deposited the first wave of direct stimulus payments last weekend, the agency announced on Twitter.  The one-time “Economic Impact Payments,” which could be as much as $1,200 for an individual and $2,400 for a couple, are part of a recent stimulus package approved by Congress to help workers and businesses combat the widespread economic fallout of the coronavirus outbreak. People with children are eligible for an additional $500 per child under the age of 17.  The payments are slated to be sent via either direct deposit or the mail in the coming months, and they won’t be subject to taxes themselves.  As the IRS starts sending out payments, many questions have emerged about who will qualify for them and the timing around their distribution. Vox has some answers, below.  Direct payments will be distributed based on the adjusted gross income reported on an individual or couple’s 2018 and 2019 tax returns, broken down as follows:  For more information, check out this explainer from Vox’s Dylan Matthews.  Those without bank information on file with the IRS who do not fill out this form can expect to receive payments in the mail.  Information required for this form includes one’s Social Security number, name, address, and details about dependents. Completing this form does not put people on the hook for any taxes, but it is required to obtain the direct payment, and including bank account deposit information can expedite the processing of that payment.  The answer to this question depends on if you have filed taxes in 2018 or 2019.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   An exclusive Reuters investigation has revealed that Amazon.com is using thermal cameras in warehouses to screen workers for fevers, in hopes of preventing the spread of coronavirus at its facilities in the United States. Reuters’ Jeffrey Dastin and Krystal Hu explain that the cameras “in effect measure how much heat people emit relative to their surroundings” and “require less time and contact than forehead thermometers, earlier adopted by Amazon.” The forehead thermometers, as Recode’s Rebecca Heilweil explains, have become a common sight in China, where they’re a widely used surveillance tool for tracking infectious diseases. Their use in US facilities like Amazon fulfillment centers is a more recent development due to coronavirus, and the remote thermal cameras are a still more recent adoption. The forehead thermometers will remain as a secondary check for workers flagged by the thermal cameras; some workers quoted by Dastin and Hu reported feeling unsafe about performing the thermometer checks, with one saying, “a line once formed outside her warehouse, and employees could not receive masks until after they had entered the building and had their temperatures taken,” raising social distancing concerns. Amazon told Reuters the thermal camera measure was taken “to support the health and safety of our employees, who continue to provide a critical service in our communities.” It comes after Amazon has faced vocal protests from workers who say the company isn’t adequately safeguarding workers at its warehouses and fulfillment centers. These critiques have garnered a great degree of attention, while Amazon deliveries have become more essential than ever as Americans staying at home turn to online ordering in lieu of brick-and-mortar stores. As my colleagues Jason Del Rey and Shirin Ghaffary have reported, there have been reported cases of Covid-19 in at least two dozen Amazon facilities in the US. These reports sparked worker protests demanding that the company “provide paid leave for any warehouse worker who feels unsafe working through the pandemic” and “fully close down and deep-clean a facility if any of its employees are diagnosed with Covid-19.” Some of those raising concerns have been fired by the company. This April, the company fired warehouse worker Bashir Mohamed and corporate employees Emily Cunningham and Maren Costa, who all say they were punished for criticizing the company’s approach to worker safety. An earlier firing, of fulfillment center worker Chris Smalls — who organized a mass walkout to demand a shutdown of his center in Staten Island — prompted an investigation from the New York City Commission on Human Rights and a letter of protest from several US senators. The company’s general counsel, David Zapolsky, reportedly later dismissed Smalls as “not smart, or articulate.” Smalls’s walkout was followed by similar actions by staff at the Amazon-owned Whole Foods grocery store chain. Amazon has raised warehouse pay and pushed new sanitation efforts like “staggered break times to promote social distancing,” forehead thermometers, mask distribution, and now, the thermal cameras — but it has resisted demands for fulfillment center shutdowns and paid leave for all (not just those with symptoms). In one case it even reopened a distribution center just one day after a worker tested positive. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.A number of governors across the United States are easing coronavirus restrictions in their states or are announcing plans to do so, despite warnings from public health experts that the nation needs better and more widespread Covid-19 testing capacity before severe social distancing measures can be safely scaled back.  Friday, Gov. Tim Walz of Minnesota reopened golf courses, bait shops, outdoor shooting ranges, parks, trails, driving ranges, and said other outdoor activities will be allowed. Also on Friday, Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida allowed some beaches and parks to reopen and Texas Gov. Greg Abbott announced imminent plans to reopen state parks, allow retail stores to provide pickups, and to loosen surgery restrictions.  Meanwhile, groups of governors on the East Coast, West Coast, and Midwest announced pacts this week to work together to determine how and when to reopen their regional economies.  The announcements came as President Donald Trump began releasing guidance for governors on ways they could reengage the economy in phases. Thursday, the president indicated it would be up to state leaders to decide when to roll back restrictions on social distancing and in-person work, despite initially saying he has the “ultimate authority” on the matter. With more than 700,000 cases and 37,000 deaths nationwide as of April 18 — as well as 22 million unemployment claims filed nationally in the last four weeks, state leaders weighing their choices are increasingly caught between public health concerns and suffering economies. The International Monetary Fund has said the “Great Lockdown” is likely to cause the largest global economic meltdown since the Great Depression.  But in order to ease restrictions, states would need widespread testing to be certain that cases are actually decreasing, and that relaxed social distancing does not lead to an uptick in cases.  Vice President Mike Pence said April 17 that the “best scientists and health experts assess that states today have enough tests to implement the criteria of phase one, if they choose.” But leading experts disagree. While the country has come a long way since early March, nationwide testing is still floundering, with levels too low to paint a comprehensive picture of how the virus is spreading in states, making it unclear whether people congregating — as they did at Florida beaches Friday after restrictions were lifted there — is safe.  According to the Covid Tracking Project, the US has averaged fewer than 150,000 tests per day over the last week. Researchers at Harvard University estimate that to reopen the US by the middle of May, daily tests would need to be closer to 500,000 to 700,000. And other experts argue millions of tests would need to be conducted each day. And the rate of positive tests in the US — about 20 percent — suggests testing is currently inadequate. Experts at the World Health Organization have said countries with robust testing find positive results in fewer than 10 percent of tests, the New York Times notes. This typically indicates a country is testing a wide swath of people, rather than only those who are symptomatic, as US guidelines currently dictate. To have its confirmed case rate more closely match other countries believed to have similar rates of infection, the US will need to scale up testing rapidly — and in part, this is what social distancing strategies were instituted to help do. “The whole point of this social distancing is to buy us time to build up capacity to do the types of public health interventions we know work,” Natalie Dean, a biostatistics professor at the University of Florida, told Vox’s German Lopez. “If we’re not using this time to scale up testing to the level that we need it to be … we don’t have an exit strategy. And then when we lift things, we’re no better equipped than we were before.” But testing has recently plateaued, which state officials say is due to shortages in testing equipment like nasal swabs, reagents, test kits, testing machines, and personal protective equipment. Others argue that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s narrow testing criteria — which prioritizes testing for vulnerable populations, health care workers and hospitalized patients — is leaving many ineligible for testing, Politico’s David Lim reported. As Vox’s German Lopez noted: To fix the gaps, experts argue, the federal government needs to relax criteria for testing, invest in new supplies and labs, and better coordinate supply chains to address, among other issues, chokepoints. States, with limited resources and little control of the national supply chain, simply can’t do this all on their own.  Public health officials and experts say that having robust testing will make it possible to trace the spread of the disease if people return to work.  “I want to be able to identify everybody who is even mildly symptomatic,” Ashish Jha, the director of the Harvard Global Health Institute, told Keith Collins of the New York Times. “So when I wake up one morning and have a sore throat and a fever, I should be able to go get tested. And then I want to be able to test all of my contacts if I turn out to be positive, so that I can do the test, trace, and isolate strategy that’s so critical to allowing us to open up and stay open.” Epidemiologists say there’s a possibility states reopening businesses and easing social distancing requirements too quickly could lead to a second wave of cases and deaths — in a worst-case scenario, that could mean up to 1.7 million Americans dead.  That projection, is of course, based on a number of assumptions that may not be met. And it is possible things could change: As scientists learn more about the coronavirus and its spread, there’s a chance some intervention could make it possible for the country to safely reopen more quickly. However, it’s more likely that states are far from ready to reopen their economies — and that the public should plan to hunker down for stringent social distancing a little longer. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) released new, preliminary nationwide data on Friday, that revealed 30 percent of Covid-19 patients are African American, even though African Americans make up around 13 percent of the population of the United States.  The federal data is far from complete — it’s missing racial information on 75 percent of patients in its database. But it’s consistent with other data on race and Covid-19.  The striking overrepresentation of African Americans among confirmed Covid-19 cases is also seen in what state-by-state data is available, and it underscores that, far from being an “equalizer,” the coronavirus pandemic is amplifying preexisting social inequities tied to race, class, and access to the health care system. The Associated Press reports that based on available state and local data, about a third of US Covid-19 fatalities are of African Americans — although in the areas analyzed, only about 14 percent of the population was African American. About half of US states, that together represent under 20 percent of cases nationwide, haven’t released demographic data on deaths, according to the AP. And state-by-state data compiled by Mother Jones shows wide disparities in both infections and fatalities among people of color. In Wisconsin, for example, African Americans represent 6 percent of the population, but nearly 40 percent of Covid-19 fatalities.  As Vox’s Dylan Scott pointed out in his analysis of how coronavirus has taken a hugely disproportionate toll on people of color, this trend is vividly on display in the epicenter of the American coronavirus crisis: New York. “Black New Yorkers are dying at twice the rate of their white peers; Latinos in the city are also succumbing to the virus at a much higher rate than white or Asian New Yorkers. The same trends can be seen in infection and hospitalization rates, too,” Scott writes. The disparities are easy to see in this chart from the city’s health department: Anyone can be infected with coronavirus, but certain populations are more vulnerable to both contracting and experiencing severe cases of it. As Scott explained, that’s because exposure to the spread of the virus and the ability to cope with it are a function of things like access to health care and types of jobs that tend to vary based on race: [T]here are the more acute reasons (black and Latino people are being put at risk more in their day-to-day lives) and then there are the structural reasons (long-standing economic and health disparities between white people and people of color). On the first, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority in NYC is a useful and disturbing example. As the New York Times reported last week, bus and subway workers have been hit hard by the coronavirus: 41 dead and more than 6,000 either diagnosed with Covid-19 or self-quarantining because they have symptoms that suggest an infection, as of April 8. Who works for the MTA? Black people and Latinos. They account for more than 60 percent of the agency’s workforce in New York City, according to estimates from 2016. US Surgeon General Jerome Adams stirred controversy last week when he implied minority Covid-19 deaths were a matter of personal responsibility rather than part of an ongoing crisis public health experts have said they are struggling to control. He said during April 10’s White House coronavirus briefing that communities of color “are not helpless” in the face of the virus, and said that in addition to observing social distancing and proper hygiene, they should “avoid alcohol, tobacco, and drugs.” Adams’s comments garnered strong criticism from progressive commentators because that kind of rhetoric has usually not been targeted at general audiences or white communities, and it appeared to hold people of color to a uniquely high bar.  What Adams spent less time discussing, however, was how susceptibility to coronavirus is shaped by a long history of institutional racism and economic inequity in America. As Vox’s Anna North has explained: [B]lack Americans are more likely to have underlying conditions because of widespread racism and inequality, experts say. Many differences in health outcomes in America are “produced by access to things like adequate time to prepare healthy foods at home” and “adequate money to not be working three shifts and have really high stress levels,” Lynch said — access that white people are just more likely to have. As [Fabiola] Cineas notes, 22 percent of black Americans lived in poverty in 2018, compared with 9 percent of white Americans. Beyond poverty, a number of factors contribute to poor health among black people, from racism in medical settings to the physical health effects of discrimination. Redlining and other forms of housing discrimination have made black Americans more likely to live in neighborhoods affected by environmental contamination, which federal and state officials have been slow to respond to, in turn raising rates of chronic illness. This makes it clear that policy choices have a huge role to play in determining which people are least protected from the pandemic — and that making changes to these policies will be key in protecting those most vulnerable to threats like Covid-19.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Democrats are standing up for science once again, this time against those on the right, like President Donald Trump and the Fox News hosts who’ve peddled misinformation about the coronavirus and downplayed its risks. “Follow the science, listen to the experts, do what they tell you,” Joe Biden exhorted during an April 5 appearance on ABC’s This Week. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi on Tuesday said that “Americans must ignore lies and start to listen to scientists and other respected professionals in order to protect ourselves and our loved ones.” There’s no question that listening to experts and respected professionals is a better idea than listening to patent falsehoods. But it’s important to recognize that the partisan clash over the science of coronavirus is not the same as that over issues like climate change and air pollution. Scientists have barely begun the work of understanding this virus, so they don’t have decades of research and data to rely on to answer our questions. Already we’ve seen America’s public health experts flip-flop on wearing face masks, while the most prominent epidemiological model has gone from predicting between 100,000 and 200,000 deaths in the US to forecasting a bit under 70,000 — a horrific toll, but one that’s outside the confidence interval of the previous forecast. This is not a reason to dismiss experts, but a way to illustrate the nature of scientific advancement: It takes time. Scientists spend years gathering the data and information necessary to produce increasingly better answers to complex questions. We need to make choices about policy and our individual lives right now, but we’re watching science play out in real time. The answers will get better, but not as fast as we might want them to. And while expertise is important, turning “the experts” and “the science” into false gods could create a backlash cycle of unrealistic expectations and dashed hopes. We need to value scientists and listen to experts, but part of listening means understanding that right now, what they’re saying is that they do not have all the answers. Two weeks ago, the country was gripped with fear about potential shortages of ventilators in coronavirus hot spots. The idea was that it would be the best treatment for severe cases, but that if a given hospital had limited supply, the death rate might soar due to the lack of treatment capacity. But on April 8, Sharon Begley reported for Stat News that doctors were beginning to think that ventilators were being overused for Covid-19 patients. On April 14, Jim Dwyer wrote in the New York Times about the new ventilator skepticism, explaining that Covid-19 patients with low blood oxygen levels seem to have unexpectedly strong ability to retain consciousness and that reorienting them into prone positions to facilitate breathing is now a preferred treatment technique. He noted that special massage tables designed for pregnant women — a commodity that, like ventilators, there is a somewhat limited supply of — seem to be especially useful for this. The turnabout from “national ventilator shortage crisis” to “maybe ventilators aren’t useful and we need pregnancy massage tables” is stunning. It reflects the reality that doctors have very limited clinical experience with this disease. And the coronavirus pandemic is littered with this sort of situation in which the state of our knowledge is simply not very good. This is not to knock the experts, but simply to say that listening to the experts means really listening to what they have to say, which is that they are not sure exactly how the virus spreads and under which conditions. They are not sure how many people are getting infected. They are not sure how best to treat the most severely ill people. And they are not sure how robust immunity will be among those previously infected. All of which is to say that, of course, model builders can’t give us good conditional forecasts about the trajectory of a disease when underlying building blocks of scientific understanding aren’t very strong.  The underlying difficulty is that SARS-CoV-2 is a genuinely new subject for study.  Every Ebola outbreak is alarming because of how deadly the disease is, and the policy work around containing the outbreaks is difficult. But scientists have been studying the Ebola virus for decades, and if you ask them questions about it, they can give you precise answers. But that wasn’t the case right in the middle of the original Ebola outbreak. And at times, things have been much worse off. AIDS was first clinically identified in June 1981, but HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, wasn’t identified until 1983. Modern science, thankfully, is able to proceed at a much faster pace than that.  But so many key questions about the pandemic can’t be answered in a lab alone. We want to know about how the virus interacts with human beings, from both the standpoint of transmission and the progress of the disease. Conducting the kind of experiments that would provide really clear evidence on these questions is inherently time-consuming. Policymakers need to make decisions under conditions of intense uncertainty.  That’s hard. And the scientists themselves are inevitably going to change their minds as they learn more. That should let us improve the quality of our decision-making over time. But it’s going to require a degree of patience, in terms of not just waiting for answers but being tolerant of errors and reversals and problems in expert judgment rather than a crash-and-burn cycle where we look to experts as seers and get disillusioned when they turn out to be mistaken. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.One of the greatest challenges of the coronavirus pandemic is that all levels of policymakers need to make decisions with imperfect information. Scientists still don’t know everything about how this virus is transmitted, and due to the lack of widespread testing, they also don’t know, exactly, how prevalent it is. They don’t know if the virus will show a strong seasonal effect, and decrease during the summer. They don’t know how this will all end. One way they are trying to answer these questions is through modeling. Specifically, infectious disease models are tools — based on mathematical formulations — that try to game out what’s possible in the future. These models are varied, often confusing to interpret, and are not crystal balls, especially because the ideal data isn’t yet available. But they are a large part of what government leaders use to make decisions, influencing how resources are allocated to health care facilities and how social distancing orders are issued to the public. In this piece, I’m going to try to explain the utility of coronavirus models and how to think about them when you see them reported in the news. I’ll also explain a big idea to make these models work better in the future.  But before that, it’s key to stress what we don’t need them for. We don’t need them to know that we’re in a very, very dangerous situation.  “What’s very important is not the details of the model, it’s that this is a virus that can crush health care,” says Bill Hanage, an epidemiologist who studies infectious diseases at Harvard. “That’s not a model result, that’s an observation. We know it because of Wuhan, we know it because of Italy, because of Spain, we know it because, now, of New York.“  In New York state, thousands have died, and hospitals are at, or exceeding, capacity and struggling with equipment shortages. Covid-19 is “a freight train,” as Hanage calls it, and it has rammed into not just New York but several other parts of the United States.  
    Related
   But the models also suggest that the country is nearing, or has reached, the peak in daily deaths. In the next phase of the outbreak, the models, and decisions made with them, will be critical: Things might seem like they are getting better, and they may be in terms of new infections and deaths. But this freight train will just be paused. Without the right controls in place, it could start up again.  The models are not perfect: Some are even failing in their predictions (more on that below). More scientific oversight and analysis is needed to figure out which models are the most useful to use in decision making.  Still, modeling plays a very important role, and it can help the public know that they, are, in fact, doing the right thing by staying home. The point of these models is not to precisely predict the future, it’s to influence the future, and choose a good course of action. Leaders have tough choices to make in the weeks and months ahead, as the outbreak plays out differently in states. Models can help predict rates of new infections, and estimate when the strain on the hospital system could peak.  In early April, Washington, DC, Mayor Muriel Bowser said that modeling projects a surge in DC area hospitals during the summer. “Like all models, we hope this one will be proved wrong,” she told MSNBC. But she’s preparing for it anyway. “We are preparing for many people to come through our hospitals.” A pandemic represents the mashup of some of the most complicated and messy things things people have ever tried to study: human behavior, virology, and the human immune system.  Forecasting disease outbreaks is an immense challenge, and even the smartest minds here don’t have the answers as to how this all is going to end. The most common question I am asked is when this will all be over. No really, when will we be able to do xyz? There is no way of knowing. There are too many possible futures, and too few hints. 2/ Models incorporate many different types of data into their projections. There are a head-spinning number of potential inputs. (And some models don’t use these inputs at all, but just rely on projecting data from earlier in the outbreak.)  A model can input the biology of the virus: How does it spread, how quickly does it infect, how quickly does it lead to symptoms, how quickly does it replicate to a level where it can jump from person to person? (Note: A lot of these variables are still not completely known.)  It can account for human biology: How does the immune system mount a response to this virus, how many people will become immune after exposure, and for how long? Also, how many people can get infected with the virus, and have the ability to spread it, but never feel sick themselves? (A lot of this isn’t perfectly understood either.)  It also should, ideally, reflect how human society works: How many people do we come into contact with each day, and how does this vary in different communities, rural and urban? Models need to account for that; in a big country like the US, outbreaks are going to be regional, with varying intensities and responses.  It needs to be realistic about the capacities of health care systems: How many beds are available for Covid-19 patients, how quickly will they fill up, how many doctors and nurses are there to serve them, how many ventilators are there, and how many patients will need them, and when?  Then, there’s chaos: How do people react to the news that tens of thousands are dying from a virus that probably started with a bat, and how might that influence the model? The question of “how will an outbreak progress” is clearly immense. In a common modeling approach called SIR (SIR stands for susceptible, infected, recovered), scientists are trying to figure how many people are susceptible to a disease, how many of them will become infected, at what rate and where. But then, as more people recover from the disease, and become immune, that decreases the number of those who are susceptible.   To sum up: This stuff is complicated! That we can get any insight into the future, considering the variables, is a miracle. Yet scientists are trying, and their efforts are valuable. Hanage explains there are basically two main types of models being used to try to plot out the course of this pandemic: statistical models and mechanistic models.  Let’s start by explaining statistical models. The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) has the most commonly cited models — and it includes separate projections for every state. Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus response coordinator, has referenced it. Hanage explains this model is what’s known as a statistical model. The IHME, based at the University of Washington, looks at data of how Covid-19 outbreaks have progressed around the world. It takes that data and then tries to project what the epidemic curve will look like as new outbreaks form in new areas based on what social distancing actions are being taken. The goal is to predict the time of peak hospital strain in an area, and the number of deaths.  To use Hanage’s metaphor: It’s looking at how fast and hard the freight train has hit on other stops of its journey, and predicting it will hit that fast and hard when it gets to new stops. This model makes some assumptions, namely, that the conditions for the previous freight train collisions will be similar in the future.  Earlier in the outbreak, the model was mainly fed from data in China, which imposed extreme social distancing measures. And so it assumes some high level of social distancing will continue into the future. “That makes this a best-case scenario model,” Carl Bergstrom, a computational biologist at the University of Washington, assessed on Twitter, at the end of March. It’s now also drawing from current social distancing actions in the US. The IHME model assumes this behavior will continue. And its creators are transparent about this limitation. The projection, the IHME explains on its FAQ page, “only goes until the beginning of August and does not predict how many deaths there may be if social distancing is not fully implemented and maintained through the end of May, or if there is a resurgence after early August.” The hardest thing to model in all of this is not the virus, but human behavior.  Its performance has been inconsistent. Recently, a group of statisticians from Australia and the US took a careful look at modeling forecasts of the IHME.  In a preprint paper (that’s not yet been peer-reviewed), the statisticians found that the model — and specifically, how its predictions on the number of daily Covid-19 deaths matched with reality — wasn’t making very good guesses when it came to individual states. “It does well predicting what’s happening across the entire United States,” Sally Cripps, a statistician at the University of Sydney, who co-authored the analysis of the IHME model, says. It also seems to predict the outbreak in New York well. “What it doesn’t do well, is predict individual states.” The model, she says, is “underestimating its uncertainty.”  The actual reported number of deaths in a state fell outside the model’s prediction between 43 and 73 percent of the time (depending on the date the model was assessed).  Which is to say: It isn’t very precise. The model was often more accurate predicting outcomes three days ahead than it was predicting events one day ahead, she says. Also, the analysis found some of the model’s predictions were underestimates, while some were over. There was no clear pattern. Cripps says she fears this lack of precision “undermines the public’s confidence or trust in science,” and that she wouldn’t depend on the model for big policy decisions. To be fair, deaths isn’t the only thing the model is trying to predict. It tries to forecast when the pandemic will peak in a given area, and can help hospitals plan for that extra strain. Estimates of those peaks were not assessed in this paper — just the prediction of daily deaths were — and will have to be gauged after the peaks are met. The model could get the number of deaths wrong, but the timing of the peaks right, for example.  (Yes, models are nuanced and confusing.) Also confusing matters, the model has been updated several times, as its creators have input new data from new outbreaks, new social distancing measures, and new resources (like ventilators) that have become available. This has actually led the models to decrease their death toll projection for the US a few times, recently from 81,766 to 60,415, or about 25 percent. This doesn’t necessarily mean the model has been wrong. It means collective actions have been working.  Our estimates for total COVID-19 deaths have dropped from 81,766 to 60,415 in today’s update. Why? Because social distancing measures in the US are working. Some Americans stayed at home before the orders came. Encouraging news #COVID19 #socialdistancing »https://t.co/KIhdSrXK7z Also keep in mind: The IHME death toll projections come with a huge range of error. In the model, deaths per day are expected to peak soon in the US. As of April 10, it predicted the peak being two days away, and the error — the shaded area, was roughly 4,000 deaths per day.  “I think it’s key not to get fixated on the exact numbers,” Dominique Heinke, an epidemiologist in Massachusetts, says. “You can look at a range of models and say, we can expect it to be at least this bad.” Again, we know this: The freight train is coming, and in many places, is already here.  Well, it reflects the complexity of the problem these models are trying to solve. For example, weather forecasters use atmospheric models to predict the weather, and as they gather more data on temperature, humidity, and barometric pressure, their forecasts become more accurate and, thus, often change.  “Unlike the weather, which we’re all accustomed to understanding and incorporating forecast into whatever decision you make, unlike the weather [here] we actually influence the outcome,” says Caitlin Rivers, a professor at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. “So people see the numbers, and they are motivated then to be more aware, stay home, and using good hygiene and doing all the things that really change that outcome.”  The models change, because our actions change. The models could change for the worse if local governments declare premature victories and decrease social distancing measures too early. “By keeping an eye on the model, we can tell how the virus is circulating in our own communities: in some places, cases and deaths are still going up, in some places they are starting to come down,” says Ali Mokdad, a professor at IHME and chief strategy officer for population health at the University of Washington. “We can also use the model to ask what businesses we should open first as we recover: The key issue as we go into recovery mode is to do it in stages so we don’t have a second wave of infections that will hurt us even more in terms of mortality and the economy.” Unless testing can be scaled up, some social distancing measures may have to be kept in place until there is a vaccine available, which can take a year or more. What happens in the scenario when social distancing measures are relaxed, but then put in place again if cases spike again? “I’m not sure we can model that,” Hanage says.  The other type of model decision makers are using is a mechanistic model. These models are designed to help policymakers understand the impacts specific policies and actions may have on a disease’s course. These models also make a lot of assumptions, and often present very wide-ranging scenarios.  A good example of a mechanistic model comes from the Imperial College of London. In the middle of March, it provided a scary wake-up call to the UK government to take more action. Their model looked at what would happen in Great Britain and in the US if the countries did nothing. It took what it knew about the transmissibility of the virus and put it into a model designed for the flu — a caveat right off the bat, as Covid-19 is not the flu.  (Transmissibility here is often called the R0, or R-naught; it’s the average number of new cases expected to be spawned by each case of an illness. Note: The value of the R0 is still just an estimation).  
    Related
   In the scenario where nothing is done, the model’s authors found, there could be 510,000 deaths in Great Britain, and 2.2 million in the US. And that was “not accounting for the potential negative effects of health systems being overwhelmed on mortality,” the authors report.  That made headlines. But their model didn’t just report the worst-case scenario. It tried to gauge the impact of various social distancing policies, and tried to make estimates for many different R0 figures. The estimates ranged, for Great Britain, from just 5,600 deaths assuming a low R0 of 2, and the most aggressive social distancing, and 550,000 deaths assuming an R0 of 2.6 and no social distancing measures.  If you’re a leader of a country, looking at that spread, you know what you need to do: implement social distancing measures. That’s what the UK did. Later, when one of the model’s authors told the UK government in testimony that the deaths in Great Britain would probably number around 20,000, he was not revising the model, as some critics complained. Instead, he was reflecting that range of possibilities presented in the model.  Again, the point of these models is not precise prediction, it’s to influence action.  That’s helpful. But again, as with the statistical models, these mechanistic models can’t game out every possible future.  Recently, Columbia University put out a model (with a handy interactive map) that tries to predict which US counties will have their health care systems overwhelmed, under different social distancing scenarios, and when.  The model also attempts to help hospitals by showing how different coping strategies in hospitals (i.e. converting operating room beds to Covid-19 care beds, for one example, and modifying ventilators for use in multiple patients for another) could mitigate the problem, and help save lives.  The prediction is grim for the crush on hospital systems, which is expected to soon move from the northeast United States, to Southern states, as the outbreak starts to impact more and more rural areas. (Keep in mind: As outbreaks in some cities taper off, outbreaks in other areas may just be getting started.) It’s a complicated model. It’s trying to predict hospital bed demand, ICU bed demand, and ventilator demand, Jeff Shaman, an infectious disease modeler at Columbia, explains. “It’s a mathematical description of transmission at county scale, where the counties are linked by movement between them based on ... travel patterns, and understanding that those have waned over time because of this ongoing Covid crisis.”  
    Related
   It tries to account for a lot, but it can’t account for everything. Something it can’t account for: the possibility that health care workers get sick and have to leave work, leaving these hospital systems more strained. “We’re in the process right now on establishing a national database on staffing levels,” Charles Branas, chair of epidemiology at Columbia, says. “It’s been challenging to build this airplane while it is flying, quite frankly.” That doesn’t mean the model is useless. It can still help guide decision-making. You can look at the map and see which counties are still overwhelmed in their best-case scenarios. “Those could potentially be first-choice counties for supplementary resources,” Branas says. I asked the Columbia researchers how they’d like the public to think of their model. “These are not forecasts, they are projections, we’re dealing with a very, very uncertain environment,” Shaman stressed. “The degree to which people are social distancing ... is changing day-to-day. It is difficult to pin down what’s going on. We’re making multiple projections because we don’t know what people will do. We do it because we would like some window into the future. So we can assess: Are we on a really bad trajectory no matter what we do? Or are we on a good trajectory no matter what we do? Or is it incumbent upon us to make certain decisions so we can more certainly move to a better outcome?“  (Another mechanistic model to check out: The University of Pennsylvania has a tool for regional leaders to input their own observations, and see how an outbreak might impact their area’s hospitals.) There’s a lot that’s still unknown about the coronavirus, and the pandemic.  “There will be people writing papers 100 years from now about what actually happened, there will be people making discoveries about the relative rates of increase in San Francisco vs. New York,” Hanage says.  Rivers, the Johns Hopkins epidemiologist, hopes, in the future, we’ll get better at this. Like the US has the National Weather Service — a government agency staffed to create weather models and test their predictive power — she hopes to see the creation of a National Infectious Disease Forecasting Center. “The reason that we have accurate weather forecast today, is because there was a federal agency responsible for weather forecast,” she says.  We need to learn from the modeling approaches being used now, to make better models for the future. The weather service does this for hurricanes: You can clearly see in the weather service data how hurricane forecast tracks (i.e. forecast models) have greatly improved over time. Rivers doesn’t see that as an accident. The weather models have improved because there’s a centralized service to study and create them.  She says there needs to be some central agency collecting these models in an archive, so that researchers later on can figure out which ones worked the best, and why. It could then incorporate that understanding to better forecast future outbreaks.  Right now, there are a lot of models. There are a lot of projections. We’re not sure which ones will be most accurate, or useful. “Don’t end up being obsessed with a specific number,” Hanage gives a final piece of advice. “Just end up recognizing the number is large. That’s the best way to think about it.”  Hanage offers another potentially helpful metaphor: “A very, very good physicist will be able to model what will happen if you walk out into the interstate and say exactly where your body parts might land, but the fact that another model puts the body parts in another place, doesn’t alter the central conclusion that you’re going to get run down by a car,” he says. For now, the biggest message from all of them is that social distancing measures are indeed saving lives. The models predicted that weeks ago — and that prediction is coming true. We can all feel good about our sacrifices because of that.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  When you have a huge hole where your nation’s leadership should be, it is wise to borrow the best of other people’s leaders. They can’t make America’s big decisions, but they can fill in some of the gaps.  In the Covid-19 pandemic, we can take comfort in their competence and use their wisdom to guide us about what we each should do. Right now, the United States and many other nations are considering easing social distancing and other restrictions if and when their new coronavirus cases and hospitalizations become flat or start to fall. And German Chancellor Angela Merkel (who happens to have scientific chops) has an important lesson that we should all listen to. On Wednesday, she laid out important logic about the coronavirus pandemic that hasn’t been communicated clearly enough here in the US. In simple and clear terms, she explains why Germany doesn’t have much “wiggle room” in its hospital capacity. Because of this, any lifting of its lockdown, like allowing some shops to open next week, will remain “on thin ice.” Merkel’s explanation, which went viral, is centered on the metric called R0, or basic reproduction number. It represents the number of people a sick person will infect on average in a group that’s susceptible to the disease (meaning they don’t already have immunity). She says that if Germany’s R0 were to shift from a flat rate of 1.0 to 1.1, the nation’s hospitals would be crushed by October, without sufficient resources to care for all of the severely ill Covid-19 patients. If the R0 goes up to 1.2, that overload hits in July. And so on. 
    Related
   Covid’s current global average R0 is 2-2.5, but Germany has done a good enough job of managing its outbreak to get its reported estimated R0 down to 0.7 as of April 17. That’s low enough for Merkel to sanction “a tentative easing of restriction.” Germany is not out of the woods, however. Marieke Degen, the deputy spokesperson of Germany’s Robert Koch Institute, told Vox’s Alex Ward that it’s “very important to stress that Germany is still at the beginning of the epidemic” and that more and more elderly people in the country are getting sick. America, for many reasons, has even less wiggle room than Germany. Germany has eight hospital beds per capita compared to America’s 2.7 beds. In ICU beds, Germany has 8.3 per capita while America has 6.6. It is also testing for coronavirus at twice the US rate (21 vs 9.8 tests per 1,000 people). Without robust testing, you can’t keep good tabs on R0 or the related Rt — and you can end up flying blind, risking health system overload and avoidable deaths.  Here's Instagram co-founder @kevin's new virus site that takes his recent models and updates them live in real time, in collaboration with @mikeyk — https://t.co/zpi35TIEdw pic.twitter.com/2qHZLDaL5n Covid-19 spreads in an exponential way, and it’s worth emphasizing exponential growth’s dynamics. Tiny shifts in risk grow very quickly, leading to deadly results, as this useful tweet thread shows: Exponentials still have the capacity to shock me.If mass wearing of masks make just 0.01 shift in the spread per day, from say 1.22x to 1.21x, there would now be ~20% fewer cases (and ~20% fewer deaths) in the UK since March 12.I had to double check that multiple times. The small choices we each make about risky behaviors are like playing Russian roulette, but with a machine gun. You may have thought that if you’re not in a high-risk group (like older adults), and the case fatality rate is around 1 percent, then the threat isn’t so great. Surely we can loosen restrictions?  But that’s like being locked in a room with 100 people, where your collective behavior determines how many bullets are live in the machine gun that’s about to strafe all of you. You might not die, but others surely will. Covid-19 is already the leading cause of death in many areas, including New York state, Louisiana, and Washington, DC. Do you want to add ammunition to its arsenal? Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The number of new coronavirus tests reported each day has plateaued — a big blow to the prospects of America reopening its economy safely anytime soon, even as President Donald Trump insists the country is weeks away from doing so. Trump announced guidelines on April 16 for states to reopen, calling for governors to ease social distancing measures, such as stay-at-home orders, as the number of new coronavirus cases begin to come down. He acknowledged a requirement for reopening the economy is that the federal government and states must know that the numbers of new coronavirus cases are actually coming down; without widespread testing, they simply can’t know what they’re dealing with and how to act. “Our best scientists & health experts assess that states today have enough tests to implement the criteria of phase one, if they choose,” Vice President Mike Pence said at a press conference the night of April 17. But according to the Covid Tracking Project, the US has averaged fewer than 150,000 tests each day so far in the week of April 13, including at both public and commercial labs. That’s an improvement from the early days of March, when the country reported new tests in the dozens and later the hundreds. But it’s not an increase from more recent weeks: In the week of April 6, the country also averaged fewer than 150,000 tests a day.  What the country needs to properly do testing, according to experts, is at least 500,000 tests a day. Some experts call for much more than that — millions or even tens of millions a day — but the general point is that the US needs to be doing multiple times the testing that it’s currently doing to be able to test everyone with symptoms and their close contacts.   A recognition of that fact is perhaps the biggest reason the US is social distancing now. One of the big goals during this period is to flatten the curve — reducing the spread of the virus — as the US scales up testing and surveillance systems to let the nation and states better control new clusters of cases. “The whole point of this social distancing is to buy us time to build up capacity to do the types of public health interventions we know work,” Natalie Dean, a biostatistics professor at the University of Florida, told me. “If we’re not using this time to scale up testing to the level that we need it to be … we don’t have an exit strategy. And then when we lift things, we’re no better equipped than we were before.” Testing gives officials the means to isolate sick people, track and quarantine the people whom those verified to be sick came into close contact with (a.k.a. “contact tracing”), and deploy community-wide efforts if a new cluster of cases is too large and uncontrolled otherwise. Without it, the only way to deal with the outbreak is more social distancing, which further hurts the economy, or letting the disease run its course — at the cost of potentially hundreds of thousands or millions of lives. The recent slowdown in new tests is driven by shortages in nasal swabs, personal protective equipment, reagents, test kits, and machines needed to run the specific tests required. According to David Lim at Politico, some labs also complain that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s testing criteria — which prioritizes hospitalized patients, health care workers, and those vulnerable to the virus, such as older people — is holding back potential tests, leaving existing testing capacity unused. To fix the gaps, experts argue, the federal government needs to relax criteria for testing, invest in new supplies and labs, and better coordinate supply chains to address, among other issues, chokepoints. States, with limited resources and little control of the national supply chain, simply can’t do this all on their own. Such fixes, however, are easier said than done. Experts warn the next phase of testing will be much more difficult than the initial phase, which largely required getting existing labs to start doing coronavirus testing — the low-hanging fruit. “We’ve made substantial progress ramping testing this month,” Scott Gottlieb, a former commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, wrote in a tweet on April 10. “But many gains were made by getting players into fight (clinical labs, academic labs). Now we must expand lab capacity, platforms, throughput, test kits. Getting next million tests/week will be harder than getting first.” This is one reason the plans to end social distancing are so grim: Not only do they suggest that some level of social distancing will be needed for the next year or so (until a vaccine or a similarly effective treatment is widely available) — which we don’t know if the country can sustain — but they call for a level of surveillance and testing the US simply hasn’t yet shown the ability and willingness to build and manage. It’s possible the US could get a lucky break; there’s still a lot about the coronavirus that we don’t know, and maybe as we learn more, we’ll realize the country can be spared the worst. (That’s optimistic, given the outbreaks we’ve already seen across the globe, but it’s possible.) The Trump administration and states also still have time to ease testing criteria and scale up capacity in the coming weeks. But unless something changes, America is simply not meeting the benchmark of aggressive testing that experts say is necessary to start to reopen the country. As eager as Trump is to get the economy going again, the US just isn’t ready to do it in a safe way yet. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. President Donald Trump’s latest spin is that while he always took the coronavirus seriously, his early efforts to respond to it were hampered by World Health Organization misinformation and a lack of warnings from American government officials. He’s rewriting history. On Friday morning, Trump, echoing something he saw on Fox News, accused the WHO of making “several claims about the CoronaVirus that ere either inaccurate or misleading” in January and February.  Why did the W.H.O. Ignore an email from Taiwanese health officials in late December alerting them to the possibility that CoronaVirus could be transmitted between humans? Why did the W.H.O. make several claims about the CoronaVirus that ere either inaccurate or misleading.... In fact, Trump was warned many times about the virus early on — both by officials from his government and from the WHO. But rather than heed those warnings, he spent January and February downplaying the threat. He told Americans they had nothing to worry about because his government had it under control. He only treated the pandemic with the seriousness it requires when it became undeniable that the country was headed into the crisis we’re now dealing with. With a tough reelection fight looming and the economy in tatters, those facts are inconvenient for Trump. He’s now trying to prematurely move on from the coronavirus and put his slow response down the memory hole. America isn’t over the coronavirus hump yet. A record 4,591 people died from the virus in a 24-hour period ending Thursday evening. But Trump is cherry-picking statistics and ignoring the country’s lack of testing capacity to justify quickly reopening relatively unscathed parts of the country. And as he does that, he’s trying to change the topic from his administration’s performance to the WHO. To be clear, it’s fair to criticize the WHO for a tweet it posted on January 14 citing “[p]reliminary investigations conducted by the Chinese authorities” that found “no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission.” That turned out to be devastatingly wrong. But Trump should also look in the mirror. On January 24, for instance, he publicly praised China’s handling of the coronavirus, saying the US “greatly appreciates their efforts and transparency.” Most experts now believe the Chinese government was hiding the full extent of the outbreak.  China has been working very hard to contain the Coronavirus. The United States greatly appreciates their efforts and transparency. It will all work out well. In particular, on behalf of the American People, I want to thank President Xi! And if Trump’s criticism is that the WHO spread dangerous misinformation, then he’s on thin ice there as well. The president has regularly pushed unproven and potentially lethal drugs as miracle cures. On Thursday, he posted tweets encouraging anti-stay-at-home-order protests in Minnesota and Michigan that could become vectors for spreading the virus. Almost no masks and no regard for social distancing guidelines outside of the Governor’s Residence. @MPRnews pic.twitter.com/8aMLHSHYzA While Trump is now trying to cast the WHO as a villain, the reality is that the US coronavirus response would’ve been much more effective had he actually followed some of the organization’s key recommendations about testing and social distancing. Instead, Trump sat idly by while the virus spread across the country in a mostly undetected manner in February and only embraced social distancing in mid-March, when public healths experts begin to sound the alarm about the possibility that American hospitals could be overwhelmed by Covid-19 patients like ones in China and Italy were. This isn’t to say the WHO is blameless. The organization can also be fairly criticized for waiting until January 30 to declare coronavirus a public health emergency. But that declaration had no discernible impact on Trump, who on that very same day proclaimed that “we think we have [the coronavirus] very well under control.” “We have very little problem in this country at this moment — five — and those people are all recuperating successfully,” Trump added. “But we’re working very closely with China and other countries, and we think it’s going to have a very good ending for us … that I can assure you.” As we know now, the virus was anything but under control in the country at that time. But Trump didn’t just ignore the WHO — he also ignored warnings coming from his own government. During his press briefing on Thursday, Trump tried to portray himself as a victim. He described himself as “angry” because “people knew [the coronavirus outbreak] was happening and people didn’t want to talk about it.” Trump says he's angry he wasn't told there was an epidemic: "And I was angry, because this should have been told to us. It should have been told to us early. It should have been told to us a lot sooner. People knew it was happening and people didn't want to talk about it." pic.twitter.com/XgWWaXAWTF Those comments came days after Trump tried to push back on an in-depth New York Times report about his slow coronavirus response by tweeting that Secretary of Health and Human Services Alex Azar “told me nothing” about the coronavirus until after Trump restricted travel from China — a commendable move but one that came after the virus was already spreading in the US.  The @nytimes story is a Fake, just like the “paper” itself. I was criticized for moving too fast when I issued the China Ban, long before most others wanted to do so. @SecAzar told me nothing until later, and Peter Navarro memo was same as Ban (see his statements). Fake News! Trump’s claim about Azar is at odds with what multiple unnamed senior administration officials told the Washington Post. From a report published on March 20: Inside the White House, Trump’s advisers struggled to get him to take the virus seriously, according to multiple officials with knowledge of meetings among those advisers and with the president. Azar couldn’t get through to Trump to speak with him about the virus until Jan. 18, according to two senior administration officials. When he reached Trump by phone, the president interjected to ask about vaping and when flavored vaping products would be back on the market, the senior administration officials said. Although Trump now wants people to believe he wasn’t adequately warned, that same Post report says intelligence agencies “were issuing ominous, classified warnings in January and February,” with one unnamed US official telling the paper that “Trump may not have been expecting this, but a lot of other people in the government were — they just couldn’t get him to do anything about it. ... The system was blinking red.” It’s not just that one report, either. Trump also ignored White House memos prepared in January and February by his top trade adviser, Peter Navarro, including one addressed directly to him on February 23 warning in its very first sentence that “There is an increasing probability of a full-blown COVID-19 pandemic that could infect as many as 100 million Americans, with a loss of life of as many as 1-2 million souls.” Not only did Trump not heed that warning, but he did the opposite by telling Americans there was nothing to worry about. For instance, on February 26 — just three days after Navarro tried to sound the alarm — Trump held a news conference in which he suggested the coronavirus would soon go away on its own in the United States. “When you have 15 [coronavirus cases], and the 15 within a couple of days is going to be down to close to zero, that’s a pretty good job we’ve done,” Trump said. (Less than two months later, the US now has nearly 700,000 cases and more than 31,000 deaths.) On February 27, as the US confirmed case count stood at 15, Trump went even further, claiming of the coronavirus that “one day — it’s like a miracle — it will disappear.” He has now moved the goalposts from saying the virus will go away to insisting that if as many as 100,000 American deaths would be evidence he did a good job. He’s criticizing the WHO not because he has good-faith concerns about the organization, but because it’s a useful distraction that is being amplified by loyal media outlets like Fox News. The news moves fast. To stay updated, follow Aaron Rupar on Twitter, and read more of Vox’s policy and politics coverage.President Donald Trump can’t help but sow division, even at a time when Americans are largely united in supporting stay-at-home orders and social distancing to slow the spread of the coronavirus. Just after 11:21 am Eastern time on Friday, President Donald Trump posted a trio of tweets endorsing the so-called liberation of a trio of states with Democratic governors from measures they’ve taken to slow the spread of coronavirus.  These posts — which are among the most dangerous of Trump’s tenure — appear to have been inspired by a segment he saw on Fox News minutes earlier. “LIBERATE MINNESOTA!” Trump began, with two further tweets saying “LIBERATE MICHIGAN” and “LIBERATE VIRGINIA, and save your great 2nd amendment. It is under siege!” LIBERATE VIRGINIA, and save your great 2nd Amendment. It is under siege! At 11:19 — two minutes before Trump’s Minnesota tweet — Fox News ran a segment about small groups of right-wing protesters in Minnesota and Virginia who have been agitating for governors there to relax stay-at-home orders so they can resume normal shopping and traveling activities.  Watch: Here's the Fox News segment that inspired Trump's unhinged "LIBERATE MINNESOTA" tweet (as @MattGertz notes it ran just two minutes before Trump's tweet was posted) pic.twitter.com/mHLxCcpoDP Fox has extensively covered right-wing demonstrations in Michigan on Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday this week, which echo the same theme. Early Friday afternoon, Fox News displayed chyrons promoting an anti-stay-at-home protest scheduled for later in the day in Minnesota. Fox News is actively promoting right-wing protests against stay at home orders pic.twitter.com/50zCeQXNZL Fox News’s coverage might give you the idea that these protesters represent the views of a significant chunk of people in their states. But polling indicates that’s not the case. For instance, a YouGov/Economist poll released Wednesday found that 61 percent of Americans think Trump should institute a nationwide stay-at-home order, compared to just 22 percent who are opposed. Along the same lines, polling from the Pew Research Central released on Thursday showed that 66 percent of people are concerned their state governments will relax social distancing restrictions too soon, compared to just 32 percent who are worried they won’t move quickly enough. As Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer (D) noted in response to the so-called “Operation Gridlock” in her state, the sad irony is that such demonstrations could end up extending the need for stay-at-home orders by spreading the virus among protesters. But asked on Thursday if he thinks protesters in Michigan should listen to local officials like Whitmer, Trump said that such people listen to him instead. “I think they’re listening. I think they listen to me. They seem to be protesters that like me,” Trump said. JON KARL: Shouldn't the anti-stay-at-home protesters in Michigan listen to local authorities?TRUMP: "I think they're listening. I think they listen to me. They seem to be protesters that like me." pic.twitter.com/842jov2kY8 One shudders to contemplate what sorts of actions right-wing protesters might take if they interpret Trump’s call for them to “LIBERATE” their states seriously. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  The economy is in free fall. About 22 million people — or more than 13 percent of the US labor force — have filed for unemployment in the past four weeks. Economists are projecting unemployment as high as 20 percent within a matter of months. Entire industries, like hotels and airlines, have all but shut down, and the rest of the economy is slowing as people stay indoors and the panic from the coronavirus shock turns into an ongoing recession. When the economy is collapsing like this, there’s an actor which is supposed to step in: the Federal Reserve. While Congress occasionally steps in to offer stimulus through tax and spending programs (and it has, though it can do much more), the primary duty of preventing and mitigating recessions in the US rests with the Federal Reserve, which is obligated under federal law to minimize unemployment. The Fed hasn’t always lived up to that mandate. Despite taking extreme, at times heroic measures to rescue the economy in 2008-’09, the Fed still oversaw a prolonged, painfully slow recovery that took a decade or more to reach full employment again. It continually undershot its inflation target, even as people were suffering from mass joblessness. To its considerable credit, today’s Fed has been taking aggressive steps to fulfill its mandate, even bigger steps than the financial crisis-era Fed did. Fed Chair Jay Powell has committed trillions of dollars of Fed purchases to combating the coronavirus downturn and making sure businesses have easy access to credit. He has brought interest rates down to zero and taken the unprecedented step of subsidizing state and local governments by buying their bonds. But while it’s become common to argue that the Fed is “out of bullets” since it’s done so much, nothing could be further from the truth. There’s still more the Fed can and should do to end this recession. Here’s what it has done so far, and what work it can still do to ease the suffering of millions of Americans. On March 15, the Fed announced that it would cut its target interest rate to a range of 0 to 0.25 percent, returning rates to the record lows they reached during the 2008-’09 recession and its aftermath. The Fed funds rate (often colloquially called the “Fed rate” or even just the “interest rate,” given its economy-wide effects) is the primary mechanism through which the Fed influences the American economy. When the Fed uses its powers to lower the rate, that means borrowing is cheaper: Mortgage rates fall, APRs for credit cards fall, auto loans get cheaper, etc. This is meant to stimulate economic activity by making it cheaper for businesses and consumers to borrow and spend. The Fed enforces this target both through expectations (it’s powerful enough that just saying “we’re lowering rates” causes banks and other actors to follow suit) and through “open market operations,” in which it buys up Treasury bonds with money it creates in a bid to make those bonds’ interest rates fall to its target range. (For more, see Matt Yglesias’s explainer.) The March 15 action was actually the second move the Fed made on interest rates in response to coronavirus. On March 3, the board slashed rates from a 1.5 to 1.75 percent range to 1 to 1.25 percent, a half-point cut. Now that rates are down to 0 to 0.25 percent, there’s nowhere left to go except negative. The Fed hasn’t done that before, but it could; see more below. The Fed hit the zero lower bound pretty quickly in the financial crisis of 2008-’09. Once it did, it moved from trying to manipulate short-run interest rates (like the federal funds rate) to long-run interest rates, like the interest paid on 10-year US Treasury bonds. Normally it does this through “quantitative easing” — just buying up massive quantities of bonds, in particular US government bonds and mortgage bonds from Fannie and Freddie. Historically the Fed has committed to buying a specific amount of bonds, either one time or every month or quarter. Its coronavirus response started that way, with $500 billion in government bond buys and $200 billion of mortgage bond buys. Then on March 23, it announced that quantitative easing would be unlimited. The Fed declared it would “purchase Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities in the amounts needed to support smooth market functioning and effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions and the economy.” It also expanded what bonds it bought to include commercial real estate, not just home mortgages. This was a major escalation from previous QE efforts because it assured markets that the Fed would keep acting indefinitely to keep long-term rates low. Uncertainty about whether QE will abruptly end, or fall short of what’s necessary, could harm the recovery, so the Fed tried to eliminate that uncertainty entirely. Skeptics of QE argue that it hurts savers (like pension firms) at the expense of people with debts. That’s part of the point, to help people get out from under debt incurred during the recession and to encourage people and businesses to take out more debt. But it provoked some political backlash. The same day that the Fed announced unlimited QE, it also announced the creation of a variety of programs to buy up bonds not covered by the QE program. Those include new and old corporate bonds and bonds backed by consumer debt other than mortgages (student loans, auto loans, credit card loans). It also announced it would set up a “Main Street Business Lending Program” to facilitate lending to small businesses. These programs ensure that interest rates on these kinds of loans to individuals and businesses don’t get too high and that there’s a market to buy them. That way, banks have an incentive to keep issuing loans, knowing the Fed at least could buy them. “Traditional logic would say that actions in the corporate bond market (which is tapped by bigger businesses) should trickle down to small businesses and consumer credit,” Yglesias explained when these moves were announced. “But today’s Fed isn’t taking chances. … All kinds of loans — federal government debt, consumer debt, corporate debt, mortgage debt, commercial real estate debt, and small business debt — are going to get help.” Later, on April 9, the Fed announced various moves to strengthen these efforts to buy up different types of debt. It offered new loans to small businesses participating in the Paycheck Protection Program, committed to buying as much as $600 billion in loans from small businesses, and expanded the size or scope of the corporate and consumer bond purchase facilities. It also … … set up a $500 billion fund to buy bonds from state governments and a few large local ones, which are seeing tax revenues collapse and are much more constrained than the federal government when it comes to spending. Buying up the bonds cheaply helps stabilize the municipal bond market and makes it more affordable for states and cities to take out loans now to cover pandemic expenses. In total, the April 9 actions added $2.3 trillion to the Fed’s purchasing efforts. The Fed has set interest rates at a range of 0 to 0.25 percent. This means it’s hit the “zero lower bound” — it can’t cut interest rates any further without going negative. That said, it can go negative. The European Central Bank has been experimenting with modestly negative interest rates since June 2014, and the Bank of Japan has since January 2016. The Fed has never done the same, but these are not normal times. Under a negative rate system, investors have to actually pay borrowers to take their money — that is, it would actually cost you to put money in the bank. The idea is that this would push you to spend your money instead of parking it in your account. The ECB rate is only -0.5 percent, a very small cost to most depositors. But if rates get too negative, there’s a risk that businesses and individuals will start pulling their money from banks entirely and holding cash; if your checking account is losing, say, 5 percent of its value a year, there’s a good case for taking your money out and stuffing it under a mattress. There are ways to get around that, though. Harvard economist Greg Mankiw has suggested that the Fed could declare all paper money with a serial number ending in “0” invalid, effective a year from now. That sets up an effective rate of negative 10 percent, so if the Fed sets a rate of, say, negative 6 percent on money still in the bank, that’s still an incredibly appealing proposition compared to getting a tenth of your cash wiped out. Miles Kimball at the University of Colorado has proposed a similar system wherein the Fed would set up an “exchange rate” between paper and electronic money, so that when you deposit $100 in cash, less than $100 is added to your bank balance. That would similarly enable negative rates and limit the incentive to hoard cash, since it can’t be deposited and used to pay checks, credit card bills, etc., and most people have bills they can’t pay in cash. One idea publicly floated by now-Fed Vice Chair Richard Clarida would be to take quantitative easing a step further and commit to buying up US government bonds until rates on long-term (10- and 30-year) bonds hit an explicit target — say, 0 percent. This would have several benefits. One, it would provide some focus for the Fed’s commitment to unlimited quantitative easing by making it clear what the goal of that measure is. The Fed is clear that it wants to lower long-term interest rates, but not what it wants to lower them to, and clarifying that in terms of government bonds could give quantitative easing more power and make it more effective in lowering those rates and making it cheaper for individuals and businesses to take out long-term loans. Second, it would help Congress in developing their own response. Mandating that government bond rates are zero or negative in inflation-adjusted terms would give Congress a guarantee that it can cut taxes and boost spending as much as necessary to fight the downturn, without risking runaway debt; it would be free or cheaper than free to borrow. Currently the Fed targets a given rate of inflation — 2 percent per year, for instance. What it tries to communicate to markets is that if inflation goes above that rate, it will take action to contain it, and conversely that if inflation falls below that rate, it will take action to increase it. The problem has been that the Fed’s obedience to this target has been asymmetrical. Inflation has undershot the Fed’s target for well over a decade now: The Fed not only hasn’t been able to get it much higher, but also hasn’t tried to get prices of goods and services to where they would have been if the US had had steady 2 percent inflation every year from, say, 2008 to present. Many economists have called for the Fed, in response to this failure, to adopt “level targeting” — not simply trying to hit a given rate of inflation, but trying to get consumer prices to where they ought to have been if inflation had hit the Fed’s target every single year. That means committing to aggressive action, and several years of above-trend inflation (say, 4 or 5 percent annually), to get back on track. This suggestion is often paired with a proposal to move from targeting inflation to targeting nominal GDP — the size of the economy, not adjusting for inflation. The hope is that NGDP reflects both the rate of inflation and the underlying state of the economy, and targeting it could force the Fed to be more aggressive when economic growth is lagging and unemployment is rising. The Fed has a statutory duty to minimize both unemployment and inflation, and NGDP offers one way to do that. One of the Fed’s less recognized policy tools is “swap lines”: defined arrangements that let other countries trade their currencies for dollars. The idea is that the dollar is a stable global reserve currency, whereas other countries’ currencies tend to be less stable, creating risk around exchange rates that can deter investment, especially in developing countries. Expanding access to credit in dollars can thus help safeguard other countries’ economies. The Fed has long had these in operation with rich countries like the UK, Canada, and those represented by the European Central Bank, but recently expanded them to include a few emerging markets like Mexico and Brazil. Expanding to even more developing countries could help them recover. Perhaps the most straightforward way for the Fed to help the economy would be to put money directly in people’s hands by printing it and mailing out checks. It’s doubtful the Fed can do this under current statutory authority, but some in Congress have argued for giving it that authority. House Financial Services Committee Chair Maxine Waters (D-CA) has proposed $2,000-per-month checks to adults and $1,000-per-month checks to children funded by printing money. A simpler idea would be to simply let the Fed send out checks the same way that Congress did through its recent $1,200 check initiative. Helicopter drops have a long and distinguished history as a monetary policy idea; Ben Bernanke, for instance, has argued they have a place in the policy toolkit. The Fed has traditionally shied away because it views giving money to people as the domain of fiscal policy and thus of Congress. Congress could remove that hesitation by explicitly authorizing the Fed to drop helicopter money. The Bank of England is already doing something like this by directly funding government operations via printing money, so the Fed would be in good company. The Fed has supported corporations by backstopping the corporate bond market and ensuring short- and long-term interest rates remain low. But there are other actions it could take as well, though they would potentially require authorization from Congress. The most straightforward option would be to buy corporate stocks, the way the Bank of Japan has done in recent years. That not only helps stabilize the stock market directly, it enables the Fed to set up a sovereign wealth fund invested in the US economy, the profits of which it can refund to the Treasury. That effectively provides a way to finance federal spending besides taxes and debt, which can be helpful if more fiscal stimulus is needed in the future. Sign up for the Future Perfect newsletter and we’ll send you a roundup of ideas and solutions for tackling the world’s biggest challenges — and how to get better at doing good. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. Future Perfect is funded in part by individual contributions, grants, and sponsorships. Learn more here. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  As the harms of social distancing become more and more apparent, Americans may start to wonder: Are we overreacting to the coronavirus pandemic? A few people (although not most of the public) seem to think so. Some federal officials, from President Donald Trump to Rep. Andy Biggs (R-AZ), have asked if “the cure is proving worse than the disease itself.” Protesters in several states, including Michigan, Ohio, and Kentucky, have called for lockdowns to end, arguing that the damage to the economy is too much to bear. This is a question public health experts and officials expected from the start. As Kent State University epidemiologist Tara Smith told me, “It’s the paradox of public health: When you do it right, nothing happens.” The problem with proper prevention, the linchpin of many public health strategies, is that there’s no clear indication when it works. There’s no public celebration when a coronavirus case or death doesn’t happen.  And in the meantime, the economic damage of closing down America is readily apparent. Some economists warn that the unemployment rate could surpass 30 percent. About 22 million have filed unemployment claims since social distancing measures took effect in March. The lines for food aid are stretching for blocks across the country. It’s now much more difficult — if not impossible — to visit family and friends and partake in many favorite hobbies and activities. In other words, the benefits of social distancing aren’t very visible, while the pain from it is. That creates a situation in which it can be easy to take for granted that social distancing is, according to experts and models, likely preventing hundreds of thousands of deaths in the United States. But it’s important to remind ourselves what we’re doing here. The US wants to avoid getting to the point where it’s obvious we did something wrong and need to correct course. We want to prevent what happened in Italy, Spain, or New York from happening across the country. That means reacting not just to what’s visible to us in the present, but what’s potentially in the future. Doing that will always at some level seem like an overreaction, even if it’s the right call. 
    Related
   “Anytime you are dealing with an outbreak, if it appears like you overreacted, then you probably did the right thing,” Krutika Kuppalli, a fellow in the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Emerging Leaders in Biosecurity program, told me. That’s particularly true for coronavirus. There’s still a lot we need to learn about the virus, but we do know it seems to spread at least in part through people who aren’t showing any symptoms. That means it can be spreading in communities without anyone — not even the people who are infected — knowing it. That requires taking action before the virus is clearly visible, at least without mass testing, in a community. There’s also evidence from past outbreaks, particularly the 1918 flu pandemic, that reacting quickly and aggressively — even before a disease clearly poses a threat — is crucial both to saving lives and, in the long term, potentially keeping the economy intact. Yes, it demands a shared sacrifice at this time. But it’s worth it. The alternative — that we let up to millions of people, including our friends, family, and peers, die — is so bad we need to do everything we can to prevent it. It’s true that we still don’t know enough about the SARS-CoV-2, the novel coronavirus. That can seem like a reason to not do much: Maybe the virus isn’t as contagious or as deadly as we think it is. Maybe it’ll die down in the summer with warmer weather. Maybe only specific segments of the general population are really vulnerable. That’s all possible. But remember: Even if all of this and more turns out to be true in the future, the reality is we simply don’t know that now and didn’t know it before. We have to act with the best information we have. And that information suggests the coronavirus is really bad — whether it’s a huge outbreak in Wuhan, China, that forced the country to lock down, the outbreak in Italy that overwhelmed its health care system, or the outbreak in New York that has turned the US into the world’s leader in reported cases and deaths (with more than 694,000 and 31,000, respectively, as of April 18 — and both figures are likely underestimates). We also know that the coronavirus can spread from people who don’t have symptoms yet or will never develop significant symptoms. That could mean the disease is less deadly than we think; if there are a lot more asymptomatic carriers than we realize, it could mean a way smaller fraction of the people who are infected are dying.  But it also means that the virus can spread before it’s clearly visible in a community. That’s been particularly exacerbated by America’s poor testing capacity — a result of both poor pandemic preparedness generally and President Trump’s slow reaction to the outbreak — leaving the country unable to quickly test people to see if there’s asymptomatic spread. (As a result, we actually underreacted to Covid-19, and have continued doing so by failing to scale up testing.) “Your chance of the first case being the one that comes to your attention is very, very, very, very small,” George Rutherford, an epidemiologist at the University of California San Francisco, told me. “By the time you have the first death, you have to figure that there’s been three full weeks of transmission, and there are at least several hundred cases in the population.” So once a city, state, or country is reporting a few Covid-19 cases and especially deaths, it’s typically safe to assume there is a much bigger outbreak going on — just one that’s not fully visible, at least yet, to the public. Given that coronavirus cases and deaths can double every few days, it’s important for the public and officials to act quickly and preemptively to stop exponential growth. It’s in this context that it’s so important that countries act, though it can feel like an overreaction. If you wait until there are already a bunch of cases or deaths in your community, it could be too late to prevent an outbreak that even extreme social distancing might be unable to get under control for weeks. Consider the stories of California and New York. California actually reported some of the first coronavirus cases and deaths in the country — including the first case of community transmission — but now New York has 14 times the Covid-19 deaths as California. There are important differences between the states, such as New York City’s much higher population density and greater public transportation use. It’s also possible New York just got unlucky: “There’s the possibility that there were just more introductions of the virus in the East Coast, in the New York area,” Jeffrey Martin, an epidemiologist at the University of California San Francisco, told me. But one likely contributor is that California, particularly the San Francisco Bay Area, reacted quicker to the outbreak. The Bay Area issued America’s first shelter-in-place order on March 16, and California issued a statewide stay-at-home order three days later — while New York didn’t until March 22. Even before the government mandates, some parts of California seemed to adopt social distancing early: Restaurant data from OpenTable suggests that seated dining on March 1 was down 2 percent in New York City, but it was down 18 percent in San Francisco. (Though it was only down by 3 percent in Los Angeles, so not every place in California acted the same.) The extra days and weeks may not seem like that much time. But when coronavirus cases and deaths can double every few days, that short time span can be important. “With this virus, days, and even hours, matter,” Jen Kates, director of global health and HIV policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation, told me. It could have been easy at the time to make the case that California and particularly the Bay Area were overreacting, given that the entire state had fewer than 25 deaths when it locked down. But it ultimately seems like it was the right decision. While there’s a lot about the coronavirus and the nature of this outbreak that we still don’t know, research from the 1918 flu pandemic, which was linked to as many as 100 million deaths globally and about 675,000 deaths in the US, provides some useful evidence for strong, early action. A 2007 study in PNAS found the places that took quicker action on social distancing — closing schools and banning big public gatherings — saw better outcomes:  [C]ities in which multiple interventions were implemented at an early phase of the epidemic had peak death rates ≈50% lower than those that did not and had less-steep epidemic curves. Cities in which multiple interventions were implemented at an early phase of the epidemic also showed a trend toward lower cumulative excess mortality, but the difference was smaller (≈20%) and less statistically significant than that for peak death rates. One example cited in the study is the difference between Philadelphia, which was slow to act, and St. Louis, which was faster. As this chart shows, St. Louis did a much better job of flattening the curve and averting excess deaths: Another 2007 study, published in JAMA, validated the findings — showing places that acted earlier and more aggressively saved lives. But this study also demonstrated the importance of sustaining social distancing measures: When cities, including St. Louis, pulled back their measures too quickly, they saw a spike in deaths. Here’s how that looks in chart form, with the line chart representing excess flu deaths and the black and gray bars below showing when social distancing measures were in place. The highest peak comes after social distancing measures were lifted, with the death rate falling only after they were reinstated. This did not just happen in St. Louis. Analyzing data from 43 cities, the JAMA study found this pattern repeatedly across the country. Howard Markel, an author of the study and the director of the University of Michigan’s Center for the History of Medicine, described the results as a bunch of “double-humped epi curves” — officials instituted social distancing measures, saw flu cases fall, then pulled back the measures and saw flu cases rise again. Notably, the second rise in deaths only appeared when cities removed social distancing measures, the JAMA study found: “Among the 43 cities, we found no example of a city that had a second peak of influenza while the first set of nonpharmaceutical interventions were still in effect.” While invoking social distancing is often presented as a choice between saving lives and sustaining the economy, there’s also some preliminary evidence that the early, aggressive actions help the economy in the long term as well. Dylan Matthews covered a recent study along these lines for Vox:  Economists Sergio Correia, Stephan Luck, and Emil Verner released a working paper (not yet peer-reviewed) last week that makes this argument extremely persuasively. The three analyzed the 1918-1919 flu pandemic in the United States, as the closest (though still not identical) analogue to the current crisis. They compare cities in 1918-’19 that adopted quarantining and social isolation policies earlier to ones that adopted them later. Their conclusion? “We find that cities that intervened earlier and more aggressively do not perform worse and, if anything, grow faster after the pandemic is over.” The basic problem is that a lot of people getting sick and dying is also pretty bad for the economy — potentially worse than temporarily shutting the economy down. The risk for us now, by believing we might be overreacting to the coronavirus pandemic, is thinking we can ease up on measures, doing it, and subsequently seeing a spike in Covid-19 cases and deaths. In fact, that already appears to be happening in some parts of the world; Asian countries that initially contained the outbreak, such as South Korea and Singapore, are now reporting signs of a second wave of cases after easing some of their restrictions. None of this completely eliminates the possibility that we are overreacting. Maybe a year or two from now we’ll realize that we didn’t have to close down certain parts of the country. Or maybe certain segments of the population could have remained at their jobs. Or maybe the warmer temperatures could slow the virus’s spread more than we think (though heat hasn’t been enough in Singapore, where it’s currently 80-plus degrees Fahrenheit). We just don’t know. But as public health experts have told me, it’d be much better to end up second-guessing ourselves about whether we overreacted than whether we underreacted and maybe caused the deaths of millions. Because that’s the risk right now, based on the best evidence we have. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. President Donald Trump more or less declared victory over the coronavirus during the daily White House briefing on Thursday — ignoring signs that the fight against a disease he likes to call “the invisible enemy” is actually far from over. Trump began by saying that “thanks to our all-out military operation and the extraordinary devotion of our people, we believe we will experience far fewer deaths than even the optimistic projection.” (In fact, as recently as late February, Trump was saying the virus would go away on its own without any Americans dying.) He went on to outline the “Opening Up America Again” criteria that will guide states with sufficient testing capacity and declining numbers of new cases through the process of getting their schools and economies back up and running in a step-by-step manner, with the approval of governors. “Now that we have passed the peak in new cases, we are starting our life again,” Trump said. “We are starting rejuvenation of our economy again.” TRUMP: "Thanks to our all-out military operation and the extraordinary devotion of our people, we believe we will experience far fewer deaths than even the optimistic projection." (As recently as late February Trump was projecting no Americans would die from coronavirus.) pic.twitter.com/ZMebnX2tYq But Trump’s claim that America is on the downside of new cases is dubious. Because the country still doesn’t have enough testing capacity to accommodate everyone who has symptoms or has come into contact with those who do, it’s possible the plateau in new cases that’s happened over the past week just reflects the reality that many cases are going undetected. A new piece from Robinson Meyer and Alexis C. Madrigal for the Atlantic explains: The growth in the number of new tests completed per day has also plateaued. Since April 1, the country has tested roughly 145,000 people every day with no steady upward trajectory. The growth in the number of new cases per day, and the growth in the number of new tests per day, are very tightly correlated. This tight correlation suggests that if the United States were testing more people, we would probably still be seeing an increase in the number of COVID-19 cases. And combined with the high test-positivity rate, it suggests that the reservoir of unknown, uncounted cases of COVID-19 across the country is still very large. Furthermore, Meyer and Madrigal report that the “test-positivity rate” for coronavirus cases in America is about 20 percent — much higher than countries like South Korea and Germany which have had more success bringing their coronavirus outbreaks under control. Since test-positivity rates generally fall along with the prevalence of a disease in a society, the US’s relatively high rate is another sign that it’s too early to declare victory over the coronavirus. Trump might not want to acknowledge these issues, but his own administration has. As my colleague German Lopez explained on Wednesday, the testing and surveillance system outlined in an early version of the administration’s plan assumes the country will dramatically ramp up its testing capacity to make sure any outbreaks that occur before a vaccine is available are contained. What the country needs to properly do testing, according to experts, is at least 500,000 tests a day. Some experts call for much more than that — millions or even tens of millions a day — but 500,000 a day is generally considered the minimum to test everyone with symptoms and their close contacts. Right now, the US is, on a good day, doing about 150,000 tests a day, or fewer than a third of that minimum. The US’s poor pandemic preparedness, as well as Trump’s slow reaction to the coronavirus outbreak, has meant America is still massively undertesting. To be clear, there are some states — such as Wyoming or Alaska — that still have fewer than 500 cases. For those places, it’s not crazy to think that some semblance of normal life could resume soon. But they aren’t out of the woods either — the lack of widespread testing means that if there’s an outbreak, it could spiral out of control before it’s even detected. Ultimately, public health experts are in broad agreement that the US needs to significantly beef up its coronavirus testing infrastructure before it makes sense to talk broadly about reopening schools, restaurants, and offices in major population centers. But the US hasn’t made significant progress in that regard. And until it does, Trump’s declarations of victory amount to little more than rhetorical exercises.  The American public seems to generally understand this. New polling from the Pew Research Central shows that 66 percent of people are concerned their state governments will relax social distancing restrictions too soon, compared to just 32 percent who are worried they won’t move quickly enough.  To advance his case that it’s appropriate to talk about reopening the American economy even while roughly 2,000 people in the country per day are dying from the coronavirus, Trump, characteristically, tried to turn that reality on its head on Thursday. “America wants to be open. And Americans want to be open,” he said.  TRUMP: "America wants to be open. And Americans want to be open." (Polling actually more than twice as many Americans are concerned their state governments will lift restrictions too quickly than the opposite: https://t.co/k0L2uFRGA9) pic.twitter.com/VjSMEVwtPu Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. As President Donald Trump pushes for the relaxation of social distancing guidelines and the resumption of something resembling pre-coronavirus social and economic activity, his supporters on Fox News are reaching for talking points to justify this course of action. A recent appearance on Hannity by Dr. Mehmet Oz illustrated how this search has run into significant moral roadblocks. Dr. Oz — who got his start years ago on Oprah and has lately become a ubiquitous presence on Fox News, making daily appearances in which he regularly promotes unproven, dangerous drugs — made a case on Tuesday that reopening schools is “a very appetizing opportunity,” citing a study that he claimed showed doing so would only increase coronavirus deaths by 2 to 3 percent. “Well, first, we need our mojo back. Let’s start with things that are really critical to the nation where we think we might be able to open without getting into a lot of trouble,” Dr. Oz said. “I tell you, schools are a very appetizing opportunity. I just saw a nice piece in The Lancet arguing that the opening of schools may only cost us 2 to 3 percent, in terms of total mortality. And, you know, any life is a life lost, but to get every child back into a school where they’re safely educated, being fed and making the most out of their lives, with a theoretical risk on the backside, it might be a trade-off some folks would consider.” DR OZ: "Schools are a very appetizing opportunity. I just saw a nice piece in The Lancet arguing the opening of schools may only cost us 2 to 3%, in terms of total mortality. Any, you know, any life is a life lost, but ... that might be a tradeoff some folks would consider."   pic.twitter.com/aifMeKTsIv (On Thursday evening, Dr. Oz posted a video on Twitter saying that “I’ve realized my comments on risks around opening schools have confused and upset people, which was never my intention. I misspoke.) It should be noted that Dr. Oz misinterpreted The Lancet study he mentioned. What it actually details is a finding made by UK researchers that closing schools there without any other mitigation measures (such as social distancing) would reduce baseline Covid-19 deaths there by somewhere between 2 percent and 4 percent. The study does not speak to what impact the reopening of US schools would have on the coronavirus mortality rate here, so Oz’s analysis was confused. (Ironically, The Lancet’s underlying source is the very same WHO/Imperial College model that Fox News hosts have been trashing.) That aside, Oz’s remarks come as the most-cited models now forecast the US will experience somewhere around 60,000 Covid-19-related deaths. (The total stands at over 33,000 as of today.) A 4 percent increase of that total represents an additional 2,400 lives. So what Dr. Oz was trying to say is that the prospect of that many additional deaths in exchange for the reopening of schools “might be a trade-off some folks would consider.” 
    Related
   While there’s no study backing up the numbers Dr. Oz threw around, the fact he was so callous about more than 62,000 lives is instructive in its own right. It points toward what a chorus of right-wing voices seem willing to sacrifice in the hope of restoring a sense of normalcy. With a tough reelection campaign on the horizon and the economy he spent so much time boasting about during his first three years in office in ruins, Trump has self-interested reasons for wanting to get kids back to school and parents back to work. But the data indicates that from a public health standpoint, doing so at this point in time would be premature. First of all, a quick look at the data shows that the US coronavirus curve hasn’t really flattened yet. Unlike countries like South Korea or Taiwan, the number of cases here continues to increase in something approximating an exponential manner. Second, other countries that have had far less of a problem with the coronavirus, such as Germany, have just started to consider reopening schools — and schools that have reopened in Denmark, which recently became the first European country to take that step, have done so with new, strict social distancing rules. The idea that schools in a country where the coronavirus is currently killing 2,000 people a day (or more) are ready to reopen is out of step with reality. As callous as they may be, Oz’s comments do reflect a talking point that’s gaining steam on the right as frustration has mounted with the social distancing measures (including school closures) that most Americans have endured for the past month. On Wednesday, for instance, host Laura Ingraham pointed out that everything we do in life comes with some degree with risk, and used that observation to suggest continued social distancing measures represent government overreach.  “Many are willing to take the risk of contracting the virus,” she said, in an observation similar to the one made by Dr. Oz. Laura Ingraham: "Many are willing to take the risk of contracting the virus" pic.twitter.com/woc5NLGfS3 Meanwhile, Tucker Carlson’s show featured him confronting Gov. Phil Murphy (D-NJ) about the constitutionality of stay-at-home orders and an interview with Sen. John Kennedy (R-LA) in which Kennedy said, “we gotta reopen, and when we do the coronavirus is gonna spread faster.” “You know what kills more people every year than coronavirus — a lot more? Poverty,” Carlson replied, using a false equivalency Trump has also given voice to. Sen Kennedy: "We've gotta reopen, and when we do the coronavirus is gonna spread faster" pic.twitter.com/v3KsK0XPEw While it’s true that we’re all going to die someday, most people would rather it not happen in the short- to medium-term future because of a communicable disease whose spread we could slow if people would just stay home for the foreseeable future. In fact, new surveys from Gallup and Pew show that more people are afraid of lifting restrictions too quickly rather than keeping them around too long. Nor do we want our neighbors or their children’s teachers to meet their demise in that way. One person’s statistic is another person’s mother or grandmother. Sacrificing thousands of lives in a misbegotten attempt to get back to normalcy is only an “appetizing opportunity” when you assume the lives lost aren’t your own or those of the people you love. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Part of the coronavirus conversation in the US is turning to the question of when to start reopening the country. President Donald Trump certainly wants to do it as soon as possible, based on the theory that the public is demanding to be let back out into restaurants and retail stores so they can resume a normal life. But as of right now, that doesn’t appear to be true at all. Instead, Americans still seem onboard with social distancing and much more fearful about the health risks of opening up the country too soon than the economic risk of a continued shutdown. The costs of both have been awful — 31,000 dead and counting, 22 million jobs lost — but the public is first and foremost preoccupied with the public health crisis. The Pew Research Center asked the question directly in a nearly 5,000-person survey conducted from April 7 to 12: Are you more worried about your state government lifting its restrictions on public activities too quickly or not quickly enough? By a 2-to-1 margin, Americans said that they were more worried about rapidly ramping down social distancing. One likely explanation as to why there is such reluctance: Pew found 73 percent of Americans thought the worst was still to come in the coronavirus outbreak, while just 26 percent thought the worst had already happened. Another piece of the puzzle may come from Gallup, which released its own polling on Thursday with a related finding: More Americans said they were worried about getting sick from Covid-19 than were worried about severe financial hardship because of the economic slowdown. Gallup found that women, people who live in cities, and younger adults were most worried about the health risks.  Lower-income people saw the worst of both worlds: They were more concerned about getting sick than the people in higher income brackets and they were more fearful about economic hardships as well. As Vox’s Anna North recently reported, the ongoing pandemic has affected marginalized Americans the most, revealing the inequalities in US society in new and painful ways. Starting to reopen society will require more testing, both to diagnose people currently infected and to identify people who’ve had the virus and recovered. We also need a better understanding of how immune people are after they fight off the virus. New applications to enable contact tracing will also help. And no matter what, it will be a slow journey back to normalcy; nobody should expect things to snap back to the way they were in the next few months. Normal life may not be able to fully resume until there is a vaccine widely available.  Opinions could, of course, change. Millions of people are now unemployed, and while Covid-19 is very infectious and can be dangerous to people of any age, it’s by far the most threatening to older people and people with preexisting conditions. The public’s calculus on health vs. economic risks might shift as lockdowns drag on, especially if officials can find ways to protect the most vulnerable. But for the time being, this new polling indicates Americans are content with using social distancing to mitigate the health risks to themselves and their neighbors, even if it comes at an economic price. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Americans don’t trust the government, and they don’t trust the media. That trend has been evident for years, but the Trump era has accelerated it.  Now we can see the worst-case scenario that trend could create, playing out in front of our eyes: Confronted with a paralyzing coronavirus pandemic, there’s deep confusion about the steps the country should be taking to respond. Don’t expect it to get better, says journalism critic Jay Rosen. That’s in large part because the Trump administration uses confusion as one of its primary political tools. Right now, it is employing it to create cover for the president, who wants to argue that he shouldn’t be blamed for a litany of missteps as the virus moved from China to the US and exploded across the country.  “The fight to keep Americans from understanding what happened from December to March is going to be one of the biggest propaganda battles in American history,” he told me recently. “The Republican Party and the Trump campaign and the MAGA coalition are going to have to produce confusion and doubt on a scale that is unlike anything you’ve ever seen before.” That conflict is unfolding in plain sight: The point of that weird campaign video Trump rolled out at a White House press conference this week was to recast himself as bold and decisive in the face of the pandemic — as opposed to convincing reports in the New York Times, Washington Post, and other outlets emerging recently that portray him and his administration as dithering and confused, and slow to make crucial decisions like telling the country to start socially distancing.  It’s an extension of the challenge Trump has posed to journalists from the start of his administration, when he ordered his then-press secretary, Sean Spicer, to tell the press that his inauguration had an enormous audience instead of a paltry one. Or, in Trump’s words, delivered to a group of veterans in 2018: “Just remember, what you are seeing and what you are reading is not what’s happening.” Rosen, who teaches journalism at New York University, has been meeting up with me once a year to discuss the challenges the Trump administration poses for the media. This year, instead of a podcast, we chatted via Skype, and I’m presenting edited excerpts of that conversation below. If you read the story I wrote earlier this week about the media’s struggles to report on the pandemic, you’ll recognize similar themes in this conversation, which was happening while I was reporting that story; I’m grateful to Rosen for the opportunity to shape my thinking. There’s a giant gap in the way the American public perceives or has perceived the pandemic. That split is both across political divides and across news consumption divides. Are you surprised in any way to see what we’re seeing today? No. We have talked about this sort of gap for several years. But did you imagine that this would manifest in a literal life-and-death crisis like this? No, I never imagined a crisis like this. I did, like lots of other people, worry about what would happen in a truly serious event, combined with the Trump presidency. But I was thinking a war, a terrorist attack, a natural disaster of epic proportion, something like that.  But something like this, which affects everyone and is invisible and takes both science and imagination to understand — which I think is a very interesting point for us to discuss — I never conceived of something like this. There have been many failures. I think one of them, for a lot of people — and I include myself here — is a failure of imagination, a failure to see this coming, even though people have literally made books and movies about this for years. This possibility was talked about a lot. And warnings for the virus began early, and so there was plenty of information that it was going to become important.  But what I meant by imagination is something additional to that, which is: In order to understand what is happening now, in order to be informed, you need not only good information, reliable information, but you need imagination to see what it is. Imagination buttressed with science ... Yeah. That’s why [Dr. Anthony] Fauci and others say if it sounds like it’s too much, it’s just enough.  But it’s an incredibly difficult thing to tell people about, because unlike a hurricane or even a war, [the virus] is completely abstract. So that’s one of the challenges that journalists faced. Right. You can’t see it until you either have it or you’re looking at someone who has it. Even now, one of the things that strikes me — and you see this manifesting on Twitter — is that even now when there are [thousands] of people who have died, because so much of it is happening in a hospital, or in someone’s house or en route to the hospital, that you’re not seeing it. And while there’s plenty of reporting from inside hospitals ... in terms of visuals, you’re still not seeing it. And so you end up with scenes like people on Twitter saying they’re going to the Elmhurst Hospital in Queens to see if they can see these lines with people. That’s a whole meme now — go to your hospital and take video of nothing happening so that you can own the libs. Are you tracking the percentage of people who say they are worried [or] not worried, and how that’s evolving over time and what their sources of information are? It seems like it has changed over time, in part because at various times the president has said this is a serious thing, after saying it was not a serious thing. Yeah. And this coheres with political science findings from long ago, that public opinion does follow what political leaders and party leaders are saying.  The recognition that there’s a reality there, that this thing is happening, it’s real, it’s not a story, it’s not a fake — I think that has grown. But as that has grown, so has the attempt to escape responsibility for that.  And I think this is a really important point that I’ve been trying to make: The fight to keep Americans from understanding what happened from December to March is going to be one of the biggest propaganda battles in American history. Because so much of it is public. We have so many statements from Trump minimizing the danger. So many things are already on the record. The Republican Party and the Trump campaign and the MAGA coalition are going to have to produce confusion and doubt on a scale that is unlike anything you’ve ever seen before. And that, of course, is going to be a huge challenge for the press.  But it’s much more than the press: I think the fight to interpret what happened in those first three months as someone else’s fault and to persuade Americans that it wasn’t Trump’s responsibility — when there are so many things on the record, like “giving myself a 10 out of 10” or “this is going to go away, it’ll just magically disappear.” All those things are going to have to be overridden somehow. And that is going to put a huge strain on the information system. In the pre-Trump era, any politician, let alone the president, who not only said this once but downplayed the virus multiples times — made a whole series of statements that were then not rebutted but actually refuted — that would be the end of the story. Right? It’s all on tape. We know what it is. There’s no doubt about it. There’s no debate. In the Trump era, sadly, we’ve become used to the idea that Trump can say something on live TV in front of everyone and then is actually able to make it go away, magically. And that there is a significant chunk of the population that either will never hear it or refuse to believe it or doesn’t care.  So you’re describing a fight to come. But it seems like in some ways, this won’t be a fight: Both sides will already be resigned to either believe Trump or not believe Trump. Is there any reason to believe it’s different this time? I think that’s a little oversimplified.  The Trump base will believe anything that he believes, and there’s already polling data indicating that his core supporters trust Trump as a source of information far more than they trust the news media or any other institution. So for that group, yes. Then, of course, there’s a large group of Trump doubters, who are also, not coincidentally, more likely to think that the mainstream media can be trusted as a source of information.  But there are people who are in neither of those camps. I wouldn’t call them centrist. I wouldn’t try to characterize their ideology. But they’re not in either one of those camps. And for those people, the key for the Trump campaign is to create confusion, not belief. And that’s what we’re going to see in the months ahead: the massive effort to create doubt and confusion about things that are overwhelmingly clear from the public record. One side says this. The other side says that. I can’t make up my mind; I’m going to either ignore it or shrug my shoulders. Yeah, it’s already happening. Like, [New York City Mayor] Bill de Blasio does not have a great record in himself and warning his public. He went to the gym way after it was too dangerous to do that. And so there is some responsibility there, right? Compared to Trump’s responsibility, it’s, you know, small. But it’s real. That kind of fact is going to interact with on the one hand/on the other hand journalism. And they’re going to try and, of course, blow that up. Another thing that has already started happening is people keep sending me this graphic. I don’t know who created it, but I’ll send it to you. That is all the headlines from various sources that minimized the virus, that said it’s not going to be that big of a deal — some similar things to what Trump said.  The attempt is to say that it was the “MSM” — a term I don’t use, but they do — it was the mainstream media that misled us. I did want to ask you about that. Do you think the mainstream media — I’ll use the term — could have done a better job of raising the alarm earlier?  Probably, yes. As with other very big crises, like the 2008 economic crisis, you can go back and you can find reports that gave the appropriate warnings. But the overall tone of the coverage did not accomplish that. I think the same thing will be true here. There are definitely reports — quite a few — that said this thing is bigger than the political system seems to be acknowledging. And then even before this particular virus arose, the possibility of a global virus like this, having this kind of effect, was very well known and discussed quite a bit. So there is some responsibility there from the news media. But the news media of course isn’t one organism. I’ve been thinking about this for a while. I think there are probably two different reasons that the media, broadly, was not more alarmist about this. One is a sincere desire not to be alarmist — in general, and specifically over a health crisis. If you’re telling people this is going to be terrible, and you quote people who are stocking up on food, you can have a run on markets. I think it would be part of the reason that you didn’t see kind of a “Time out, nothing else matters. Pay attention to this.” That would be one reason.  But another way to look at it would be if the president and the White House [were] hair on fire about this, there is no doubt there would be media coverage of the same type. So that’s a factor as well.  There’s a lot of resistance to reporting on something that is a possibility. But the other thing is that for many journalists, this reporting involved going to health experts — often the CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] or the WHO [World Health Organization], or people like that — and saying, “What should we think about this?” and then reporting what they say.  Now we’re seeing that, in some cases, those institutions themselves were behind in sounding the alarm, being more vocal about the alarm, and some of their advice and prognostications have changed.  And it seems like that would pose a real challenge if you are a good reporter, and you go to what is supposedly a nonpartisan institution staffed with experts, and they’re saying this is our view — that it’d be very hard for you to run against that. I agree with that. Journalism scholars say that news reporters are dependent on “authorized knowers.” This would be a very good example of that. When the authorized knowers aren’t making a big deal of something, it’s extremely difficult for journalists to do that. What do you make of the Ben Thompson argument that this is why Twitter was particularly valuable? Because you had all sorts of experts on Twitter — sometimes they weren’t sanctioned by the CDC, sometimes they were smart people in Silicon Valley — and they’ve had insight and we should have listened to them more than the CDC or the WHO at various points? Well, if the question is the availability of information that warned us that this was coming — yes, that information was available. And you could find it in part by doing your own research. That’s true. But the problem is not really the availability of good information that turned out to be right and important. It’s the combination of good information and public attention. Which is kind of the job of the media. To contextualize that information and to put it out. Yes, and to order things. This is one of the problems we have with our news system. The news tends to be, to use a colloquial expression, “one damn thing after another.” And what it’s not that good at — even though people say that front pages do this — it’s not that good at helping us organize stories in order of priority.  Like telling us what’s most important to worry about. And next most important, and maybe third or fourth. And keeping those priorities both stable, in the sense that they don’t change day to day, but also be able to evolve as big events evolve. We don’t really have anything like that. And so it tends to be one damn thing after another. If you just think about producing today’s news, then a sense of hierarchy, a sense of relative importance, disappears from the flow of content. This is a big problem with our news system. It’s not the fault of any one journalist or any one news organization. It’s a problem with relying on news for our knowledge. But there are hierarchies. There’s the top of the newscast. If you know how to interpret the New York Times, you know that the story on the far right is the most important even though it may be under a smaller headline than the rest of the page. That is part of the job of media, right? Packaging that and ordering it? Yes. But that tends to be a little bit different than what I said. That’s “here’s the most important new thing that happened today.”   But some things are not new, but they are the most important thing. So some things are persistent and still the most important thing today. And when you have things like that, where actually the news of the day doesn’t change the fact that you should be worried about X, Y, and Z first — that’s where the system breaks down. I want to come back to the original idea here that I had when I was talking to you, which was: Is there anything we can do about a partisan divide and a news source divide that is now literally a life-and-death situation? Is there any practical solution to this problem today in 2020? Well, as the reality of the virus grows and everyday life is affected and people have extremely practical questions like, “What do I do? How do I protect my family?” the news at the local level becomes extremely important because people need to know where to go, what to do. So it’s possible that local news providers will experience kind of a rebirth of both use and trust from the many questions and crises that arise from this situation. And a relationship with a local news provider is basic to how people develop trust in journalism and in the news media as an institution. And so if people’s connection to local news providers is strengthened by this — which does happen sometimes in civic emergencies, like hurricanes, for example — that could change things a little bit. I don’t think it’s going to change opinion at the level of Fox versus NBC and Trump versus Jonathan Karl. It doesn’t touch that. But reestablishing trust and utility with local publics could help journalism quite a lot. That would be great. And it would be great if we have local news outlets that are still around to perform that function. Well, this is part of the problem. Those newsrooms are themselves impoverished. And so it makes it extremely difficult. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  Apple and Google are a month away from launching a series of updates to their smartphone operating systems that will use Bluetooth signals to track potential coronavirus cases. This week, the companies confirmed to Recode that the contact-tracing technology will go away when the pandemic does, which should assuage some privacy concerns. But as two of the world’s tech superpowers prepare to embed new surveillance features into their devices, skepticism mounts. Will Apple and Google’s joint effort to fight the virus have unintended consequences? When the contact-tracing tool was announced, there was no indication that the software required to make it work would be temporary. That it involved changes to mobile operating systems actually made it seem more likely that it would be a permanent fixture. Apple and Google have said this deep integration was the only way to enable the nonstop tracking necessary for the contact-tracing tool to function properly. Nevertheless, the permanency of such a tool could lead to its features being used for other purposes, once its intended use was no longer needed. So it seems to be a relief that Apple and Google plan to sunset the contact-tracing tool at the end of the pandemic, though details about exactly which software features will go away and what qualifies as the “end of the pandemic” still need to be explained. By promising an expiration date, Apple and Google have addressed a chief concern for privacy advocates, some of whom have been uncharacteristically amenable to certain types of tracking during the pandemic. But many more questions remain. How will Apple and Google prevent their tool from being abused by governments with access to it? How will the companies ensure that contact-tracing systems remain optional for smartphone users? Will the tool be effective enough to warrant the privacy compromises it requires? “This is an extraordinary time,” Bennett Cyphers, staff technology at the Electronic Frontier Foundation, told Recode before the time limit was announced. “It means that we would accept some pretty extraordinary things that EFF would normally never endorse. But that has to come with some kind of limit on how it can be used and for how long it can be used.” Although they seem to have answered the “how long” question, Apple and Google have so far provided limited information about the tool itself. The companies have released some technical documents showing how the system works, and they’ve answered a few questions from the media. But that’s about it. Beyond confirming that the tool would end, neither Apple nor Google has responded to Recode’s requests for comment. The new Apple-Google tool sounds miraculous at first blush. Starting in mid-May, the companies plan to release software updates that will allow iOS and Android phones to exchange anonymized keys through Bluetooth to any other phones that come within a certain proximity. These feature will enable interoperability between iOS and Android phones, and public health authorities will exclusively build apps based on an application programming interface (API) built by Apple and Google. If a user tests positive for coronavirus, they will inform the app, which will then alert people who have been close enough to the infected person for their phones to exchange Bluetooth keys. The alert will tell them they’ve been in contact with an infected person, without revealing the person’s identity. Although this talk of tracking and tracing might sound daunting, the Apple-Google tool includes specific privacy protections, such as using anonymized keys that change every 15 minutes to prevent anyone from tracing a specific key back to an individual; storing data on users’ devices rather than on a central server; using proximity detection instead of location data; and making the entire program opt-in. Apple and Google have said privacy and user trust was at the forefront of their collective minds when developing the tool. Not everyone believes these good intentions can hold. Apple and Google’s privacy promises ring hollow to people who have seen how both companies have built themselves on the back of privacy compromises, many of which were made without the consumer’s knowledge. “Two corporations, Apple and Google, have come to dominate the smartphone software ecosystem, and they have spent years spying on users and enabling consumer surveillance in their app stores,” Michael Kwet, a visiting fellow at Yale Law School’s Information Society Project, told Recode. “In the world we built, we now have to weigh the fate of our lives and economy against trust in Apple and Google, the ad-tech industry they support, and government intelligence agencies. … This is a nightmare.” Just look at how well the tools hidden in many apps available through Apple and Google marketplaces can track you. And Google has trackers installed all over the internet, gathering first- and third-party data about potentially everything you do online. One way or another, everyone from location-data brokers to law enforcement can get access to a lot of your data through these companies’ devices. Apple and Google have made several efforts to combat some of these intrusions, but such intervention only shows that the companies can’t foresee all of the unintended consequences their innovations may have. They can only respond to them after the fact. We also don’t yet know which countries, states, or cities will be participating in the Apple-Google contact-tracing effort. We do know that the API will be made available only to those governments’ public health authorities, though it’s unclear if the companies will take measures to prevent authoritarian governments from using the technology in unintended ways. Along those lines, while users must opt-in to the contact-tracing feature, we don’t know if health authorities will be able build apps on top of the Apple-Google technology that could enable more invasive tracking. We’ve already seen systems like this in other parts of the world. The Chinese government, for example, made an app that assigns a health code to users, who must then show a healthy code in order to move around freely. The Apple-Google tool doesn’t do this, but it could be used to perform a similar function. “I think there’s a very real possibility that businesses could, for example, require that their employees show proof of ‘non-infection’ before they’re permitted to return to work — voluntarily, of course,” Ashkan Soltani, a former Federal Trade Commission chief technologist who has written about privacy issues and Bluetooth tracking, told Recode. Soltani also wondered what Apple and Google will do to prevent developers from adding identifiers in the apps they build using the contact-tracing API, such as location information and names. On Thursday, the European Union released a list of privacy requirements for member states developing contact-tracing apps, suggesting the EU has some privacy concerns with regard to the Apple-Google tool. On the list is “urgent engagement with owners of the mobile operating systems” to ensure that the tool is “compatible with the EU common approach.” Meanwhile, the United Kingdom’s National Health Service was reportedly looking into ways to identify supposedly anonymous users of the contact-tracing app it is developing. The NHS plans to integrate the Apple-Google tool into that app, according to the BBC. It’s not inconceivable that something like this could happen in the United States, where there are already instances of public health authorities sharing positive coronavirus tests with the police. Sen. Richard Blumenthal, an advocate of data-privacy legislation, said in a statement that he “urgently want[ed] to know how Apple and Google will assure that consumers’ privacy interests are strongly balanced with the legitimate needs of public health officials during the coronavirus pandemic,” adding that “a public health crisis cannot be a pretense to pave over our privacy laws or legitimize tech companies’ intrusive data collection about American’s personal lives.” Privacy and security are chief among the concerns with the Apple-Google tool, but there are also issues with the technology itself. While more precise than GPS, Bluetooth signals may not be good enough to determine the proximity of other devices with the accuracy needed for contact tracing. The precision of these signals can depend on several factors, but some estimates suggest the technology could struggle with the 6-foot social distancing recommendation. If a Bluetooth signal can only determine your location to within 30 feet, for example, you’d get a notification that you were in proximity to an infected person when you might actually be at a safe distance. (Exactly how far the coronavirus can travel in the air remains unclear.) These false positives could happen in a densely populated location with such frequency that they become meaningless. Bluetooth signals can also travel through physical barriers, so the Apple-Google contact-tracing tool might get mixed up if there’s a wall between two devices. That means you could get a notification about being exposed to the coronavirus when, in reality, you and the other person are in two separate apartments. The opposite could also be true: You might not get a notification when you have been exposed in a way the Bluetooth-based system didn’t register. “The false negatives are the ones that concern me more,” Susan Landau, a cybersecurity and policy professor at The Fletcher School at Tufts University, told Recode. False negatives could happen in many different ways. The infected person might not use the tool, or they may not have their phone on them when they came near you. Or someone with the virus might sneeze or cough more than 6 feet away from you. They wouldn’t trigger the proximity alert, but you still could have been exposed. Meanwhile, if this data is then used by governments to justify lifting shelter-in-place ordinances, any inaccuracies could be very costly. “It’s essentially going to give us a false sense of safety while simultaneously infringing on people’s rights,” Soltani said. Finally, assuming the privacy issues don’t lead to any sinister outcomes and the Bluetooth technology pulls through, the Apple-Google contact-tracing tool might fail due to statistics. There’s the minimum percentage of the population that will have to participate in digital contact tracing in order for it to be effective. An Oxford University study puts the minimum at about 60 percent. And while having it integrated into the vast majority of smartphone operating systems — an estimated 3 billion people worldwide own an Apple or Android smartphone — is one of the better ways to encourage that, it still leaves out billions of people who don’t have smartphones. Even in America, where 81 percent of adults own smartphones, mass adoption will be tricky from both a cultural and practical perspective. Smartphones are still less accessible to lower-income people and seniors, populations that have been hit particularly hard by the pandemic and will increasingly be left behind. Those who do have phones will have to download the latest software updates (and have newer-model phones that can support the updates), download the app from the relevant public health authority, carry their phones with them everywhere they go, and want to participate in the first place. The bar to entry might simply be too high for too many people. “We cannot solve a pandemic by coding the perfect app,” the Electronic Frontier Foundation said in its report about such digital contact-tracing tools. “Hard societal problems are not solved by magical technology, among other reasons because not everyone will have access to the necessary smartphones and infrastructure to make this work.” Even if the Google-Apple tool achieves the necessary widespread adoption, it alone may not be enough to eliminate or reduce the spread of the virus. Michael Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota, said in a recent Project on Government Oversight panel discussion that contact tracing alone was a “somewhat superficial and not very meaningful” solution. “When your house is on fire, there’s no way to do contact tracing,” Osterholm said. “[Coronavirus] is everywhere ... The only thing we know that really will work is a primary shutdown.” This is especially true when you consider that many people who have the virus and are contagious are asymptomatic, meaning they never get tested at all. Only a mass-testing program, experts say, will allow people to safely stop social distancing. We need to significantly increase our testing capabilities for this; estimates range from 750,000 tests a week to 35 million a day. We aren’t anywhere near even the lower end yet, and there are many factors preventing us from achieving it anytime soon, from a shortage of basic materials like testing swabs to questions about the tests’ accuracy. Landau, the Tufts professor, noted that even if Apple and Google use the tool only for the duration of the pandemic, we don’t know how they’ll define the end of the pandemic, and no one knows when that will be. “It’s tempting to say after a certain time, the app will die,” she said. “We don’t know how long that will be. We don’t know if we’ll have a vaccine. We don’t know what percentage of the population will respond to that vaccine. There’s all sorts of unknowns.” Even assuming Apple and Google have the most altruistic of intentions, their tool likely won’t be the pandemic-fighting silver bullet we all want. If we don’t know that it will solve this problem, it’s harder to justify the additional problems it will create. Altering their phones’ operating systems — even if that change is temporary — is a big deal. We can only hope the ends justify the means. Open Sourced is made possible by Omidyar Network. All Open Sourced content is editorially independent and produced by our journalists. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.A political divide over the response to the coronavirus pandemic was on stark display Wednesday in Lansing, Michigan, where about 3,000 conservative demonstrators rallied against the Democratic governor’s policies.  “Operation Gridlock” wasn’t intended to go beyond people driving around and honking their horns in opposition to Gov. Gretchen Whitmer’s executive stay-at-home order, organizers say, but some drivers got out of their cars and the event took on a flavor of a Trump rally, with some demonstrators, including members of militia groups, protesting close together while chanting slogans like “lock her up,” referencing the governor. Some attendees wore Make America Great Again hats and waved Confederate flags, and others carried AK-47s on the steps of the state capitol.  Whitmer’s handling of the coronavirus receives a favorable review from 71 percent of Michigan residents. Nationally, Whitmer has received some attention as a potential vice presidential pick for presumptive Democratic nominee Joe Biden. The state has been one of the hardest hit by the coronavirus pandemic. As of the morning of April 16, there were more than 28,000 confirmed cases in the state, resulting in over 1,900 deaths — the third most in the country. Last week, Whitmer responded by extending the state’s stay-at-home order through April 30, but she has also joined a coalition of Midwestern governors working together to determine an end to stay-at-home restrictions.  But a vocal subset of conservatives and libertarians have started to rebel, led in part by the Michigan Conservative Coalition. MCC spokesperson Matt Seely told Vox that the extension of the stay-at-home order made many Michiganders “nuts.”  Seely, who denounced the “jackasses” who brought weapons to the event, said the movement isn’t about partisanship. “We would have protested this executive order if it was an independent governor or a Republican governor. Party has nothing to do with this system, out of principle and our civil liberties.” Still, surveys show that national attitudes about the government response to coronavirus are polarized around party ID and political attitudes. Morning Consult found that most Americans were practicing some form of social distancing in March, with Republican men being the least likely to say they were doing so. And the symbiotic relationship between President Trump and Fox News has contributed to this difference in attitudes. A recent study of Fox viewers found they reported being more skeptical of mainstream media reports about the virus and less likely to participate in social distancing.  Michigan is seeing the challenges of getting public buy-in for social distancing policies firsthand, and Trump’s messaging on Fox and in daily briefings mirror the divide. He’s consistently downplayed the pandemic and attempted to pin the blame on governors, particularly those of blue states (including Whitmer). And while those Vox spoke with in Michigan said that they understood how serious the coronavirus pandemic was, his message is clearly resonating with some conservatives and having a real-world effect on their attitudes and actions — potentially putting them and others at risk.  Conservatives in Michigan were already growing agitated with Whitmer’s aggressive response to the virus when she took another step that seemed nonsensical: Big-box hardware stores (larger than 50,000 square feet) were told they must close off aisles dedicated to paint supplies and lawn care until the end of April. They can still sell other goods deemed essential. “If you’re not buying food or medicine or other essential items, you should not be going to the store,” Whitmer said in a press conference earlier this month. Some rally attendees complained to Fox News that Whitmer’s order seemed arbitrary. They can’t buy lawn fertilizer from Home Depot, visit siblings, or get their hair done, but lottery tickets are still for sale and liquor stores remain open. Seely told Vox, “Do you want people to leave their homes and risk infecting themselves and other people to get a lottery ticket? But I can’t go to the hardware store and buy grass seed for my lawn, buy a gallon of paint so that I can find myself doing a home project so I don’t go absolutely insane being locked at home. I mean, none of that makes any sense.” Chants of “recall Whitmer,” “USA” and “lock her up” outside Michigan Capitol. #OperationGridlock pic.twitter.com/7Q7niiNFUF MCC president Roseanne Ponkowski told Vox that on her way to Lansing, some rally attendees saw Michigan Department of Transportation workers planting trees and flowers along the highway and in the capitol. “And yet private businesses can’t do that. ... So it’s like there doesn’t seem to be any rhyme or reason.” She added, “We have a lot of jobs that just by the nature of the work are social distancing. The man cutting your grass on the riding lawnmower is social distancing. Why can’t he be working?”  Republicans in the state, especially those in the more rural northwestern areas, share the frustration. The Guardian explains: Four sheriffs in the north-western Lower Peninsula called Whitmer’s orders a “vague framework of emergency laws” that are frustrating citizens. The Leelanau county sheriff, Mike Borkovich, said people did not understand why they could not take a child fishing in a motorboat but they could use a kayak. “We’re trying to keep the peace with people ... The economy is coming apart in northern Michigan. People are upset,” Borkovich told the Associated Press. “People are frantic to get back to work. They have been very edgy.” Part of the reason for the skepticism among conservatives is also about geography. The metro Detroit area, which is overwhelmingly Democratic, has been hit much harder by the pandemic than the rest of the far-redder state. For example, in Iron County, on the state’s upper peninsula, there have been zero confirmed cases of coronavirus thus far. In Wayne County, which includes Detroit, there have been more than 12,500 confirmed cases.  Public health officials have said that social distancing rules are important even if a region hasn’t seen very many cases. Because the virus’s incubation period can be up to 14 days, there is a lag between when the virus starts spreading and when cases begin to emerge.  And members of the MCC were notably dubious about coronavirus just a few weeks ago — largely following rhetoric stemming from the White House. Early in the pandemic, members of the MCC posted on Facebook that Democrats were “cheerleaders” for coronavirus and reshared a Breitbart article arguing that the coronavirus threat was being overstated. One MCC leader vowed to continue holding mass events as recently as a month ago.  If the goal of Wednesday’s demonstration was to persuade Whitmer to reconsider the stay-at-home order, it doesn’t appear to have succeeded. Later Wednesday, the governor spoke to MSNBC and said “the sad irony here is that the protest was that they don’t like being in this stay-at-home order, and they may have just created a need to lengthen it, which is something we’re trying to avoid at all costs. “We know that this demonstration is going to come at a cost to people’s health,” Whitmer added. “We know that when people gather that way without masks … that’s how Covid-19 spreads.” Whitmer: I mean this was a political rally. It was a political rally that is going to endanger people’s lives because this is precisely how COVID-19 spreads... The cars were blocking one of our hospitals pic.twitter.com/YlyFTbrfia What remains to be seen, however, is whether the demonstration will persuade the Republicans that control Michigan’s legislature to block Whitmer’s efforts to continue the states of emergency and disaster that will expire at the end of the month unless they are extended by lawmakers. Whitmer, like other Democratic governors, has been critical of the federal government’s coronavirus response. She’s become a particularly pronounced target of abuse from Trump, who has referred to her as “the woman in Michigan” and “Failing Michigan Governor.” Failing  Michigan Governor must work harder and be much more proactive. We are pushing her to get the job done. I stand with Michigan! Trump’s victory in 2016 hinged on winning in Michigan, where he edged out Hillary Clinton by a slim margin. He picked up votes in areas of the state that haven’t yet experienced high rates of infection or deaths and where some are agitated by the social distancing rules. New polling by the American Enterprise Institute found that even among Republicans, those living in rural areas were more likely to say that Trump had responded to the pandemic well and less likely to say that they were concerned about the outbreak.  At his daily press briefings, Trump has routinely deflected responsibility for his administration’s failures in responding to the virus, instead attempting to pin the blame on governors, arguing that they should have built their own stockpiles of ventilators and protective medical gear like masks and gloves rather than rely on the federal government’s.    At the same time, he’s urging states with areas that are less hard hit to get ready to reopen. And his messaging is resonating with some Republicans across the country. In Minnesota and Kentucky, for instance, some residents are also agitating for their Democratic governors to lift stay at home orders. The installation of social distancing policies that seemed confusing to some may have been the tipping point for protesters in Michigan. But weeks of denials from the White House of the pandemic’s true cost have done little to help.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.     One of the most striking elements of the coronavirus crisis is how easily the response has been folded into America’s partisan culture war. From the earliest days of the outbreak, Republicans in Congress, party-aligned media, and voters have tended to play down the pandemic and treat the push for social distancing skeptically — while also positing nefarious motives for liberals and public officials who take opposite positions. There are exceptions, like Gov. Mike DeWine of Ohio and Gov. Larry Hogan of Maryland, but corona-skepticism and hyper-partisanship has been more much the rule. The Trump administration was infamously slow to embrace distancing and conduct widespread testing; even now, President Donald Trump is privately pushing to rapidly reopen the country starting May 1. Florida Gov. Ron Desantis, who didn’t declare a state of emergency until April 2, recently declared WWE wresting an “essential service” that can continue to broadcast live shows. Conservative media has cast Democratic governors who have imposed distancing as authoritarians, pitting allegedly authentic Americans who want to reopen the country against out-of-touch liberal elites who don’t care about the lockdown’s economic consequences. It is, of course, desperately important to establish a sense of shared reality and responsibility here. You need a cross-elite consensus on coronavirus, not only to swiftly pass essential legislation like more expansive forms of stimulus, but also to make sure the entire citizenry actually follows public health best practices in their daily lives. The more Republicans and allied media treat the coronavirus as a partisan issue, the harder those things will become. How did the coronavirus become folded into the culture war in such a harmful way? One of the best explanations I’ve seen comes from David Hopkins, a political scientist at Boston College. The GOP, Hopkins writes on his personal blog, is failing on coronavirus not by accident — but because the party was built in a way that produced failure. “The contemporary Republican Party has been built to wage ideological and partisan conflict more than to manage the government or solve specific social problems,” Hopkins writes. “So perhaps it shouldn’t be shocking that an array of subjects, from what medical treatment might help COVID patients to how important it is to take measures protecting the lives of the elderly, have been drawn into the perpetual political wars.” This analysis draws on Hopkins’s book Asymmetric Politics: Ideological Republicans and Group Interest Democrats, coauthored with Michigan State’s Matt Grossmann. In the book, Hopkins and Grossman argue that there’s a fundamental structural difference between the Democratic and Republican parties: While the former is a coalition of social groups, the latter is primarily a vehicle for a single cohesive ideological movement. This difference makes it much easier for conservative Republicans to push the party to the fringes on the right than it does for leftist Democrats to do the same. But it also means that the GOP is less able to shift its policy approach to adapt to specific policy problems: It is so consumed by ideology, so preoccupied with the war on Democrats and liberals, that it cannot countenance cooperating with them to address a shared national problem. The Republican party needs a perpetual liberal enemy. In other countries — Canada, for example — the coronavirus has created unprecedented levels of cross-party cooperation and consensus, as everyone recognizes that it’s in the common national interest to fight the virus through mass measures like social distancing. In the United States, by contrast, even positions on basic medical issues, like whether hydroxychloroquine should be promoted as an effective therapy for the virus, are becoming partisan-signaling fights. Conservative media in the US is touting a more relaxed “Swedish response” to the crisis — despite Sweden’s lack of restrictions producing far higher death tolls than those of its neighbors — and arguing that liberals are exploiting the restrictions to impose their agenda on the country. Sometimes, the impulse to polarize everything works well for Republicans in crass political terms. It helped Trump escape impeachment despite clear evidence of his guilt. But Hopkins thinks it might not work out so well this time around: Republicans need a party-wide reset of priorities. There has seldom been a time in recent political history when daily partisan point-scoring has been rendered more irrelevant. The general election is far enough away that good policy is good politics: the best way for the ruling party to serve its own electoral interests is to work as hard as possible over the next seven months to render COVID manageable and prevent economic freefall. The widespread public confidence that will be necessary for “normal life” to resume simply can’t be jawboned back into existence via daily press conferences, radio broadcasts, or Fox News monologues. If Republicans lose the battle with the coronavirus, they won’t have much of a chance to win the fight against liberalism. Owning the libs is the raison d’être of the current Republican party. It’s not a governing strategy in normal times. But in a crisis, it’s downright catastrophic — and quite possibly self-defeating. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Pressure is mounting on President Donald Trump to take action against China for its role in hiding the severity of the coronavirus outbreak. And what he chooses to do could greatly impact not only the future of the pandemic, but also the world’s most important global relationship. Republican lawmakers want Trump to consider harsh measures against Beijing such as sanctioning Chinese leaders, opening a formal investigation into the disease’s origins, removing Chinese pharmaceutical companies from America’s supply chain, and more.  So far, Trump’s only retribution for the outbreak of over 2 million cases worldwide has been against the World Health Organization (WHO), an international body that helps countries identify and curb pandemics. On Tuesday, Trump announced he was freezing US funding for the WHO while his administration reviews how the organization handled the early signs of a health crisis out of Wuhan, China, the disease’s origination point. But if Trump actually wanted to reprimand Beijing, what would be the best way for him to do that? To get a better sense of the options available to him, I asked 12 policy experts, including US lawmakers, former top US officials, and academics, what actions they’d recommend the president take. Their responses, lightly edited for length and clarity, are below. First, we need to be clear that we are talking about the Chinese government and ruling party, not the people of China. That’s important not only to prevent further escalation of the destructive anti-Asian racism we see here at home, but also to recognize Chinese doctors and nurses who were on the front lines from the start, independent Chinese journalists persecuted for their coverage, and people across China using the internet to echo Dr. Li Wenliang’s call for greater transparency, only to be silenced by censors.  We don’t know the true extent of the Chinese government’s complicity in the spread of the virus, and we may never have a full picture due to their obfuscation and control of information. We do know that they lied to their own people and the world about the details and spread of the virus, and today we face a pandemic that has left no country untouched.  We need a deliberate US effort to counter Chinese influence and manipulation of international institutions. The administration cannot complain about an increasingly assertive China in international organizations, such as the WHO, when it fails to appoint diplomats to top posts and uses its own yearly contributions as blunt instruments rather than tools to shape policies in our interests. When the United States is absent on the world stage, China is only too happy to fill the void. This endangers our health security and national security.  Looking forward, we need to make sure that the United States has a medical supply chain that is not reliant on China or other foreign suppliers. We need to restore a stronger US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) presence in China, as well as an embedded US presence in the Chinese CDC and unimpeded international access to identify the origins of the coronavirus.  The United States must also lead action in the UN Security Council to ensure that in the event of a declared health emergency, all countries grant on-the-ground access to WHO officials, as well as require that all countries transparently disseminate timely public health information to the WHO and to their own people. The WHO should no longer be at the mercy of a single member-state for information that affects the security of all countries.  And we need a commission akin to the 9/11 Commission, as I have called for, that recommends further actions to ensure that the mistakes that led to this health pandemic never happen again. The US response should focus on establishing the facts surrounding the virus’s origins and China’s early missteps in a credible, impartial, and scientific manner. This approach makes sense for two reasons.  The first is that, based on reliable reporting about China’s initial fumbling, the facts appear to be damning on their own. The United States should make sure that evidence of Chinese mishandling and politicization of the problem is exhaustively documented and well-understood around the world. Washington should recognize, however, that letting the facts speak for themselves will be more convincing to third parties than trying to embellish or sensationalize. The United States should show, not tell.  Second, in the contest of governance systems between liberal democracy and authoritarian capitalism, openness and transparency are advantages — the lack of which seemingly allowed the virus to take hold in the first instance. Ensuring the facts are brought to light in a credible way, in conjunction with allies and multilateral organizations, will pressure China to take responsibility. And it could result in other positive outcomes as well, such as further boosting Taiwan’s image abroad.  Next, if one of the two leading theories about the virus’s origin — that it started in a Wuhan wet market, or that it accidentally escaped a Chinese lab that was studying animal coronaviruses — turns out to be correct, then pressuring Beijing to fix disastrous regulatory and enforcement failures should obviously be a top priority. The same goes for upholding China’s commitments to international public health agreements.  The overriding goal of any response, though, should be preventing another pandemic. Policymakers should avoid creating incentives for any country, including China, to avoid reporting a potential outbreak in the future for fear of being blamed or punished. Imposing sanctions on Chinese officials or allowing victims to sue China for Covid-19-related damages could dissuade countries from sounding the alarm early next time.  I generally favor taking a tougher line toward China on a range of policy issues, from its assertive military behavior to its human rights crackdown and abusive trade practices. But there should be some issues both superpowers try to separate from geopolitical competition, even if they won’t be 100 percent successful, because those issues are fundamentally negative-sum games.  Nobody “wins” a pandemic. We should keep that in mind right now. First, the United States should not use China as a scapegoat for the pandemic and its failed response at home. When the Trump administration refers to the coronavirus as the “Chinese virus” or the “Wuhan virus,” it not only conjures up racist stereotypes that are unethical in their own right, but also serves to shift the blame for the pandemic squarely onto China.  Without a doubt, China’s failure to be transparent about the emergence of the virus in November and its failure to involve international health experts to manage the containment led the disease to spread throughout the world. It is also true, however, that the United States is the current epicenter of the pandemic in no small part because of the bungled response of the Trump administration and its failure to organize even minimal preparations.  Put simply, the blame-shifting from the Trump administration elides the fact that both China and the United States bear responsibility in creating the conditions that exist today. An important effect of this rhetoric is that it positions China as a lesser, distinctly incapable global power relative to the superior United States, which in turn, precludes the kind of international cooperation that a pandemic requires. Second, the United States must actively seek China’s help in understanding and containing the novel coronavirus. These efforts should include the creation of an international working group to coordinate efforts to address the pandemic, whose mandate encourages the sharing of scientific expertise among states in order to guide policy.  As the first country to experience the pandemic, Chinese scientists have unique knowledge to contribute to such an effort and could take a leading role in shaping the global response to the disease. By designing a response that engages China on the science of the virus, the US may recognize the important role China can play in this area, while also sidestepping the many thorny political dynamics that have characterized US-China relations over the past several years.      Whatever form it takes, recognition and cooperation must be at the center of any American response to China’s role in the spread of the coronavirus. If done with care, these cooperative endeavors could provide the foundation for cooperation in other areas of US-China relations in the years to come. There is really not much the US can do. We could blame China for causing the outbreak, but the US was the origin of the 1918 Spanish flu [Editor’s note: this is still disputed] and arguably the 2009 H1N1 pandemic.  We could say that China should be held accountable for the pandemic, especially given its initial mishandling of the outbreak. But our own handling of the outbreak was characterized by inaction and ineffectiveness, not to mention that in international politics, we cannot really hold a sovereign state “accountable” for a disease outbreak. China has not been a responsible international partner in the global fight against Covid-19.  China’s lack of transparency and cooperation with the global health community, including the United States, slowed down our understanding of the virus and how to contain it — putting the world at far greater risk. In the critical early stages of the virus, China refused to allow international experts to come to the epicenter of the virus and suppressed information about the severity of the virus. China is culpable for their inactions and mismanagement.  But in order for us to ultimately defeat Covid-19, it will require a coordinated global response. As one of the world’s most powerful countries, China is a critical actor in the fight against coronavirus and any future pandemic outbreak.  Moving forward, it’s incumbent that China understands the important role it plays in the global health community and acts as a responsible and transparent partner. As chair of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific, and Nonproliferation, I will continue to press the global community, including China, to do everything it can to prevent another pandemic outbreak like Covid-19. No one who has been closely watching the unfolding of this pandemic could conclude that it had emerged from anywhere other than China, or that China’s negligent initial response to the outbreak did not contribute to its spread. The world knew all of this, even before Washington and Beijing prodded each other into a counterproductive narrative war.  It’s deeply unfortunate that the world’s two most capable powers are consumed by finger-pointing and blame-shifting while the pandemic spreads, literally killing thousands and destroying economies in its wake.  The United States will not be able to protect its people until it stamps out the virus in every corner of the world. Such an outcome will not be possible unless a consortium of powers pools its capabilities to do so. It’s hard to imagine that occurring until the United States and China find a way toward even a minimal level of coordination (e.g., on vaccine trials, production, and delivery).  To keep the focus where it needs to be in the midst of this crisis — saving lives and stopping the spread of the virus — it would be helpful if both Washington and Beijing could commit now, that after the crisis has passed, they both will fully and transparently support a UN-led after-action report of Covid-19, whereby leading scientists could determine the origin of the virus, causes of its rapid spread, and lessons that must be learned to prevent a recurrence.   In response to the Covid-19 outbreak, both the US and China had moments of mismanagement. Amid the escalated feud between the two countries, we have seen the importance of their interconnection and the negative impacts of worsened US-China relations.  China has played a critical role in the global supply chain, including pharmaceutical active ingredients and personal protective equipment (PPE), which are in high demand in many countries. Also, to fight the pandemic, we need close cooperation and communication among the global scientific and public health care communities, in which China is an important actor with much-needed experiences and lessons.  Meanwhile, the widespread economic fallout in the US and Europe has taken a toll on China’s economy, even if the latter has tried to jump-start its economic activities after a months-long lockdown.  Looking ahead, the US and China should rebuild their relations through mutual understanding, continued dialogue, and long-term collaboration.    Accountability is needed for China’s failure to close its “wet markets,” as it pledged to do after the SARS outbreak; its failure to inform the world promptly of the dangerous new pathogen emerging in Wuhan; and the initial cover-up that allowed the new virus to spread far beyond Wuhan and spill across international borders.  But the ability of the US to lead an appropriate response depends on Washington restoring lost credibility. So first and foremost, the US government needs to launch an effective effort to stem the outbreak in America, aid afflicted countries, lead global coordination through the G20 and the WHO, and rapidly produce a vaccine against the coronavirus.  Only then will the US have the credibility needed to hold China to account.   It would be an error for the US to blame China as “responsible” for the Covid-19 outbreak.  According to the International Health Regulations (2005), state parties have reporting requirements. They have to inform the WHO of all cases of human influenza caused by a new subtype in their territories within 24 hours. While China did not report immediately, and contributed to a delay in the global response, it cannot be considered the culprit in a pandemic. The reason is that there is no proper definition of international responsibility for pandemics. In practice, no single actor has been held accountable for pandemics so far. And while the US can continue to promote reforms in China and reestablish dialogue and trust, the best response is to increase cooperation with the international community and lead the development of international health law.   Following the example of President George W. Bush’s International Partnership on Avian and Pandemic Influenza, the US could also lead new forms of international cooperation to increase international coordination, transparency, and international capacity to identify and contain new pandemics. This is not the time for the US to withdraw from international organizations. It is time to actively participate in them and reform them, filling the gaps in pandemic accountability and responsibility.  The time to press for a full accounting of Beijing’s mishandling of the Covid-19 pandemic will be once the current crisis has begun to recede.  For the moment, without getting our hopes up, we should remain open to the possibility of cooperating with China in fighting the virus and coping with its consequences. At the same time, however, we should vigorously counter Beijing’s efforts to rewrite history and cast itself as a savior and a model rather than as the source of this catastrophe.  In the somewhat longer term, the United States and other like-minded countries should create an independent, international “truth commission” to explore the origins and unfolding of the pandemic.  Aside from whatever happens with China, the US and other democracies should work together to enhance coordination and improve cooperation on a wide range of issues, including reducing their dependence on China for the drugs, medical devices, and other equipment that will be needed to fight the next global outbreak of infectious disease. The US should highlight China’s missteps through open sources of information, especially our media institutions and academic research. In particular, investigative journalists and academic researchers should analyze China’s official data on infections and deaths as there is likely significant underreporting.  We should highlight the institutional and regulatory failures that led to the delay in reporting and to the punishment of whistleblowers, activists, and journalists, which continues to this day. Media outlets outside of China should continue to highlight the censorship, repression, and information control that squash independent Chinese voices.  More generally, there should be a strong pushback against the official Chinese Communist Party narrative that President Xi Jinping and the party [have asserted], instead of against China’s citizens, civil society, and health care workers. The US should reverse its decision to halt funding to the WHO. It should admit to its own mistakes from late January until early March in downplaying the severity of the virus. And it should spearhead an international effort to control the pandemic and develop a successful vaccine.  The best thing we could do in the wake of China’s past actions is to lead the international response, building networks of cooperation and sharing research, development, and logistical support to health workers.  Unfortunately, we’re forfeiting that chance by missing no opportunity to pick fights with our allies and friends. The polling on expectations overseas and even in our hemisphere that we will “do the right thing” are terrible. We compete over supplies, and in Asia we are picking counterproductive fights with South Korea and Japan over cost-sharing.   We grew to unprecedented power after World War II by helping our allies and friends, in what used to be called the “free world,” become successful. Democracy grew around the world, most notably in Taiwan, South Korea, Indonesia, and other places. Now democracy declines across the globe, in large part because we’ve forgotten who we are.   If China emerges from the pandemic as an international leader, we have only ourselves to blame. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.At a press conference Wednesday evening, President Trump went on a long rant accusing the Senate of being too slow to confirm his nominees to executive and judicial roles, although the Senate has confirmed Trump’s judges at a much faster pace than the nominees of other recent presidents. He then threatened to use a presidential power that has never been used before in American history. Referring to a process the Senate uses to neutralize the president’s ability to make temporary appointments while the Senate is in recess, Trump claimed that “the current practice of leaving town while conducting phony ‘pro forma’ sessions is a dereliction of duty that the American people cannot afford during this crisis,” labeling this process “a scam.” The Constitution permits the president to “fill up all Vacancies that may happen during the Recess of the Senate,” although these appointments typically expire after a little more than a year. Pro forma sessions are extraordinarily brief sessions that the Senate holds every few days while it is not conducting business. The Supreme Court held in National Labor Relations Board v. Noel Canning (2014) that the Senate may use these brief sessions to nominally prevent itself from recessing — thus preventing the president from making recess appointments. If the Senate does not abandon these pro forma sessions, Trump threatened to use a “very strong power” to adjourn Congress — thus forcing the Senate into recess and opening up Trump’s ability to make recess appointments.  In theory, this trick could work. In practice, however, it appears unlikely to succeed. And even if it does succeed, Trump will gain very little. Despite Trump’s claim that he has a “very strong power” to adjourn Congress, this power is actually quite limited. The Constitution provides that the president may adjourn both houses of Congress “to such Time as he shall think proper,” but only “in Case of Disagreement between them, with Respect to the Time of Adjournment.” Thus, the president’s power to adjourn Congress is only triggered when the two houses disagree about when to adjourn. As University of Texas law professor Steve Vladeck notes on Twitter, right now the House and Senate are in agreement about when to adjourn — they plan to formally adjourn on January 3, 2021, the day when current House terms expire. So long as the houses are in agreement, the president has no power to adjourn them. At the moment, Congress does not plan to return to work until May 4. In theory, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell could try to call the Senate back to Washington sooner — so that it could formally vote to either adjourn or to disagree with the House about the proper date of adjournment — but McConnell does not appear particularly inclined to do that. In a statement responding to Trump’s threat to adjourn the Senate, a McConnell spokesperson said that “the leader pledged to find ways to confirm nominees considered mission-critical to the Covid-19 pandemic, but under Senate rules, that will take consent from [Democratic] Leader [Chuck] Schumer.” All of that said, if McConnell were determined to engineer a situation where Trump could make recess appointments, he could most likely do so. As Sarah Binder, a professor of political science at George Washington University and senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, told me, “motions to adjourn are not debatable” in the Senate, which means that Senate Democrats could not use the filibuster to block such a motion. If McConnell wanted to adjourn the Senate, “a simple majority vote would suffice.” It’s not immediately clear which jobs Trump would fill by recess appointment if such an adjournment happened, although CNN suggests that the list may include “the director of national intelligence, two members of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, an assistant secretary of the Treasury Department and an undersecretary of agriculture.” For the most part, Trump’s nominees have received a favorable reception in the Republican-controlled Senate, although there are some exceptions. For example, Trump’s Federal Reserve nominee Judy Shelton, a one-time advocate for fringe positions such as a return to the gold standard, has raised concerns among some Senate Republicans. Outlier nominees like Shelton aside, Trump would see little benefit if the Senate were formally adjourned. Let’s suppose, for the sake of argument, that Trump succeeds in adjourning the Senate. Then what? The most likely answer is that Trump would have to keep Congress out of session for a decent amount of time, and in the middle of a global crisis, before he could invoke his recess appointments power. Under Noel Canning, the president’s recess appointments power is triggered during a “recess of substantial length.” Though the Court did not fully define the word “substantial,” it did strongly imply that the recess typically must be at least 10 days. “Though Congress has taken short breaks for almost 200 years, and there have been many thousands of recess appointments in that time,” Justice Stephen Breyer wrote for the Court, “we have not found a single example of a recess appointment made during an intra-session recess that was shorter than 10 days.” In order to make recess appointments, in other words, Trump would likely need to send Congress away for at least 10 days in the middle of a pandemic. And he would need to do so at a time when the economy is hemorrhaging jobs — a total of 22 million people filed new unemployment claims since social distancing measures began in March.  In fairness, Congress already does not plan to return to Washington until early May, but that is largely so that Congress can practice the same social distancing that much of the nation is currently engaged in. Before Trump could adjourn Congress, the Senate would have to break this social distancing and pass a resolution that would enable it to be formally adjourned. It’s unlikely, especially given McConnell’s lack of enthusiasm for such an maneuver, that members of the Senate would risk their own health so that Trump could make recess appointments. And all of this would be so that Trump could fill a few jobs with Republican appointees, most of which the Republican-controlled Senate was likely to confirm anyway, if Trump were just a bit more patient. Democratic political operatives couldn’t dream of a more damaging story to tell about Trump during a presidential election year. The president is threatening to delay stimulus legislation, relief for many people who are unemployed, and potentially funding for necessary public health measures, over a petty dispute about a few political job vacancies. And, while judges nominated by the president and confirmed by the Senate may serve for life, judges given a recess appointment receive a temporary appointment that expires at the end of the Senate’s next session. The current session ends in early January, and the next session will likely end in January of 2022. So a recess-appointed judge would serve less than two years. The Senate could potentially confirm these recess appointees in the interim, giving them a lifetime appointment. But absent such a confirmation vote, any judicial vacancies Trump fills with a recess appointment could potentially be filled again very soon by a Biden appointee. Similarly, while Trump could conceivably appoint someone like Shelton to the Federal Reserve, without Senate confirmation she would only serve a very brief term — not the 14-year term typically served by board members. So Trump is literally threatening to do something that’s never been done — adjourn Congress by presidential decree. And he stands to gain very little from doing so. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Over the last week, from April 8-15, the US averaged about 151,000 coronavirus tests per day. At the end of last month, from March 25 to April 1, the country was performing about 110,000 tests every day. The number of tests done each week has gone up, which is good. But experts say that’s far short of the millions upon millions more tests America needs to conduct every day if we’re to resume anything resembling normal life. Testing right now is not nearly good enough. If the Trump administration is serious about starting to reopen the country soon and wants to avoid a lot more people getting sick, they need to fix the testing problem — fast. Because right now, we’re staring down the potentially toxic mixture of relaxed social distancing and insufficient testing. To end social distancing, as Vox’s Umair Irfan put it quite plainly: “Test millions. Test early. Test late. Test over and over. Test until the whole damn pandemic is over.” The path forward is clear, according to Umair’s reporting: Following through on this would require a massive increase in government funding, huge numbers of workers trained to administer the tests, and the coordination of raw materials, manufacturing, and delivery across the entire global economy. It’s a costly, brute-force approach. But it may be the only way out of the expensive and blunt measures already deployed to control the pandemic, from social distancing to shelter-in-place orders. Right now, however, the US is struggling to test even 100,000 people per day, so getting to the scale some researchers suggest would demand a huge ramp up in capacity. Yet, they say, it’s possible to do it. And despite the immense financial and social costs of a national testing system, it may yet be the cheapest path to reopening the economy. But right now, our testing capability is being restrained, remarkably, by two equal but opposing forces: supply shortages, which limits the number of tests that can be processed, and overly restrictive testing criteria, which curbs the number of tests ordered even when labs have actually more testing capacity. ”The system is decentralized and not coordinated,” Jen Kates, director of global health and HIV policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation, told me. “And the federal government has not stepped in to provide that coordination and help ramp up the manufacturing. Finally, we have such a testing deficit that we are playing a terrible game of catch-up.” In both cases, the Trump administration and Congress could do more to fix it. More federal funding would help labs keep their capacity up, and less-stringent federal guidelines would allow doctors and hospitals to order more tests so everyone can better understand the scope of the pandemic. As Brian Resnick and I reported a month ago, the testing fiasco started with faulty test kits getting sent out to labs. That problem has been fixed, thankfully; there are still some concerns about test accuracy, but that has been a problem for every country and would theoretically be mitigated if we were testing a whole lot more. But now, testing is sluggish. Labs are either overwhelmed because they’re short on staff and supplies, or they’re sitting open because federal guidance is restricting how many people get tested. Vox’s German Lopez covered the first problem late last week: There is no widely accepted number for how many tests America should run each day, but the current number is generally considered far too low by experts. Jha put the ideal at 500,000 tests a day. Scott Gottlieb, former FDA commissioner and coauthor of the AEI report, suggested that everyone who goes to a doctor could be tested, which would amount to more than 500,000 a day. A Harvard model proposed millions of tests a day. Complaints vary, but labs say they don’t have enough swabs, test kits, reagents, personal protective equipment (PPE), staff, or machines to run the specific tests required. “Any one link in the chain of supply, any restriction in the chain of supply, can suddenly create a bottleneck,” Louise Serio, a spokesperson for the American Clinical Laboratory Association (ACLA), which represents the private labs, told me. “No labs have, really, the predictable, consistent access to all the supplies we need, from reagents to test kits to PPE.” Labs need more money, both for these supplies and to keep their staff employed, as their finances have taken a hit with most other kinds of medical testing sharply falling during the pandemic. At the same time, Politico reported on Tuesday that some commercial labs were “now sitting with unused testing capacity waiting for samples to arrive.” The trade association for commercial labs, the American Clinical Laboratory Association, was practically begging for the testing criteria to be loosened. “ACLA members have now eliminated testing backlogs, and have considerable capacity that is not being used,” ACLA President Julie Khani told Politico’s David Lim. “We stand ready to perform more testing and are in close communication with public health partners about ways we can support additional needs.” The FDA commissioner, Stephen Hahn, was quoted saying the administration was examining the issue. Every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, Recode’s Rani Molla and I update our estimates of how many people the US and other countries are testing. If you look back over the last month, the US has come a long way — but not far enough. This was our chart from March 18, when the United States was embarrassingly behind:  And this is our chart from April 16. America has risen all the way up to ... mediocre compared to Italy (another one of the epicenters) and Germany (a model for good testing practices). We have to get this right — and fast. As Vox’s Ezra Klein wrote last week, every single plan to relax social distancing and start to get life back to normal again depends on a dramatic increase in testing. Nobel laureate Paul Romer thinks we should be conducting 22 million tests every day. By that standard, the US testing capacity has barely budged since the last week of March. Even much less ambitious testing proposals remain far out of reach for the time being. Setting aside the issue of scale, there is also little coordination in how the tests are being administered. Laurie Garret, a Pulitzer-winning author who has covered prior outbreaks, said we need a strategy for testing both the vulnerable populations (like nursing-home residents) and people who we want to return to their regular routines (like students). ”We need wisdom,” Garrett said. “Right now it’s nothing more than chaotic supply-and-demand.” More than 600,000 cases and 26,000 deaths into this crisis and America still hasn’t risen to the challenge. This story appears in VoxCare, a newsletter from Vox on the latest twists and turns in America’s health care debate. Sign up to get VoxCare in your inbox along with more health care stats and news.  Get our newsletter in your inbox once a week. Are you interested in more discussions around health care policy? Join our Facebook community for conversation and updates. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Ariella Altman, a surgical resident at the University of Minnesota and mother of two, panicked when she heard that Minneapolis schools and day care facilities were closing for at least five weeks starting in mid-March in order to curb the spread of coronavirus.  Altman is contributing to the coronavirus response at the university hospital, which is the only facility in the Upper Midwest specifically designated by the federal government to contain and treat highly infectious diseases like Covid-19. Her husband, Ethan, works full time as a business analyst, so they didn’t know how they would take care of their children Gabriel, 4, and Jonathan, 2.  When Altman saw a link on Facebook for MN CovidSitters, a group founded by University of Minnesota medical students offering free child care to front-line medical workers amid the pandemic, she jumped at the opportunity and was approved for their services within a day.  “I immediately reached out, knowing medical students would be trustworthy and also conscious of socially distancing during this time,” she said. “We just wanted the best option for our kiddos.” Now, a “pod” of students is assigned to the family so they can share responsibility for child care while also limiting the number of people who come into contact with the family in order to prevent the spread of the virus. They even helped Jonathan craft his own pair of goggles, modeled after the personal protective equipment his mother wears at the hospital.  For many medical professionals, these kinds of child care services are necessary to ensure they can continue to do lifesaving work on the front lines of the pandemic. Some states — including Washington, California, and New York, which currently have the biggest outbreaks in the US — are providing free or subsidized child care to essential workers. Others have allowed existing child care facilities to remain open, but many providers have had to shut down nonetheless due to decreased overall demand, limiting the options available to health care workers who need their services most.  Where existing child care facilities or the state hasn’t been able to provide services, volunteers have tried to step in. MN CovidSitters, which has over 300 volunteers serving more than 200 health care families, is expanding across rural Minnesota and has been contacted by dozens of schools looking to start sister organizations across the country. Similar babysitting networks have emerged at Dartmouth, Johns Hopkins, and Ohio State University.  “We have the urge to help where we can,” Kristin Chu, a second-year medical student and co-founder of MN CovidSitters, said. “We did a needs assessment to see where our profession needs us currently — the need for child care became even more present.” At this point, all states have ordered schools closed for the time being, though so far only 19 have extended those closures through the end of the school year. Washington state, the epicenter of the first major coronavirus outbreak in the US, is preparing for even longer closures that could potentially stretch into the fall.  Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said on April 7 that he is cautiously optimistic that schools will be able to reopen by fall 2020: “I fully expect, though I’m humble enough to know that I can’t accurately predict, that by the time we get to the fall that we will have this under control enough that it certainly will not be the way it is now, where people are shutting schools.”  In the meantime, however, Colorado State University’s Jude Bayham and Yale University’s Eli Fenichel found in a recent study published in The Lancet that at least one in seven medical workers may have to stay home from work due to school closures to care for children ages 3 through 12. They account for households in which older siblings and other non-working adults can provide child care — but not for households with children younger than 3, who need even more supervision.  Essential health care workers are defined as anyone who works at the offices of physicians or other health practitioners, outpatient care centers, hospitals, nursing care facilities, and residential care. That may include people delivering direct care to patients, such as doctors, nurses, pharmacists, and medical technicians, and all the workers needed to keep a medical facility running, from administrative to cleaning staff.  Many of these workers can’t afford child care to begin with. According to the Center for American Progress, a liberal think tank, their median personal income is $42,340, but the annual cost of care for two young children is more than $20,000 on average. A 2014 Pew Research Center survey found 22 percent of grandparents regularly provided child care at no cost, but now that option may no longer be safe because seniors face elevated risk of complications from the virus due to their age.  The impact of health care workers staying home isn’t just economic; it could also increase cumulative mortality rates due to staffing shortages. “Health-care workers spending less time providing patient care to look after their own children can directly influence the development of an epidemic and the survival of those patients,” Fenichel told Science Daily. “Understanding these trade-offs is vital when planning the public health response to COVID-19 because if the survival of infected patients is sufficiently sensitive to declines in the healthcare workforce, then school closures could potentially increase deaths from COVID-19.”  State and city governments have tried to step in to incentivize medical professionals to continue showing up for work by providing child care services in some capacity. And many states have also allowed day care facilities to remain open and are subsidizing them to make up for lost income.  In places like New York City, child care is free at one of the 93 regional centers serving children of health care workers, first responders, grocery store and pharmacy workers, transit employees, and other city agencies. The centers have capacity for about 40,000 children as young as 3 and up to 12th grade, including those with disabilities. Children younger than 3 can continue to attend day care if their parents are essential workers, but many day care facilities in the city have shuttered amid the pandemic.  But in Washington, free child care options amid the pandemic have gotten off to a bumpy start. Gov. Jay Inslee had initially called on local school districts to start providing child care to essential workers, but it’s taken time for schools to adjust. In Seattle, teachers refused to show up, claiming it would put them at risk of infection, and in other districts, the programs still weren’t up and running as of early April, forcing parents to turn instead to other local nonprofits providing child care.  Other states, such as Ohio, are issuing special pandemic licenses to day care facilities that allow them to stay open with reduced capacity to serve essential workers, though not free of charge. About 1,500 day cares were approved for those licenses as of late March, roughly 20 percent of existing facilities. North Carolina has similarly allowed day cares to remain open, but it is also offering to pay for emergency child care through May for health care workers under certain income thresholds. While many states have allowed private child care facilities to stay open amid the pandemic, few have done so because their customer base has disappeared now that most parents are caring for their kids at home. That means parents in the health care field may struggle to find child care providers if their city or state does not offer its own services.  According to a survey by the National Association for the Education of Young Children and the Early Care and Education Consortium, attendance at day care facilities declined almost 70 percent in a single week amid the pandemic. Many providers said they couldn’t survive without a week of income and would have to close — in some cases, for good. More than 60 percent said they could stay afloat for no longer than a month absent government aid.  The US is already seeing massive closures of child care facilities. More than half of the child care facilities in Florida had shuttered as of April 11. More than 1,000 child care facilities in Washington, with the total capacity for over 48,000 children, had closed as of April 2. Some states are offering financial support to child care providers who are losing income amid the pandemic. The coronavirus relief bill signed by President Donald Trump last month, known as the CARES Act, provides $3.5 billion in discretionary funds for them to do so, but experts say that might not be enough. Kim Kruckel, executive director of the Child Care Law Center, told Vox’s Anna North that the need is closer to $50 billion. In Minnesota, for example, child care providers can apply for a monthly grant of $4,500 if they remain open and can qualify for an extra $1,000 if they serve children with special needs or who don’t speak English, or if they stay open outside normal business hours. Child care facilities with capacity for more than 10 children can qualify for up to $15,500 in grants.  But it’s not clear how many child care providers will be able to stay afloat for the working parents in health care and other essential fields — and for the rest of the public when the economy reopens. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.     Right now, many are wondering: “How long are people going to be dying of Covid-19, and when can businesses reopen?” To answer those questions, scientists and policymakers have turned to a growing number of infectious disease forecast models. None of these models is perfect. Each uses different methods, makes different assumptions, grapples with uncertainty in different ways, and yields different results.  It’s hard to know — for policymakers, and for the public — which model to trust the most for decision-making. There also hasn’t been a lot of formal accountability at a time when the accuracy of models is so important and can mean lifting restrictions and possibly exposing more people to the virus.  “Right now, there’s nobody responsible for recording and archiving who said what,” Caitlin Rivers, an epidemiologist at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, says. That’s a problem, she says. Because to better predict and quell future outbreaks, we need to understand what is working — and what’s not — during the current one.   Some researchers are doing this independently. Recently, a group of statisticians from Australia and the US took a careful look at modeling forecasts of the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME), which operates out of the University of Washington. IHME models have been among the most commonly cited during the outbreak, influencing even the White House. In a preprint paper (that’s not yet been peer-reviewed), the statisticians found that the model — and specifically how its predictions on the number of daily Covid-19 deaths matched with reality — was inconsistent. (The model, they found, decently predicts what’s happening across the United States. “What it doesn’t do well is predict most individuals’ states,” Sally Cripps, a statistician at the University of Sydney who co-authored the analysis, told me.) That’s a useful critique that could potentially help scientists make better models. But a one-time effort is not enough.  Rivers has a big idea to overhaul how infectious disease forecasts are done and evaluated in the United States. Just as the National Weather Service both studies the science of weather forecasting and produces forecasts, Rivers thinks there ought to be a national infectious disease forecasting center. Recently, I called her up by phone to discuss. This interview has been edited for length and clarity. Diagnose the problem for me. How is the current system for forecasting infectious diseases failing? And how could we do better?  Modeling plays a really important role in decision-making during outbreaks. We saw this in 2009, during the H1N1 pandemic: we saw it during Ebola in 2014. In this outbreak ... we see President Trump at the White House press conferences describing the modeling results. They’re informing decision-making.  But right now, most infectious disease modelers work in academia. They have their regular projects that they are doing day in and day out. When there is a public health emergency like the one we’re facing, they drop what they are doing and volunteer — usually for free — in order to support the public response. We have some of the best infectious disease modelers in the world. I’m really proud of my community. But if we’re going to rely on them so heavily — and if they are going to be so important — we need to think more about how to make that a formalized capability, and not a volunteer effort.  I think it should be something like a national infectious disease forecasting center. Does this not exist? Does the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention do this? Or some other arm of the Department of Health and Human Services? There are several small groups within government that do this work.  There’s a small group in HHS, and there’s a small group in CDC, there’s a small group at NIH [the National Institutes of Health], but it’s not that many people. They are staffed to support their agencies during peacetime — if you’ll forgive the war terminology. When there is an infectious disease emergency, there’s just a raw personnel problem.  What about the National Weather Service do you think is worth emulating in a disease forecasting center?  There’s a lot of lessons from the National Weather Service. They have a whole research and development layer, which involves building new models and finding new ways to review data sources, and really pushing that envelope.  There’s also the layer that focuses on implementing those models and telling us what the weather is going to be.  And then there’s the local layer, when you turn on the TV and you see a local meteorologist interpreting for you what the National Weather Service has said. Thinking through those different pillars — of research and development, translation, and applied public health — is really inspirational. Brian Resnick Does this need to be a permanent workforce, or something like an Army reserves? It needs to be a permanent workforce. There is a lot more work that could be done during downtime in order to improve the capacity and improve the science, and a lot of those functions don’t sit well in academia.  Right now, there’s nobody responsible for really recording and archiving who said what: What did modelers say, and what happened. What prediction did they make today, and how does it change tomorrow, how does it change the next day, and how does that relate to what actually happened? No one is doing that. That is something that a government function could do.  I report on hurricanes when they happen. And, yeah, you can go to the National Weather Service, and see decades’ worth of hurricane predictions and compare them to the actual storm paths. There’s even some reassuring charts that show us the hurricane track forecasting models are getting much, much better over time. Yeah, we’re not doing that [for disease models]. We have not been doing that work because there is nobody responsible for it.  It’s hard to get a grant to do things like archiving forecasts, and finding out which ones were right and which ones were wrong and why. That’s not the kind of thing that academics … you can’t build a career off of that.  Why is it hard to make a career in checking up on disease modeling? Couldn’t the government encourage more of this by just increasing the number of research grants in this area? For things that are so fundamental, we usually make those government functions.  Is there a path forward in which academia could be structured and funded so it could better support those needs? Maybe. But if we’re taking the opportunity to think through what would be best and most effective, that would be a government function. The reason we have accurate weather forecast is because there was a federal agency responsible for improving the forecasts.  Also, again, on pushing the science forward: A lot of academic infectious disease modelers are focused on diseases that recur, like seasonal influenza or dengue or cholera. Those are excellent uses of their time. But there is not as much thinking specifically on these emerging infectious disease threats, like the one we’re facing now — again, because it’s hard to make a career out of something that doesn’t come around very often. A federal agency would be able to put more time and thinking into the very specific purpose of using modeling to support decision-making during crises.  What tools would an agency like this need? Weather forecasters have weather stations reporting conditions on the ground; they have the means to know what’s happening with air systems in the upper atmosphere. What tools will disease forecasters need to do this work better than it is being done now?  That’s exactly the kind of question that I think an agency should put a lot of time into answering. That’s the entire future of the field.  First of all, we need more detailed and timely data about who is getting sick. Right now, most modelers are having to rely on case counts over time. If you Google what’s happening with Covid today, you find a website with a little graph: That’s the exact same data that the modelers are using.  But if we can bring in more detailed, more patient-level data, we can add a lot of richness to our analyses.  I also think there should [be] more detailed information about human movement and human behavior: There are a lot of questions right now about “are people social distancing.” … The fact is we don’t really know because we don’t have the capacity to evaluate that.  But we could. Mobile phone data has been used in the past to understand population movement, but it has not been systematized. And then there are a lot of other ideas that haven’t been explored. Is forecasting infectious diseases harder than forecasting the weather?  I am not a meteorologist. But it is harder because the weather is governed by physics. And some of the transmission dynamics is as well.  What we don’t have a good handle on is human behavior and how that changes. We are always changing the outcome with the choices that we make, and there are ways we can build that into the models and do that better, but it definitely adds complexity.  Humans are hard creatures to understand. Might there always be limits on what we can predict when it comes to disease outbreaks?  Even just going through the practice of finding out what the limits are, and being able to build that into our communications would be so helpful.  If we can add more detail about the ways we might be right and the ways we might be wrong, and add more richness to the variables we think are influencing the outcome, that would be really helpful. Unlike the weather, with pandemics, we actually influence the outcome. ... People see these numbers, and they are motivated then to be more vigilant about staying home and doing all the things that change that outcome. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.                As Congress starts planning its next coronavirus relief package, Sen. Amy Klobuchar (D-MN) has shared her new plan for rural America exclusively with Vox. Though much of the national media focus so far has been on “hot spots” like New York City and New Jersey, coronavirus has already hit America’s rural communities. And if it hasn’t yet reached a given area, it likely will in the coming weeks and months. A recent New York Times analysis found that as of April 6, two-thirds of rural communities have confirmed at least one coronavirus case; the number of cases could continue to rise.  Covid-19 is colliding with a weak health care infrastructure in rural areas with older and lower-income patients who have seen their local hospitals close. With far fewer resources than cities or suburbs, the 60 million people who live in rural areas could be devastated by the coronavirus.  Rural communities are also being hit by the economic ripple effects of the virus’s spread. Some in rural areas have no access to high-speed broadband, which they could use to work remotely, file for unemployment, or get their kids logged on to virtual school. Farmers and ranchers fear the virus could wreak havoc on the food supply chain and their livelihoods. And people of color, including Native communities, are particularly at risk.  “We’re facing a national crisis — it affects every American, no matter where they live,” Klobuchar told Vox in a statement. “While COVID-19 may be slower to spread to some rural areas, its impact will likely be just as serious, as we’ve seen in places like Albany, Georgia, and Martin County, Minnesota.” Klobuchar’s plan is expansive. It includes some proposals like small-business relief, which was in the CARES Act and is part of another small-business loan bill negotiation between Republicans and Democrats. Other pieces have already been introduced as stand-alone bills. But now that the first coronavirus wave seems to be leveling off, the Minnesota senator recognizes a second wave could hit rural America particularly hard and wants her plan included in coronavirus stimulus packages to come.  As the coronavirus hit large urban areas like New York City, Detroit, and New Orleans, rural communities didn’t see many cases at first.  The lack of dense population might make it seem like these communities don’t have as much risk. But no one’s risk is zero.  “If we believe that the way seasonal flu spreads through the country is likely similar to Covid-19, the rural eruptions tend to be later and briefer but more impactful than in big urban areas,” Roger Ray, a retired neurologist, physician executive, and physician consulting director with the Chartis Group, recently told writer Lois Parshley for Vox.  And when the coronavirus does hit, rural areas simply have fewer resources to deal with it. From 2005 to 2020, 170 rural hospitals around the country closed, leaving critical gaps in the rural health care infrastructure. Physician shortages have followed; a 2019 poll conducted by NPR, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health found a quarter of people living in rural areas said they could not access needed health care — and many said it was because their health care facility was too far away.  Per Parshley: More than half of counties in America have no hospital ICU beds, posing a particular risk for the more than 7 million people over the age of 60 living in those places, who are at higher risk of severe cases of Covid-19. In February, the Chartis Group released a study showing that more than 450 rural hospitals are vulnerable to closure. “If you’re vulnerable enough to risk losing the ability of making payroll, how valuable can you be to the community in crisis?” Ray asks. Even if these rural areas may not face coronavirus rates like New York City did, the virus could exacerbate some devastating trends.   Klobuchar’s proposal is a wide-ranging, four-part plan that takes into account everything from support for rural hospital and medical professionals to relief for farmers, increased rural broadband, and support for local governments.  “We need to ensure that all communities across rural America are not left behind and have the resources they need to respond to this pandemic,” Klobuchar told Vox. Here are the main points of her plan. As the coronavirus spreads to rural areas, Congress will likely have to extend more assistance to those areas. As a senator, former presidential candidate, and potential vice presidential contender, Klobuchar may be in a good position to make the case for helping Americans who live there.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. In an April 14 press conference, President Donald Trump blamed the World Health Organization for the Covid-19 crisis in the United States and said he would halt its funding “while a review is conducted.” It’s not clear if the president has the authority to do this: Congress approved the United Nations agency’s budget in December 2019, but the Wall Street Journal reports that Trump may be able to reroute the $116 million allocated for 2020 to other global health purposes or organizations or withhold funds for the next fiscal year. This is not the first time the president has accused the agency of mismanagement. A week earlier, when Trump first threatened to freeze funding, he sniped on Twitter:   The W.H.O. really blew it. For some reason, funded largely by the United States, yet very China centric. We will be giving that a good look. Fortunately I rejected their advice on keeping our borders open to China early on. Why did they give us such a faulty recommendation? Others in the Trump administration, the GOP, and conservative media have also scolded the WHO. Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus task force coordinator, and Scott Gottlieb, the former commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration under Trump, criticized its handling of China’s data and transparency. Gottlieb told Face the Nation, “Going forward, the WHO needs to commit to an after-action report that specifically examines what China did or didn’t tell the world and how that stymied the global response to this.” Senate Republicans, meanwhile, on April 13 announced a plan to investigate the origins of the virus and the global response, including the WHO’s decisions. Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee Chair Ron Johnson told Politico, “We need to know what role WHO might have had in trying to cover this thing up.” Yet several global health experts Vox spoke to said they believe the agency responded quickly to the Covid-19 outbreak and avoided major missteps. The SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes the disease swept across the globe not because of the WHO’s errors but because of a “very fragmented, chaotic, state-centric response,” according to Yanzhong Huang, a senior fellow for global health at the Council on Foreign Relations.  And now, with over 2 million reported cases and 125,000 deaths worldwide, countries “failing in their response have decided WHO is the culprit,” says Ashish Jha, a professor at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health.  Global health megadonor Bill Gates also swiftly condemned Trump’s promise to cut funding to the agency.   Halting funding for the World Health Organization during a world health crisis is as dangerous as it sounds. Their work is slowing the spread of COVID-19 and if that work is stopped no other organization can replace them. The world needs @WHO now more than ever. Lawrence Gostin, a professor at Georgetown University and a past critic of WHO’s director-general, agrees Trump went too far. “How can you threaten to withdraw funding from the world’s leading global health agency in the midst of a pandemic, with tens of thousands of people dying?” he tells Vox. “It’s utterly irresponsible.” The World Health Organization works to improve global health in many ways, by improving access to health, strengthening health care systems, and, perhaps most importantly, preventing and responding to medical emergencies. Countries cooperating to control disease actually began earlier than germ theory itself, which started with efforts to coordinate quarantines as far back as 1851. After the world wars, developing an international health organization was one of the first things the new United Nations did, launching the WHO in 1946. Today, when outbreaks occur, it’s the agency’s job to coordinate information and resources among countries. “WHO functions best when it is sharing information it knows, openly and transparently calling attention to problems of global concern, and setting norms and best practices,” Jha says. During Covid-19, “on those fronts, it’s done a pretty good job.”  Most experts agree there are some legitimate criticisms of how the agency has handled the Covid-19 global health crisis, particularly in how it responded to China’s initial delays and suppression of key information. Other critiques, they say, are less founded. Here are five common questions about the WHO, with answers from the experts we spoke to. In the April 14 briefing, President Trump claimed, “The delays the WHO experienced in declaring a public health emergency cost valuable time — tremendous amounts of time.” To parse this, it’s helpful to review the timeline. China first reported an unusual cluster of pneumonia cases in Wuhan, China, to the WHO on December 31, 2019. The same day, Taiwan (which is not a WHO member because of objections from China), also emailed the agency, asking for information.  Six days later, the agency alerted the scientific community and global media about the new virus. China did not publicly share the genome sequence of the virus until January 12, delaying WHO’s ability to make tests for the new coronavirus. On January 13, public health officials confirmed the first recorded Covid-19 case outside of China, in Thailand. In mid-January, the WHO volunteered to send a team into China but was declined. “It wasn’t like WHO was going to be able to bully China into letting a team in. That’s just not how it works,” says Jha, pointing out that Trump would equally be able to say no if the agency wanted to come to New York. On January 22, just three weeks after first being notified of the virus’s existence, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus convened an emergency meeting to determine if the outbreak qualified as a public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC), the agency’s term for an “extraordinary event” that requires a coordinated international response — like SARS, H1N1, and Ebola outbreaks in 2014 and 2019. The experts couldn’t agree and decided to meet again. After the director-general traveled to Beijing to meet with Chinese President Xi Jinping in Beijing on January 29, a PHEIC was declared on January 30.  This declaration activated WHO measures to “address travel, trade, quarantine, screening, treatment” as well as national measures in countries that have tied their pandemic response plans to WHO declarations. “I called for WHO to do it a little earlier,” says Gostin, “but it had no impact on the epidemic.” Jha agrees. “I think they could have called it when they initially met, but it wouldn’t have made a big difference,” he says. On March 11, alarmed by the disease’s spread and governments’ inaction, the director-general announced that Covid-19 could be considered a pandemic. “Ultimately, referring to it as a pandemic is simply a descriptor,” says Adam Kamradt-Scott, a professor of global health at the University of Sydney, an informal classification that didn’t impact WHO obligations or powers.  Declaring a PHEIC at the end of January was what helped initiate states’ preparedness plans and gave the WHO the authority to issue recommendations and guidelines, although not to enforce them. In the March 11 press conference, Tedros was “explicit that he was doing this precisely because he was concerned a number of countries haven’t responded forcefully enough,” Kamradt-Scott explains. By March, Trump said, “I don’t take responsibility at all” for the slow American response to Covid-19. On April 14, by which time the confirmed US death toll had exceeded 25,000, he reiterated this opinion, saying, “So much death has been caused by their mistakes.”  
    Related
   But, again, all the experts Vox interviewed agreed that the US government’s lack of preparation for Covid-19 was not a result of WHO delays. “Trump has a penchant for rewriting history,” Kamradt-Scott says, “So it’s not surprising to see him blaming the WHO for mistakes ultimately attributable to his own administration.”  ABC News reports US intelligence agencies warned the White House and the Pentagon of the disease as early as November. In January, trade adviser Peter Navarro warned the White House that the novel coronavirus could kill half a million Americans. In February, the US lost valuable weeks failing to develop effective testing. As late as February 27, Trump told a press briefing the virus would “disappear.” The next day, the first American died of Covid-19.  “WHO is not responsible for America not heeding the warnings of its own scientists and security apparatus — for two months,” says Jha. “That’s laughable.”  As early as December, Chinese doctors knew that a new disease was circulating. Dr. Li Wenliang, an ophthalmologist in Wuhan, was detained for “spreading rumors” after trying to warn his colleagues; he later died of Covid-19 at age 33.  By the end of December, Wuhan had nearly three dozen cases of Covid-19, and authorities had closed a market where they thought it was being spread. But the government allowed 5 million people to leave the city for the Lunar New Year. The Chinese government also did not confirm the virus could spread from human to human until January 20. One preprint study suggests that by acting more quickly, China could have reduced its infections by 95 percent.  But when a WHO team visited China in early February, the report its members wrote did not mention these missteps and lack of transparency. Instead, they wrote, “China’s bold approach to contain the rapid spread of this new respiratory pathogen has changed the course of a rapidly escalating and deadly epidemic.”  
    Related
   For a time, Trump also repeatedly praised President Xi Jinping’s response, saying in a press briefing on February 7 that he’s handled it “really well” and telling Fox News on February 13 that China was “extremely capable” and handling the outbreak well. That praise seems unfounded. “The Chinese government allowed the outbreak to evolve into a major epidemic and eventually a global pandemic,” says Huang of CFR. “WHO shouldn’t have downplayed the initial mishandling of the crisis in Wuhan.”  He suggests that although the agency couldn’t have investigated without China’s permission, it could have done more to press the government “to provide more accurate data in a more timely and accurate manner.” (In particular, Chinese officials have made a number of grave errors, including silencing whistleblowers and delaying reporting.) 
    Related
   Gostin agrees that China was not transparent but says that’s not the WHO’s fault. He argues the director-general decided “not to publicly criticize China, believing that smart diplomacy is better to coax cooperation and transparency.”  “In a pandemic, you don’t choose sides,” says Gostin. “Tedros has praised China, and perhaps he shouldn’t have done it, but he also praised Trump, and perhaps he shouldn’t have done that either.” Overall, WHO has offered little criticism of governments’ responses. “People have fixated on the idea WHO is now in China’s pocket,” says Kamradt-Scott. Back in 2003, after WHO strongly criticized China’s lack of transparency during SARS, checks were placed on the secretariat to prevent future criticisms. Kamradt-Scott says that, fortunately, China has been much more transparent about Covid-19. “It’s much more important to keep China engaged than closing down its correspondence with the international community.”  But the conflict between China and Taiwan has further politicized the global response to Covid-19. The island is not allowed into the WHO, even as an observer, because China claims Taiwan has refused to allow it to participate in multinational organizations as a member state. As the WHO is a UN agency, Kamradt-Scott says, “It’s not in the power of the secretariat to admit Taiwan.” Although China has sometimes allowed Taiwan to participate in the WHO’s annual World Health Assembly, it stopped in 2016 after Taiwan refused to endorse the One China policy. As coronavirus cases were reported in Taiwan, Quartz reports WHO couldn’t even decide what to call the island. At first, they called it “China, Taiwan,” and then “Taiwan, China” and most recently, “Taipei and environs.” Although Taiwan, which is known for its excellent health care, is only 100 miles away from mainland China, it has only reported 393 cases as of April 14.  In the latest twist, Tedros, the first African director-general of WHO, recently alleged that he had experienced racist attacks and death threats from Taiwan, and accused the Taiwanese government of knowing about them. (Taiwan has denied these claims.) It’s unclear if Taiwan’s reduced access to WHO has had health care consequences.  Tedros, in the same briefing, begged members to put politics aside. ”For now, the focus should be on fighting the virus,” he said. “The United States and China should come together and fight this dangerous enemy.” On February 2, President Trump closed US borders to non-Americans who’d been in China in the previous two weeks. On March 11, the travel ban was expanded to Europe. Many other countries have since followed suit: Think Global Health, an initiative of the Council on Foreign Relations, has a tally of 96 countries that have restricted travel from China. New Zealand, for example, has been closed to almost all travelers since March 19. The WHO “actually criticized and disagreed with my travel ban at the time I did it. And they were wrong,” Trump said in a White House media briefing on April 7. It may be too early to determine what effect the US travel bans may have had on transmission: A new study published in Science suggests China’s dramatic lockdown, with stringent travel restrictions between provinces, may have prevented more than 700,000 cases of Covid-19.  But it’s not too early to say that American travel bans didn’t actually stop travel from China. More than 430,000 people traveled from China to over 17 American cities after the virus was discovered but before the ban; another 40,000 people arrived to the US from China after the ban went into place.  Huang explains that one of the main functions of the WHO is to coordinate responses, “But no one listened. What you see basically is a very fragmented, chaotic, state-centric response to the outbreak in terms of trade and travel restrictions.”  Although the WHO has not publicly criticized the American travel ban, it doesn’t recommend travel or trade restrictions during disease outbreaks, both because they often don’t work and because they can make disease response more difficult. Kamradt-Scott recalls firsthand his difficulty in trying to get from Australia to West Africa during the 2014 Ebola outbreak, when all but two commercial airlines had stopped flying there. “It’s not simply that it causes economic damage, but that it impedes responses,” he says.  “The WHO guidance on travel and trade is entirely consistent with previous practice and with science,” says Gostin, who notes that the agency is following the international health regulations that the US has signed but is currently disregarding. “Germs don’t respect borders, so it’s really just deflecting blame,” he says. Kamradt-Scott, however, is on the fence. He has just completed a literature review, looking at travel and trade restrictions, and his view is that travel bans “may have helped delay the arrival of the virus.” He predicts that eventually Covid-19 research will cause the WHO to revisit some of its guidelines. “It’s rather fraught. It does create economic problems, but if it can help countries by giving them time to prepare, perhaps it can be justified on that ground.” But, he adds, “Trump implemented travel restrictions but then did nothing to prepare the country, so again, that really comes back to his administration.” At first, many, including the surgeon general of the US, told the public that masks weren’t necessary and that health care workers needed the scarce supplies. People were told they wouldn’t be able to properly fit them, although several studies suggest that even a homemade mask is better than no mask. Finally, in mid-March, both the CDC and the WHO recommended wearing masks if you are sick.  Today, the CDC is recommending everyone wear a mask when out in public, while the WHO is standing by its recommendation to only wear one if sick or caring for someone else who is sick. “There is no specific evidence to suggest that the wearing of masks by the mass population has any potential benefit,” said Mike Ryan, the head of the WHO health emergencies team. Hong Kong health officials disagree; they have recommended everyone wear masks and say it has helped control the spread of Covid-19. Because this is a new virus, Gostin says, “Everyone has to operate in circumstances of scientific uncertainty. We have to do the best we can with the knowledge we have.” But new information is coming out every week about the virus’s transmissibility, including one notable report in early April that it can be aerosolized just by breathing and talking. (At this point, he, too, thinks widespread mask use is justified.)  For now, the best we have are educated opinions — no one yet has definitive data on SARS-CoV-2 transmission rates and mask-wearing.  “[WHO] called it wrong. They call it wrong. They really, they missed the call,” President Trump said, referring to WHO’s declaring a pandemic during a press briefing at the White House on April 7. As a result, on April 14, he declared a hold on WHO funding. The agency gets money in two-year cycles. The US is currently its largest contributor, giving a total of $929 million (including voluntary donations and membership fees) in 2018 and 2019. The Trump administration has also, however, reduced the next round of American contributions to less than $58 million in its most recent budget proposal for fiscal year 2021.  Under the UN system, countries are expected to contribute a certain amount based on their population size and GDP. Because the US is one of the largest economies in the world, its assessed contributions were large in the 1980s, when the agency froze membership dues in real dollar terms, increasing only due to inflation and exchange rates. “It’s always irked some in the US that even though they pay 25 percent of the assessed contributions, they only get one vote,” says Kamradt-Scott. “But the US agreed to that arrangement.” Regardless, budget shortfalls have been a problem for the agency for decades. After the 2008 recession, it had to cut $1 billion from its budget and disbanded its epidemic and pandemic response department. The agency “has the operational budget equivalent of a tertiary hospital in any high-income country,” Kamradt-Scott says.  The WHO’s 2020-21 budget is $4.8 billion, or $2.4 billion per year. Only around 20 percent of this comes from membership contributions; the rest is voluntary donations. “The problem is those voluntary funds have strings,” says Kamradt-Scott. “They are tied to particular initiatives, which means that even when WHO is confronted with a pandemic, they can’t reallocate funds.”  This is why, on February 5, the WHO asked for an additional $675 million to fund coronavirus responses, although it took two months to reach its goal. For all of its responsibility, the WHO has no teeth; unlike other international organizations, the WHO has no ability to sanction its members and instead has to rely on diplomacy and donations. After the 2014 Ebola outbreak, an emergency contingency fund was set up in order to allow the WHO to respond early to emergencies, “sending people to ground to help contain problems before they became a bigger crisis,” Kamradt-Scott explains. But the $100 million fund has never reached its target. “Even when a new mechanism has been set up explicitly to deal with this pandemic, it hasn’t received support from member states.”  “We still need, whether you like it or not, an international health agency that can effectively coordinate an international response,” Huang says. “Slashing funding to WHO would actually reduce the US voice in the international agency and allow other countries to play a bigger role in the organization. That is not something that is in the US interest.”  “I’ve never hesitated to constructively criticize the WHO when I think it’s made a mistake,” says Gostin, “But frankly, I’m outraged and embarrassed by what President Trump did.”  There will be plenty of time for reviewing the WHO response, and Gostin says there are many possible reforms: He would double the budget and “invest very widely and deeply in health system capacity, particularly in low- and middle-income countries,” as well as giving WHO enforcement powers during a public health emergency. Kamradt-Scott would like to see the WHO enforce data-sharing during clinical trials. Jha would like to improve transparency in spending.  “You have to remember the fundamental problem of WHO is that it is two things in one, and in all the times it matters, those two things come into conflict,” Jha says. “On the one hand, it’s a membership organization,” meaning it doesn’t “usually beat up on their own members.”  “On the other hand,” he says, “It’s the world’s public health agency, so it has an obligation to the global public that goes beyond the interest of its member states.”  But the middle of this crisis is not the best time to be dismantling WHO. “The focus needs to be on the virus itself,” says Rebecca Katz, professor and director of the Center for Global Health Science and Security at Georgetown University Medical Center. “What we need right now is the largest mobilization of public health we’ve ever seen in our lives. We have no answers — we’re building the plane while flying it.” We need to build capacity for contact tracing, for isolation, and for quarantine. We need to think through infection prevention and control at the same time as dealing with supply chain issues, to ensure we have enough protective personal equipment and critical medications. We need to better understand the virus we’re fighting. We need to find, validate, manufacture, and distribute a vaccine at a scale never seen before. “At this point, WHO is the only organization equipped to handle these challenges,” Katz says.  “If we didn’t have WHO,” Gostin says, “We would have to invent it.” Lois Parshley is a freelance investigative journalist and the 2019-20 Snedden Chair of Journalism at the University of Alaska Fairbanks. Follow her Covid-19 reporting on Twitter @loisparshley. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. A new study from the Pew Research Center suggests many Americans had a poor understanding of the risks posed by the coronavirus in the early days of the pandemic — and that the majority, some correctly and some incorrectly, felt they were being presented with untrue information from the media.  The survey of 8,914 US adults, conducted from March 10-16 (with a 1.6 percentage point margin of error), found 80 percent of respondents noting they had been exposed to at least some false news reports about the virus (48 percent said they’d seen “a lot” or “some” and 32 percent saying they’d seen some but “not much” fake news). About half of those respondents gave examples of the misinformation they believed they’d seen — and not all of it was actually false news. For example, 22 percent of those respondents said the news had exaggerated the risks of the pandemic, citing reports recommending people stock up on food and estimates of potential death tolls as overstating the seriousness of the virus. Nineteen percent said they saw reports that millions of people could die from the virus and believed these to be exaggerated. We now know the virus does indeed pose a serious threat, and it has, since the survey was conducted, been classified as a pandemic. It is true that millions have not died from the virus, but in early March, many reports relied on models that were based on an assumption that governments would not take aggressive mitigation strategies, like social distancing and shelter-in-place orders — and that, as a result, millions of deaths would be seen. It is important to remember, however, that despite those measures, the confirmed worldwide death toll currently exceeds 100,000 and will continue to grow for the foreseeable future. Some respondents reported seeing news that undersold the severity of the virus: 15 percent of respondents claimed the media was understating its risks, with 12 percent calling into question reports equating the virus with the flu. And another 10 percent reported concerns about stories elevating false claims about the virus made at the time by President Donald Trump. There is some truth to this, as explained by Recode’s Peter Kafka: It’s clear now that the US government was woefully unprepared for the pandemic, and that’s been reflected in its messaging to the public since the start. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), for instance, didn’t tell the country to stop gathering in groups until March 15 — weeks after a top CDC official announced that the virus would begin spreading throughout the US. And after telling Americans for months that they should not wear masks unless they are sick, the government formally flipped that advice on April 3 and said that everyone should wear some kind of covering on their face in certain public settings. Much of the mainstream media amplified this slow and muddled reaction to the rapidly spreading virus. Since alarming reports about Covid-19 began to emerge from China in January, the media often provided information to Americans that later proved to be wrong, or at least inadequate. For instance: While President Trump has been correctly pilloried for describing the coronavirus as less dangerous than the flu, that message was commonplace in mainstream media outlets throughout February. And journalists — including my colleagues at Vox — were dutifully repeating exhortations from public health officials not to wear masks for much of 2020. The survey is a potent reminder of the effects this muddled messaging had, with some appearing to disregard accurate information as false.  A clear understanding of the risks inherent to the virus is critical to getting folks to buy into subsequent social distancing guidelines and state-level shelter-at-home orders. Most Americans now seemingly understand that staying at home is the biggest key to staying safe from catching the virus and avoiding passing it on to others. But the fact there wasn’t total clarity — or agreement on — the risks in early March means that valuable time may have been lost in getting Americans to adopt these practices.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Kentucky’s heavily Republican legislature voted Tuesday to require voters to show a government-issued photo ID, overriding Democratic Gov. Andy Beshear’s veto in the process. Meanwhile, if a Kentucky voter heads to the state’s webpage hoping to learn how to obtain such an ID, they will encounter a message telling them ID-issuing offices are closed. Strict voter ID laws are increasingly common in Republican-controlled states, and left-leaning groups like students, low-income voters, and voters of color are especially less likely to have the ID that these laws require. Although voter ID’s policy proponents often argue that the measure is necessary to combat voter fraud at the polls, such fraud is so rare that it is virtually nonexistent.  While voter ID laws, at best, are a solution in search of a problem, Kentucky’s new law could prove to be a particularly potent attack on the right to vote during a pandemic. The ostensible function of a voter ID law is to prevent someone from impersonating another voter in order to cast a ballot in their name. But numerous studies and investigations show that the primary form of voter fraud addressed by these laws, impersonation fraud at the polls, is only slightly more common than unicorns. A study by Loyola Law School professor Justin Levitt, who led much of the Justice Department’s voting rights work during the Obama administration, found only 35 credible allegations of in-person voter fraud among the 834 million ballots cast in the 2000-2014 elections. A Wisconsin study found just seven cases of any kind of fraud among the 3 million cast in the 2004 election — and none of these seven were the kind that could be prevented by voter ID. In 2014, Iowa’s Republican Secretary of State Matt Schultz announced the results of a two-year investigation into election misconduct within his state. He found zero cases of voter impersonation at the polls. Notably, when the Supreme Court allowed an Indiana voter ID law to take effect in Crawford v. Marion County (2008), it was only able to identify a single case of in-person voter fraud at the polls in the preceding 140 years. Voter ID laws target an imaginary problem, but at least some studies show that they particularly affect voters who lean Democratic. While there’s no firm research consensus on the laws’ effect, several studies have found that voter ID has no meaningful impact on voter turnout (although others have found significant effects). In a close election, though, even a small effect on turnout could matter. At best, voter ID achieves nothing at all in an ordinary election while erecting an additional barrier to people exercising their right to vote — a barrier that disproportionately affects low-income and black and Latino Americans. Under normal circumstances, voter ID could potentially make a difference in a close election. It’s far from clear that November’s general election will be anything resembling normal. Late last month, Gov. Beshear handed down an executive order providing that “all businesses that are not life-sustaining shall cease operations ... except as needed to conduct Minimum Basic Operations.” Among other things, the order suspends “all in-person government activities ... that are not necessary to sustain or protect life, or to supporting Life-Sustaining Businesses.” Thus, Kentucky voters who lack an ID — perhaps because they recently moved to the state and didn’t get around to obtaining a Kentucky driver’s license before the coronavirus lockdown began — may be unable to obtain this ID in time to vote because the state offices that issue such IDs are closed. The future of life under coronavirus remains very uncertain, and it is, as yet, unclear when the country will return to anything resembling normal. Even if Kentucky is able to relax restrictions as more testing for the virus becomes available, it may need to reimpose strict limits on businesses and government offices if an outbreak occurs. Voters may only have a limited window to acquire an ID, and that window might close just as a particular voter was preparing to obtain one. Kentucky’s law, moreover, also resembles a similar Wisconsin law in that it requires voters to show ID in order to obtain an absentee ballot. So voters without ID cannot escape the law by voting by mail. The new law does permit some voters to cast a ballot without showing photo ID — if they sign a sworn statement affirming that they are lawful voters and providing certain information. But this exemption from the photo ID requirement is only available to a limited group of voters, and it is far from clear that a healthy voter qualifies because they were unable to obtain an ID because government offices were shut down during a pandemic. Although the law allows a voter to cast a ballot without showing photo ID if they were prevented from getting an ID due to “disability or illness,” the statute is not clear on whether the voter must themselves be infected by this illness in order to qualify. And voters who misuse the exemption could potentially face perjury charges. It’s worth noting that there could potentially be a very high-profile race on Kentucky’s ballot this November. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell is up for reelection, and there is some evidence that McConnell could be defeated if 2020 is a strong year for Democrats. In January, for example, one poll showed McConnell just 3 percentage points ahead of possible Democratic challenger Amy McGrath, and a second poll showed McConnell and McGrath tied.  So, while the impact of voter ID is uncertain under normal circumstances, there are good reasons to believe that such a law could have a larger effect during a pandemic. Whether that impact would be enough to skew a close election from McGrath to McConnell is also unclear. But, at the very least, many voters could struggle to cast a ballot if they are unable to obtain the IDs they need to vote. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Between the multiple Trump Towers, Trump Plazas, Trump International Resorts, and the now-defunct Trump Steaks, it’s clear President Donald Trump has a penchant for putting his name on things. And that predilection has now been extended to include the coronavirus stimulus checks.  The Treasury Department on Monday ordered that Trump’s name appear on the paper checks being rushed to millions of people by the IRS.  Those checks could end up being delayed a few days in order to add the president’s name to them, according to senior IRS officials. In order to add Trump’s name — which will appear in typeface rather than as a signature given the checks are from the Treasury rather than from the president — the code in the IRS’s computers must be tweaked and subsequently tested.  “Any last minute request like this will create a downstream snarl that will result in a delay,” Chad Hooper, a quality control manager who serves as national president of the IRS’s Professional Managers Association, told the Washington Post. A Treasury Department representative denied that the change would result in a delay, however. “Economic Impact Payment checks are scheduled to go out on time and exactly as planned—there is absolutely no delay whatsoever,” the representative said in a written statement to the Post. It’s clear that many Americans need their stimulus checks as soon as possible. Over the past three weeks, there have been 16.8 million new initial claims for unemployment as restaurants, retailers, and other nonessential businesses have been shuttered to limit the spread of the virus. The scale of this crisis has some lawmakers calling for more stimulus funds, as Vox’s Dylan Matthews explained: [The CARES Act’s] cash checks are a one-off, with no automatic payments to kick in if and when unemployment spikes. The increase in unemployment benefits is similarly temporary and not tied to objective economic metrics that could keep them from being withdrawn early. The benefits to businesses are opaque and might be inferior to just having the government temporarily take over payroll for struggling companies, the way Denmark has done as its crisis response. There’s too little aid to state and local governments to forestall budget cuts, and no mandate for postal voting in the 2020 election to be sure it’s conducted safely if the country is still under quarantine. Regardless of whether the stimulus will work or if Congress will need to authorize more spending, Trump seems determined to grab whatever political credit comes from it. The IRS, which is responsible for distributing the checks, is supposed to be a nonpartisan agency, and it has held to that tradition since former President Richard Nixon targeted political opponents, including civil rights groups, reporters, and prominent Democrats, with tax audits. After that, Congress enacted laws to ensure that the agency operates apolitically. Trump’s move, critics fear, changes that. They argue this move is a blatantly political attempt to tie the president to the popular stimulus checks, even though Trump had initially pushed for a payroll tax cut rather than direct stimulus.  House Speaker Nancy Pelosi slammed the president for injecting politics into a process meant to help everyday Americans. “Delaying direct payments to vulnerable families just to print his name on the check is another shameful example of President Trump’s catastrophic failure to treat this crisis with the urgency it demands,” she said in a statement Wednesday. Trump has long argued that putting his name on things is important branding, remarking on a tour of George Washington’s estate early in his presidency, “You’ve got to put your name on stuff.” This is the first time a president’s name will appear on an IRS disbursement. The president reportedly initially pushed to have his name appear on the signature line; however, presidents are not authorized signers for legal disbursements from the Treasury Department. As a result, the president’s name will appear in the memo line, just below a note saying “Economic Impact Payment,” according to administration officials. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   As the number of reported US coronavirus cases climbs past 600,000 and reported deaths past 26,000 as of April 15, there is a little bit of good news in the data: Things may be getting somewhat better, especially for areas that were hot spots, like New York and Washington state. For the past week, new case numbers have been growing steadily, rather than exponentially. And daily new deaths are lower this week than last week.  New York and Washington state, which saw cases and deaths skyrocket in the final week of March, have seen their numbers get a little more under control in the first week of April. “We are flattening the curve,” said New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, pointing out that new hospitalizations are at “the lowest number we’ve had since this nightmare started.” Feared hot spots like Florida aren’t yet overwhelmed, either (though in all of these states, spikes in all-cause mortality suggest that the situation is worse than the numbers suggest). A body of preliminary research suggests that social distancing and lockdowns have worked to flatten the curve and, at a minimum, greatly slowed down the spread of the disease. “We’re seeing less cases,” professor of health metrics sciences Ali Mokdad at the University of Washington told me. “Social distancing is working.” But while that’s good news, it’s limited good news. Case numbers aren’t growing as fast or as exponentially as they were in March, but it is not apparent yet that they’re shrinking, either. Some models project a nationwide peak soon (or argue the US has already reached it) and should then see a decline in the number of cases, but these models are highly uncertain, and it remains a possibility that case numbers will continue to grow, even if they’re growing more slowly than previously.  Since it takes several weeks for new case numbers to reflect changes in policy, experts have been waiting for the last few weeks to learn how stay-at-home orders have worked. Now the data’s in. It suggests that social distancing (not just the lockdowns, but all steps that people took to avoid other people) is working — but perhaps not necessarily working well enough to drive new cases down to zero.  That puts the country in a challenging position going forward, even if it should rightly take some pride in having successfully tempered the exponential spread of the virus.  First, the good news: Social distancing absolutely does work to slow the spread of the coronavirus. In the states that started social distancing the earliest, including Seattle and San Francisco, the growth of new cases has slowed noticeably. In places that implemented them a little later, like New York, the growth of new cases began to slow later.  Testing is still limited and the criteria for testing varies in different places, making direct comparisons difficult, but there are enough cities seeing improvement that a real trend can be observed.  Modeling done by the Center for Mathematical Modeling of Infectious Diseases (CMMID) at the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine attempts to use confirmed case numbers to estimate the “effective reproductive number” or R0 — the number of people the average person infects. If that number is less than 1, the disease will die out.  Early studies found that the R0 for the Covid-19 coronavirus was in the 2-2.5 range (by comparison, the seasonal flu’s R0 is 1.3). In the US, the CMMID model found that the number was between 2 and 3 when the disease first took off, but it has been steadily declining in the weeks since. It is now around 1, meaning the average person is infecting about one additional person. That decline started before stay-at-home orders went into effect in most states and reflects the impact of those orders and the voluntary social distancing efforts before them.  Other recent studies point toward a similar conclusion, though there’s still a lot of uncertainty. An April 6 article in The BMJ (The British Medical Journal) argued that Seattle’s success at controlling the virus is a cause for hope: Two reports released on 30 March by the Seattle based Institute for Disease Modelling suggested that the early implementation of successively stronger measures, starting with a 4 March recommendation that workers be allowed to work from home, effectively reduced the reproductive value of the coronavirus from 2.7 in late February to 1.4 by 18 March.  Then came the lockdown, after which, the article says, “modellers suggested the region was ‘on the cusp’ of pushing the viral reproductive value to 1, below which the virus wouldn’t be able to sustain its spread over time.” Other states now appear to be on the same trajectory. New reported confirmed cases in the US hovered for a week between 30,000 and 34,000, and have at last fallen under a reported 30,000 in the past few days (it’s not just limited testing; the percentage of tests that are positive is falling as well). This is a big change from previous weeks, where by Friday there’d be twice as many new cases as there were on Monday.  New York, the hardest-hit state in the country, is seeing that trend. “The evidence is very strong that the curve is leveling off in New York,” Jeffrey Harris, a medical doctor and MIT economist, told me. His new working paper, “The Coronavirus Epidemic Curve Is Already Flattening in New York City,” explores what that means. Through March 20, the paper argues, New York’s confirmed case numbers were doubling every 1.3 days. That’s when they started leveling off — still growing, but with a much slower doubling time.  Some of this is attributable to reduced testing — the number of tests being conducted has fallen slightly over the last few weeks. But it cannot all be attributed to that. The percentage of tests that return a positive result has also been falling. The number of new hospitalizations has been growing more slowly.  The most remarkable thing is that much of these gains showed up in case statistics too early to be just the result of lockdowns and stay-at-home orders. Harris, for example, finds that New York’s slowdown in new case numbers started on March 20 — before the state even put such an order into place.  “In many places, many people started staying at home before the orders came out,” Mokdad told me. “Many companies moved to working from home,” he said, including Seattle giant Microsoft, which switched to work from home several weeks before formal stay-at-home orders were put in place in the city.  A few weeks after those companies first started ordering employees to work from home, the virus was no longer spreading exponentially throughout the Seattle population. The improvement began well before measures started in cities like Los Angeles, Detroit, and New Orleans, suggesting — though all this data is still preliminary — that it’s early social distancing that made the difference. But while the slowing spread of the virus is good news, a lot depends on exactly how much the spread has slowed. And that’s where there’s still a lot of uncertainty — which makes things difficult for epidemiologists, modelers, and policy planners who want to start planning the next phase of the attack on the virus. Here’s the dilemma: Ideally, case numbers would now start falling. If the effective reproductive number (the R0) of the virus has been pushed below 1 with the shelter-in-place orders around the country, then every day should see fewer infections than the day before, and case numbers should fall, hopefully as quickly as they rose.  Most schemes to reopen the country rely on this: They require that case numbers fall for 14 days before the US starts loosening restrictions. The idea is that two weeks of falling cases is enough that it can’t just be a coincidence, and enough to lower the overall case count so regions can trace contacts and use more intensive monitoring approaches in a targeted way. But even in the parts of the country that have now been living under extensive restrictions for several weeks, case numbers aren’t falling across the board — though in some areas (most crucially New York) they do seem to be. More reliable measures like hospitalizations and deaths aren’t falling, either. That’s why the CMMID estimates the RO in the US at about 1 — each sick person is infecting about one more person.  But that estimate has a lot of uncertainty, too, and that uncertainty is significant. If the number is a little smaller than 1, new case numbers will decline. If it’s a little larger than 1, new case numbers will keep increasing. And there are some signs that it might, indeed, be larger than 1, considering that case numbers aren’t consistently decreasing anywhere. “We are still moving in an uphill direction,” Becca Bartles, Providence St. Joseph Health’s executive director of infection prevention, told The BMJ. “It is almost completely flat in the borough of Manhattan,” Harris told me of the New York numbers. “The doubling time in the other boroughs is much slower but is still not leveling off.” It has been more than three weeks since New York’s stay-at-home order, so these slowdowns in the rate of infections likely reflect entirely new infections that occurred under the order. In other words, social distancing is definitely working, but the question of whether it is working well enough remains to be seen, and the fact that numbers are plateauing rather than falling isn’t a great sign.  “It seems that the press has been eager to push the narrative of ‘we are near the peak!’ and ‘the end is in sight,’ but given the strong uncertainty about the future and lack of clear consensus among modelers, I think these messages are premature,” UMass infectious disease researcher Nicholas Reich argued.  The more accurate message: There are some promising signs, but nothing definitive, and the range of possible futures is very wide.  Even if case numbers are falling, that just brings us face to face with another uncertainty: What next?  “We cannot lift all the restrictions at once,” Mokdad told me. He favors a cautious, gradual approach that lets us keep the R0 below 1 (assuming that it is below 1 right now): “Relax a little, see that the virus is not circulating, relax a little more.”  But the current uncertainty is fatal to such an approach. If we’re going to calibrate our restrictions around the R0 of the virus, we need really good and timely data on exactly what that number is. “All of the conditions to go back to opening business depend on being able to do testing,” Mokdad says. And US testing, which grew rapidly for most of March, has been plateauing lately. It’s a vexing situation. The US has succeeded at its first task of slowing the wildfire spread of the virus through our communities, but it may have achieved only a standstill, not a victory. And as pressure grows to open more businesses and get the country back to work, there is still limited (and not encouraging) data about what will be needed to keep the virus from roaring back. Even worse, if the data suggests that the country actually needs more stringent restrictions than the current ones, it’s hard to imagine who’d muster the political will to implement them.  That bad news must be grappled with alongside the good if the country is to take sensible next steps. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  President Donald Trump’s administration is reportedly working on a plan to reopen the economy as the US continues its fight against the coronavirus pandemic. But details from the plan — part of which was obtained by Lena Sun, Josh Dawsey, and William Wan at the Washington Post — show just how far America is from safely reopening. According to the Post, the public health side of the plan can be broken down into three phases: Prepare the nation to reopen (now to May 1), aggressive testing (now to May 15), and a “staged re-opening” (“not before May 1”).  The Post only got the parts of the plan put together by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, providing only a limited view of the public health strategy. The plan is also still in development, so even the provided details aren’t finalized. But what we can see from this limited view of the plan is that the US has a very steep road ahead. The Trump administration’s plan reportedly relies on building an adequate testing and surveillance system, which is in line with what experts and think tanks have called for in their own proposals. The problem is that America is nowhere close to truly establishing such a system. What the country needs to properly do testing, according to experts, is at least 500,000 tests a day. Some experts call for much more than that — millions or even tens of millions a day — but 500,000 a day is generally considered the minimum to test everyone with symptoms and their close contacts.  Right now, the US is, on a good day, doing about 150,000 tests a day, or fewer than a third of that minimum. The US’s poor pandemic preparedness, as well as Trump’s slow reaction to the coronavirus outbreak, has meant America is still massively undertesting. 
    Related
   What’s more, this figure hasn’t improved much in recent weeks. This week, starting with April 13, the US has done fewer than 140,000 tests a day — an improvement from the early days of March when daily tests numbered in the hundreds, but actually a downgrade from the previous week, starting with April 6, when the country averaged nearly 150,000 tests a day. Part of that is driven by a shortage of swabs and personal protective equipment to collect samples, as well as reagents, kits, and machines needed to run the specific tests required. According to David Lim at Politico, some labs also complain that the CDC’s testing criteria — which prioritizes hospitalized patients, health care workers, and those vulnerable to the virus, such as older people — is holding back potential tests. So the reality is that the US is nowhere near the level of testing that experts say is needed to track and manage the coronavirus. In fact, further increasing the number of tests will likely be even more of a challenge than ramping them up in the first place.  “We’ve made substantial progress ramping testing this month,” Scott Gottlieb, a former commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, wrote. “But many gains were made by getting players into fight (clinical labs, academic labs). Now we must expand lab capacity, platforms, throughput, test kits. Getting next million tests/week will be harder than getting first.” Testing gives officials the means to isolate sick people, track and quarantine the people whom those verified to be sick came into close contact with (a.k.a. “contact tracing”), and deploy community-wide efforts if a new cluster of cases is too large and uncontrolled otherwise. Without it, the only way to deal with the outbreak is more social distancing, which further hurts the economy, or letting the disease run its course — at the cost of potentially millions of lives. This is one reason the plans to end social distancing are so grim: Not only do they suggest that some level of social distancing will be needed for the next year or so (until a vaccine or a similarly effective treatment is widely available) — which we don’t know if the country can sustain — but they call for a level of surveillance and testing the US simply hasn’t shown the ability and willingness to build and manage yet. It’s possible the US could get a lucky break; there’s still a lot about the coronavirus that we simply don’t know, and maybe as we learn more, we’ll realize the country can be spared the worst. (It’s optimistic, given the outbreaks we’ve already seen across the globe, but it’s possible.) Perhaps the Trump administration will move to ease testing criteria or dramatically scale up capacity by investing in more labs and supplies. But unless something changes, America is simply not meeting the benchmark of aggressive testing that the Trump administration and independent experts say is necessary to reopen the country. So as eager as Trump clearly is to get the economy going again, the US just isn’t ready to do it in a safe way yet. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. A few weeks ago, I came down with a mild cough and a runny nose. I heard seasonal allergies were starting early and didn’t think much of it.  The next day, I was exhausted and had a splitting headache. As a doctor, I was required to get tested for Covid-19 before I could go back to work in the emergency room. The result was positive.  Fortunately, I’m already back to feeling like myself. I was one of the lucky people with relatively mild symptoms.  Now that I’m well, my blood could be used as an experimental cure for the new coronavirus. But because of homophobia, that won’t happen.  New research published in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) describes an experimental treatment for those dying from Covid-19 called convalescent plasma transfusion. The procedure starts with collecting blood from people who have recovered from the virus. These donors have Covid-19-fighting antibodies that circulate in their blood, proteins made by the immune system that can bind to and neutralize the virus.  
    Related
   Once the blood donation is collected, researchers remove all the cells, and the result is plasma: a protein-rich solution that contains the anti-Covid-19 antibodies. This plasma is then transfused into the bloodstream of patients dying from the virus.  The thinking goes that the antibodies in the plasma will bind to the coronavirus, neutralize it, and help the patient recover. Similar strategies have been used for infectious diseases going as far back as the 1918 flu pandemic.  In the JAMA study, five critically ill patients were treated with the intervention, and by 12 days after the treatment, none had detectable virus in their bloodstream. A second study of 10 patients in the journal PNAS showed similar promise. The data we have so far on the treatment’s efficacy are preliminary, and we still need high-quality controlled trials. But it could save lives.  Researchers are so excited about this approach as a potential treatment that there are now at least 10 clinical trials ongoing around the world. In collaboration with the Food and Drug Administration, the Red Cross is actively recruiting plasma donors who have recovered from the disease. You can sign up here. That is, unless, you’re gay. The FDA says I can’t donate blood or plasma because I’m gay. In 1985, during the AIDS epidemic, the FDA placed a lifetime blood donation ban on all men who have ever had sex with men.  The policy was created to prevent blood banks from collecting blood that contains HIV. Since the AIDS crisis though, the US has instituted extensive procedures to test blood donations for infectious diseases, including HIV, to minimize this risk. It’s true that gay and bisexual men account for a large proportion of new HIV infections each year. It’s also true that tests to screen blood aren’t perfect. The risk of contracting HIV from a blood transfusion isn’t zero. But it is currently around 1 in 1.5 million.  The problem is that being gay isn’t the real risk factor here. Why should a monogamous gay man who has sex only with his husband be barred from donating blood when a heterosexual man who had condomless sex with 100 female partners in the past three months can? The latter is at dramatically greater risk of HIV infection.  In 2014, Sen. Tammy Baldwin (D-WI) led more than 75 members of Congress in calling for an end to the ban, joining extensive lobbying from LGBTQ rights organizations in putting pressure on the administration for a change. In 2015, the Obama FDA reduced the lifetime ban to a 12-month ban on gay sex before donating.  Earlier this month, the FDA shortened the ban to three months of abstinence from sex with other men, due in large part to the drastic drop in blood donations since the start of the coronavirus pandemic. (Just prior, Baldwin and other senators, including Elizabeth Warren, Bernie Sanders, Cory Booker, and Kamala Harris, submitted another letter to the FDA asking them to end the discriminatory policy entirely.)  The new FDA guidance is a good but insufficient step forward. It’s still going to leave out the vast majority of men who have sex with men. And it still promotes the internalized homophobia many gay men experience from growing up in a homophobic society: You can only be good and pure if you don’t have gay sex. This is psychologically damaging, unscientific, and wrong. The rules need to change and be based on scientific behavioral risk factors. “Instead of a blanket ban on recent sex between men, we need to explore an approach that asks all donors about their recent behaviors, including condom use, number of partners, and use of preexposure prophylaxis, which we know is highly effective in preventing HIV,” explains Dr. Julia Marcus, an assistant professor of population medicine at Harvard Medical School, where she studies the epidemiology of HIV. Such risk-based screening systems have been successfully implemented in Spain, Chile, Argentina, and South Africa. As written, the FDA rules aren’t supported by science. They simply discriminate against gay and bisexual men. Plasma donations are critical. If the experimental treatment works, countless deaths from Covid-19 could be prevented. But in addition to plasma, the US also has a dire shortage of whole blood.  Due to social distancing, there have been 150,000 fewer blood donations since the pandemic began. More blood is leaving the blood banks than is coming in. This blood is desperately needed for trauma victims who are bleeding out, cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy, and children with sickle cell disease, to name a few in-need groups.  Federal officials have been begging the public to donate blood. They should know that gay men like me are ready to roll up our sleeves and help.  America is in the midst of a public health crisis. Old homophobic policies are making it worse: leaving trauma victims without donor blood and withholding plasma donations that could potentially save people dying from the coronavirus. It’s time for the FDA to lift the ban and save lives. When they do, I’ll be the first in line.  Jack Turban MD (@jack_turban) is a resident physician in psychiatry at the Massachusetts General Hospital. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  Despite promises from President Donald Trump that private companies would start pumping out personal protective equipment (PPE), doctors and nurses are still pleading for more gloves, gowns, masks, and, most of all, N95 respirators. This crisis poses a threat to the safety of health care providers and workers on the front lines who are keeping society functioning by staffing grocery stores, delivering packages, and collecting trash.  It also sets the stage to prolong what is already expected to be a devastating economic downturn. Any plausible vision of curtailing the kind of heavy restrictions that have successfully slowed the spread of the novel coronavirus is going to require a significant increase in America’s production of PPE. Trump has invoked the Defense Production Act (DPA) sporadically as a bargaining lever, and his Democratic opponent, former Vice President Joe Biden, has called for wider use of the law but in a nonspecific way. And prices are soaring without doing much to bring new supplies online. The problem is that even though there’s clearly money to be made selling respirators and masks, managers with good reason don’t want to front the cost of retooling factories for an unknown quantity of orders over an unknown time horizon.  But there is a solution: invoking other titles of the DPA to give companies financial guarantees and some regulatory relief to speed up production. In a paper published by the libertarian-ish Mercatus Institute and jointly authored by Caleb Watney from the center-right R Street Institute and Alex Stapp from the center-left Progressive Policy Institute, they spell out how Trump could do it. The proposal involves spending a lot of money and skewing some sacred cows of both market fundamentalism and the regulatory status quo. They involve accepting some risk of wasted money or improperly functioning equipment.  In a world where the alternatives involve health care workers treating Covid-19 patients while wearing bandanas and America experiencing mass unemployment, it’s time to consider something drastic.  Most discussions of the Defense Production Act have focused on the president’s authority under Title I, which allows the president to force companies to accept and prioritize orders related to national defense. That can be useful in some situations, but the United States is currently not facing an N95 shortage because private sector buyers or export orders are overwhelming supply. There just legitimately aren’t enough to go around.  Stapp and Watney suggest instead that the government instead emphasizes its power under Title III of the DPA to offer loans and purchase guarantees to expand production.  Right now, one huge barrier to scaling up N95 production is that companies have no idea how long the current surge in demand will last. Prestige Ameritech, a Texas-based company that is the largest American manufacturer of surgical masks in the United States, thought the surge in demand associated with the H1N1 flu pandemic in 2009 would be a godsend. But in a recent NPR interview, co-owner Michael Bowen recalls that their efforts to scale up rapidly in that crisis nearly killed the company. “We hired a lot of people and ramped up,” he told NPR’s Mary Louise Kelly. “And then we nearly went bankrupt afterward. We laid off 150 people and nearly went out of business. You know, it’s not like flipping on a switch. It’s building machines. It’s hiring people. It’s training people. That’s the issue.” Retooling a factory to make urgently needed medical equipment is an expensive proposition with an uncertain payoff. And it’s made more difficult by the fact that the normal way the manufacturing business works is you don’t get paid until the goods are delivered. So you need to incur the full expenses of setting up production and hiring trained staff before you see an ounce of revenue. The federal government has the power to offer guaranteed loans to companies that want to get into the N95 business. And it can guarantee to buy large quantities of masks at prices above the traditional rate. The idea would be to make a reasonable estimate of how many masks are needed and for how long, and then guarantee to buy more masks than that, and for a longer period. That way, if need turns out to be greater than anticipated, the US is covered. And if it turns out to be less than anticipated (as happened during H1N1), companies that stepped up get made whole anyway.  Excess supplies can be added to national stockpiles and given away to lower-income countries that don’t have the financial resources to do this for themselves. The same principle could be applied to needed commodities beyond N95 respirators and surgical masks. There are persistent reports of swab shortages as an impediment to scaled-up testing, for example, and though many distilleries are now producing hand sanitizer, this largely seems to be a small scale play for goodwill rather than a real business model. At a time of soaring unemployment and low interest rates, it makes sense for the government to freely hand out purchase agreements at generous prices of everything that’s useful and in short supply. Meanwhile, given the urgency of the crisis, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) needs to recalibrate its risk assessments.  Stapp and Watney note that Title VI of the DPA gives the president the ability to issue certain kinds of liability waivers to companies involved in emergency production. They say this could be useful. But the bigger gains in regulatory relief would come from the FDA, which regulates medical devices.  They note, for example, that “the average approval time for a production facility that is certified to make N95 respirators is more than three months.” This may make sense in ordinary times when health care providers have ample respirators, so the potential benefits of allowing new entrants are relatively low and the potential cost to human health is relatively high. Right now, however, there is an acute shortage of respirators. The alternative to a potentially faulty one isn’t a rock-solid respirator from a longstanding facility, it’s no respirator at all. That calls for a less risk-averse regulatory stance that would be based on random inspections of products that ship rather than intensive certifications of factories.  Similarly, Stapp and Watney propose that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention should relax the requirement that PPE manufacturers have their products tested at the National Personal Protective Technology Laboratory, and allow private and university labs that have the right equipment to do it instead. As with shifting to a random inspection model, this may involve some compromises relative to an ideal situation. But equipping a nurse with PPE certified in a university lab is preferable to sending them to work with improvised protection from garbage bags and bandanas.  This is especially true because a much larger than usual set of people could use some level of PPE these days. Currently, the general public is being exhorted to avoid using professional-grade PPE altogether to ameliorate shortages. But the legions of grocery workers, restaurant cooks, delivery people, truckers, bus drivers, and others who are keeping the country running would be much better off with professional equipment made under relaxed regulatory circumstances than with nothing at all.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. During a news conference on Tuesday, Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis (R) was asked to explain a bizarre move: Classifying professional wrestling as an “essential service,” thereby allowing World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) to continue to broadcast live shows from a facility near Orlando, despite the state’s stay-at-home order. His answer didn’t inspire confidence that good public health reasons underpinned the decision. “Obviously, WWE, there’s no crowd of anything, so it’s a very small amount of people,” DeSantis said, overlooking that WWE announced last week that one staffer recently tested positive for Covid-19, and that putting others in a position where they feel obligated to travel to and from work at the live shows is a risky proposition.  DeSantis went on to make a case that WWE shows will help people who are currently “starved for content.” “I think people are chomping at the bit,” he said. “I mean, if you think about it, we’ve never had a period like this in modern American history where you’ve had such little new content, particularly in the sporting realm. I mean, people are watching, we’re watching, like, reruns from the early 2000s, watching Tom Brady do the Super Bowl then, which is neat because he’s gonna be in Tampa and I think they have a chance to win a Super Bowl this year. But I think people, to be able to have some light at the tunnel, see that things may get back on a better course — I think from just a psychological perspective I think is a good thing.” "People have been starved for content ... we're watching, like, reruns from the early 2000s," Gov. Ron DeSantis says of his bizarre decision to classify live pro wrestling shows as an "essential service" during a deadly pandemic pic.twitter.com/rWeCOJKkh2 With over 21,600 confirmed Covid-19 cases and more than 570 deaths as of April 15, Florida is currently one of the nation’s coronavirus hot spots. DeSantis, a former Congress member whose zealous support of President Donald Trump was a key part of his successful 2018 gubernatorial campaign, didn’t help matters by refusing to implement a stay-at-home order until the late date of April 2 — after the virus had already had an opportunity to spread among spring breakers who flocked to the state in March.  DeSantis’s comments about wanting to make his state a welcoming place for a variety of sporting events even amid a pandemic reflects his priorities. But his move in particular to classify WWE as “essential” has the whiff of the swamp Trump talked about draining during his 2016 campaign. WWE is run by Vince McMahon, husband of Linda McMahon, who served in Trump’s cabinet as his small-business administrator from 2017 until 2019, when she became chair of the pro-Trump super PAC America First Action. After weeks of broadcasting taped shows, Vince quickly took advantage of the DeSantis administration’s April 9 memo classifying his business as “essential” by resuming live broadcasts on Monday night. The plan is to continue with them going forward. While WWE performers are reportedly unhappy with the change of plans, having the ability to do live shows could be important to the company’s bottom line. As wrestling journalist Dave Meltzer has detailed, WWE has lucrative television deals that require almost all of its shows be broadcast live. DeSantis’s classification of the company as an essential service allows McMahon to avoid jeopardizing those agreements. In a statement about the resumption, WWE didn’t allude to any financial motives, but instead claimed “[w]e believe it is now more important than ever to provide people with a diversion from these hard times ... [a]s a brand that has been woven into the fabric of society, WWE and its Superstars bring families together and deliver a sense of hope, determination and perseverance.” But there’s no reason WWE couldn’t deliver this “sense of hope” with the same sort of taped shows they’ve been broadcasting for the better part of a month. The big losers are WWE staffers, who instead of riding out the coronavirus pandemic at home are now faced with having to travel to the Orlando area for live shows on Monday, Wednesday, and/or Friday.  I just heard this too, and a lot of the talent I've reached out to aren't happy about it. https://t.co/AAQn1UiqOg While it’s true the events are taking place in empty arenas, wrestling obviously requires physical contact — and WWE hasn’t been careful about observing social distancing. One staffer has already tested positive for the virus. But DeSantis may have had reasons for classifying WWE as “essential” that go beyond content starvation. On April 9, the same day DeSantis’s administration classified Vince McMahon’s business as an essential service, Linda McMahon’s pro-Trump super PAC announced it’ll be spending $18.5 million on advertising in Florida. “America First is making the Florida and North Carolina reservations because we are confident we can secure inventory at the best possible rates in these crucial battleground states,” a statement from the super PAC said. “We will make further decisions in May.” Orange County Mayor Jerry Demings told reporters that while wrestling wasn’t exempted from the state’s original stay-at-home requirement, the change was made following “some conversation with the governor’s office regarding the governor’s order.” Police officials have even said they tried to shut down WWE’s taped shows before the April 9 memo, because they ran afoul of the state’s stay-at-home order. It’s possible there is no connection between DeSantis’s classifying WWE as essential and America First Action’s huge Florida ad buy — but if DeSantis has other good reasons to greenlight WWE’s broadcasts, he certainly didn’t provide them during Tuesday’s news conference. Then again, as is often the case, DeSantis appears to be on the same wavelength as Trump. Hours after his news conference, Trump did one of his own in which he echoed the same sentiments. “We have to get our sports back,” Trump said. “I’m tired of watching baseball games that are 14 years old.” Trump also announced that Vince McMahon will be part of a large group of business leaders who will be advising him about how to relax social distancing measures and get the economy back up and running again as soon as possible. But thanks to DeSantis, McMahon may not be feeling as much urgency about that as he did a week ago. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Donald Trump’s taste in films is not much of a secret. In 2012, he gave Movieline a list of his five favorite movies: Gone With the Wind, Citizen Kane, Goodfellas, The Godfather, and The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly. After complaining about Parasite’s Oscar wins at a campaign rally just two months ago, he mused, “Can we get, like, Gone with the Wind back, please? Sunset Boulevard? So many great movies.” Now he’s added another favorite film to the list. On Tuesday morning, Trump tweeted his love for Mutiny on the Bounty:  Tell the Democrat Governors that “Mutiny On The Bounty” was one of my all time favorite movies. A good old fashioned mutiny every now and then is an exciting and invigorating thing to watch, especially when the mutineers need so much from the Captain. Too easy! “Tell the Democrat Governors that Mutiny On The Bounty was one of my all time favorite movies,” the president wrote. “A good old fashioned mutiny every now and then is an exciting and invigorating thing to watch, especially when the mutineers need so much from the Captain. Too easy!” Presumably, Trump was responding to two announcements on Monday from several Democratic governors in the Northeast and on the West Coast. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said on Monday that he and the governors of New Jersey, Connecticut, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Rhode Island were working together to “plan a safe and coordinated reopening” of their states’ businesses and systems following weeks of pandemic-related shutdowns. Washington Gov. Jay Inslee announced a similar pact between himself and the governors of California and Oregon. Trump’s tweet is fairly obviously an attempt to attach the rebellious and conspiratorial concept of a “mutiny” to these governors’ coordinated efforts; he insisted the same day in two additional tweets that only the federal government and the president are allowed to “open up the states” (which is not true). And at a press conference on Monday, he falsely insisted that he has the “ultimate authority” to override individual states’ protective measures against the pandemic. 
    Related
   As others have been quick to point out, Trump’s tweet reveals his understanding of Mutiny on the Bounty to be limited at best. Trump didn’t say which of the five versions of the story is one of his “all time favorite movies.” It’s probably not the first, a silent film made in 1916, which has been lost to the sands of time. It’s probably also not the second, a 1933 film called In the Wake of the Bounty, which marked Errol Flynn’s screen debut. But Trump could have been referring to the 1935 Charles Laughton-Clark Gable version, which won Best Picture at the 1936 Oscars. Or he might have meant the 1962 version starring Trevor Howard and Marlon Brando. It’s even possible he was talking about the 1984 film The Bounty, starring Anthony Hopkins and Mel Gibson.  Nonetheless, it seems clear the president doesn’t really grasp the plot. Mutiny on the Bounty, in brief, is based on an actual mutiny that took place in 1787, when a ship called HMS Bounty was sent to Tahiti to collect breadfruit plants, to grow in the West Indies to feed enslaved people in the colonies.  The ship’s captain, William Bligh, was reportedly a cruel, hubristic, paranoid commander, and he treated his first mate, a man named Fletcher Christian, so brutally that Christian led a mutiny against him.  If you squint, Trump’s tweet could seem to align him with Bligh, the domineering and inhumane captain. In that case, the Democratic governors would be the Bounty’s mutinying crew. Such a comparison isn’t very flattering to Trump, and suggests he’s going to get thrown overboard. But it also doesn’t make much sense from a basic story standpoint: The mutineers in Mutiny on the Bounty don’t “need so much from the Captain,” so much as they object to his wanton cruelty and dehumanizing leadership. (What did Trump mean by “Too easy!” you ask? Who, truly, can say?) As Jordan Hoffman writes at Vanity Fair, it’s possible the president confused Mutiny on the Bounty with some other movie involving a mutiny. Or perhaps he fell asleep halfway through. Or maybe he’s never seen it and is just making stuff up.  But it’s also possible he’s seen it, many times, and doesn’t get it. In this scenario, Trump’s well-documented love for the film Citizen Kane is instructive, since he expounded on it in a 2002 interview with documentarian Errol Morris. (You can watch that interview here.) Trump was exuberant in his love for the film in general and for the character of Charles Foster Kane specifically — a megalomaniac demagogue who builds an empire but ends up empty and alone. The point of Citizen Kane is that all of the title character’s fortune and fame couldn’t fill the yawning maw that was at the center of his being, which his famous dying words, “Rosebud,” signify. (Rosebud is a sled he was playing on when he was taken away from his mother as a child.)  Trump’s affinity for Kane apparently does not stem from the actual story of Citizen Kane, though it seems eerily parallel to many parts of Trump’s own biography. Instead, during the interview with Morris, Trump made it clear that he sees the movie as a story about a man who chose the wrong woman, and whose troubles are linked to her.  Morris has spoken about the interview on multiple occasions, reflecting on Trump’s “irony deficit disorder.” In one interview, Morris marveled at the seeming disconnect between Trump’s understanding of Citizen Kane and the fairly obvious moral of the film: If I were Donald Trump, I would not want to emphasize that connection with Kane. You know, a megalomaniac in love with power and crushing everything in his path. The inability to have friends, the inability to find love. The moral that Trump takes from Kane—I mean, it’s one of the great lines that I recorded. I ask, “Do you have any advice for Charles Foster Kane, sir?” You know, let’s get down to the psychiatric intervention. How can we help this poor man? He’s obviously troubled. How can we help him? Donald, help me out here! And Donald says, “My advice to Charles Foster Kane is find another woman!” And you know, I thought, is that really the message that Welles was trying to convey? That Kane had made poor sexual choices, poor marriage choices? It’s not. It’s really not. I’m confident that Trump’s unsound “readings” of films like Citizen Kane and Mutiny on the Bounty don’t necessarily mean he can’t understand movies. The problem runs deeper than that.  Art acts like a mirror, reflecting ourselves back to us. When you watch a movie and respond to it, you’re responding because it provokes something in you, or resonates with who you are. But art also acts like a window. A movie doesn’t have to tell a story about someone just like you for you to respond to it; movies can give you a look into a deeper reality, something beyond yourself. If you find it difficult to connect to a movie, that might be the movie’s problem. Or it might be yours. The window-mirror of art reflects, in part, something about the person who watches it, and that reflection reveals whether they’re willing to look not just at it, but through it.  What readings like Trump’s tend to indicate is that he only completes the first step — a phenomenon the New Yorker critic Emily Nussbaum has dubbed the “bad fan” syndrome. For Trump, movies seem to reflect only what he wants to see in them: himself and his own concerns. But it appears he tends to miss, or willfully ignore, the greater reality that the window of a movie reveals. In the midst of a pandemic, Donald Trump’s specific movie opinions don’t matter. But what they tell us about his mindset is troubling. It’s difficult to care about anyone else when all you see is yourself. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. One of the biggest reasons the federal government failed in its initial response to the coronavirus pandemic is that it lacked the medical supplies necessary to deal with the outbreak. Because of that failure, states like New York and New Jersey, which were hit especially hard by the virus, scrambled to locate desperately needed masks, other protective equipment, and ventilators for their front-line medical workers. The obvious question is: How did this happen? There’s an office of the government called the “Strategic National Stockpile” that’s specifically tasked with managing the nation’s stock of emergency medical equipment and other materials that might be needed in a disaster — like, for example, a global pandemic. This stockpile should’ve been the backstop the states needed when their supplies ran out.  To learn why the national stockpile failed so badly in this pandemic, I reached out to Andrew Lakoff, a professor at the University of Southern California who studies the politics of global health and disaster response. He’s also the author of Unprepared, a 2017 book that explored how the world responds to public health emergencies.  We discussed why the federal government wasn’t ready for this crisis, what went wrong, and how we can better prepare for the next one.  A lightly edited transcript of our conversation follows. What is the Strategic National Stockpile and when was it created? The Strategic National Stockpile was first established in 1999. Basically, it’s a series of federally managed storage facilities designed to have essential supplies available to be distributed to states and localities in case of a range of different kinds of potential emergencies. What kind of emergencies or disasters was it designed to backstop? From its inception, the stockpile has mainly been focused on health emergencies. There are supplies that could be used for other kinds of emergencies, but if you look at where its major efforts have been focused, its emphasis from the beginning was on bioterrorist attacks, and then it broadened to encompass naturally occurring infectious diseases like a flu pandemic. Why was a bioterrorist attack the biggest concern in 1999 as opposed to, say, a flu pandemic or nuclear war? The government became worried about this for a couple of reasons. One was the result of the defection of a bioweapons scientist from the former Soviet Union who told US biodefense specialists about large stockpiles of weaponized anthrax and smallpox that had been somehow lost or misplaced after the collapse of the Soviet Union. Then, along with that, there were a number of speculative narratives, for instance a bestselling novel called The Cobra Event about a potential bioterrorist attack, that Bill Clinton read and found convincing. After that, high-level security officials began to run simulations that showed what might unfold in the US after a bioterrorist attack. One thing that they recommended was that we have a lot of biomedical countermeasures at the ready in advance of such an event. And then, of course, the anthrax letters of 2001 added urgency to this effort.  So who funds the stockpile? And has it been a priority for Congress and the various administrations? The level of prioritization has ebbed and flowed. Its funding level depends on congressional appropriations. Until recently, it was managed by the Centers for Disease Control, and then it was transferred to the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Preparedness and Response within the Department of Health and Human Services.  But to answer your question about funding, it depends on health and security officials convincing Congress that these threats are a high priority. For example, around 2005, 2006, there was a lot of worry about the possibility that H5N1, bird flu, might mutate to become easily transmissible among humans.  At that point, Congress held a number of hearings on the pandemic threat, and a significant amount of funds were allocated for stockpiling antiviral medications that would be effective against influenza as well as other pandemic preparedness supplies. But that anxiety faded over the ensuing years. You could tell a similar story about stockpiling ventilators. That’s the discussion that we’re having today. Right, and a lot of people who aren’t familiar with this background are wondering how in the hell do we end up in a situation where a state like New York is paying 15 times the normal price for masks and other supplies because it’s not getting what it needs from the federal government?  Who’s responsible for this failure? It’s really a terrible situation, and I would say that question goes beyond the stockpile per se and it’s much more broadly about what role the federal government can and should play in an emergency situation.  I think most preparedness planners have always thought that in a major public health emergency the federal government would really play a strong coordinative role in the response. That includes being very aggressive about providing essential medical items where they are needed. That could involve using the Defense Production Act (DPA), it could involve finding other sources of supply, but in any case ensuring that states don’t have to bid against each other.  The federal government could have played a much more proactive role in creating a fair, efficient system that would deliver critical supplies to the places that need them most. The entire world has known something like coronavirus or a comparable flu pandemic was inevitable for decades. Why weren’t we prepared for this? On the one hand, there are a range of different threats that come to the center of planners’ attentions at different moments and there are different factors as to why one threat rather than another is prioritized. A tremendous amount of money has been spent on things like having enough doses of smallpox vaccine to inoculate the entire United States population, or on acquiring thousands of caches of nerve gas antidote.  So choices are constantly being made about which are the most dire threats given a limited amount of resources. Then as it turned out, the event was not a smallpox attack, it was not nerve gas. It was a coronavirus and it wasn’t pandemic influenza. And in terms of pandemic preparedness, a lot of the effort focused on rapid vaccine development and on stockpiling antiviral medications that are known to be effective against influenza. But pandemic influenza would require medical equipment like ventilators and masks just as a coronavirus pandemic does, so it still boggles the mind that we weren’t prepared. Right, and there were strong recommendations that the stockpile increase its supply of those things for years but it just didn’t happen.  One thing that happened is that after the 2009 H1N1 pandemic there were a lot of masks distributed to states and localities and they simply weren’t replenished. Then there was a plan to purchase thousands more ventilators. A contract was signed with a small medical equipment company in Southern California. That company was then bought by a different medical equipment company, and in the end the contract wasn’t fulfilled. The new ventilators never came in.  So there are these matters of prioritization and inattention that can affect whether in fact we have the supplies that have been recommended in the stockpile. Again, who’s responsible for that failure? Who decided not to replenish those supplies? There are probably different stories in each case. In the case of ventilators, it’s partly about how the medical industry changed over the last decade. But more generally, it is up to the officials who manage the stockpile to make decisions about where to invest their resources and whether they have enough of a given item. I imagine that we’ll be learning more in the coming weeks and months about how certain decisions were made. I want to be as clear as possible on this point, because there’s a lot of confusion about whether we lacked the supplies we needed in the stockpile or whether we had the supplies we needed and this administration failed to distribute them fairly and quickly.  How do you see it? I think it is probably a combination of both of those. There’s a key period that a lot of people are now focusing on, which is late January to mid-February. This is a point at which we were already aware of what had happened in China, and the World Health Organization had declared Covid-19 a “global health emergency of international concern.”  That was really the time to consider whether we had the supplies we needed of these essential items and to figure out whether the stockpile needed to be replenished rapidly and do whatever it took to make sufficient supplies available — whether that meant purchasing supplies from other sources or even using the DPA to force manufacturers to shift to production of ventilators, for example. So even if it had not been replenished prior to this administration, there was a chance to do a better job at the outset. What did our preparedness system look like before the National Stockpile? You mentioned in a recent article that it was tied to the Cold War era. Why is that history relevant? There are two distinct periods to look at it. The first I would date from 1950 to 1975. That’s the period of Cold War preparedness, and in terms of medical stockpiling, the focus was on what kinds of supplies the population would need to survive a thermonuclear attack. There were something like 32 storage facilities around the country that had radiation dosimeters, surgical supplies, burn treatments, all the things you might imagine you would need in the aftermath of a nuclear attack at the ready.  By the late ’60s and early ’70s, if not before, the public was disillusioned with the idea that we should be spending a lot of money preparing for the aftermath of a thermonuclear catastrophe — mainly because nobody believed we could survive a massive thermonuclear war. So we should mainly try to avoid having one. By the mid-’70s, that stockpile was disposed — hundred of millions of dollars worth of medical equipment was sold off or given away. There was no medical stockpile for a couple of decades, but then in the mid-’90s after the collapse of the Soviet Union, this new concern arose about a novel biological threat, and that’s when the second stockpile came into being, what is now called the Strategic National Stockpile.  Then, just as during the Cold War, it was difficult to convince Congress to allocate resources to maintain the stockpile, to indefinitely store things that might or might not ever be used. So even though the current stockpile is a different one than the Cold War stockpile, they suffered from similar neglect.  It’s become popular to talk about our response to this virus as a “war.” Is that the wrong framework for thinking about preparation for a public health crisis like coronavirus? The idea that we should be able to mobilize to address a dire emergency is not necessarily a bad one. It’s important to have in place tools and capacities for dealing with acute events — whether it is an enemy attack, a major hurricane, or a pandemic — that are difficult to predict. The challenge is to maintain the attention of the public and policy makers in between these events, to keep thinking about what we’ll need, and to stay flexible in terms of our policy measures and responses for all kinds of events, not just the once-in-a-generation disasters like this one. Can you give me an example of what you mean there? Well, there’s something called a syndromic disease surveillance system, which is a system for detecting anomalous disease events in a city. The system can be used to detect outbreaks of food poisoning, seasonal flu, or alternatively something like an emerging pathogen. The more you spend resources on tools that are flexible in this way, the better you’re prepared for a wide range of threats. So how can we better prepared for the next pandemic or the next shock event? We should think carefully both about which threats are most plausible but also which methods of preparing have the widest range of potential application, so that we can be much more responsive and flexible when an event that was not anticipated occurs. In the end, though, there may just be some events for which we can never fully prepare, even if we know they’re coming. I think that’s right.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.On Monday, President Trump delivered an astonishing press conference, in which he claimed the sort of powers ordinarily associated with an absolute monarch.  When asked what he would do about states that do not agree to lift coronavirus-related restrictions and reopen their economies on the same schedule preferred by the White House, Trump falsely claimed that “the president of the United States calls the shots.” He then added another false statement, that states “can’t do anything without the approval of the president.” When pressed, Trump went even further. “When somebody is the president of the United States,” Trump incorrectly claimed, “the authority is total.” Trump has reportedly floated May 1 as a target date for reopening US businesses. It’s a bit surprising that this needs to be said, but no, the president of the United States’ authority is not “total.”  The federal government’s powers are restricted to a broad-but-limited list of enumerated powers, and the 10th Amendment reserves any power not mentioned on that list “to the states” or “to the people.” A doctrine known as “anti-commandeering” prohibits the federal government from ordering state and local governments to take specific actions, or to spend their resources in particular ways. Because the state and local governments own and operate public schools, the federal government cannot lawfully order those schools reopened. Schools will reopen when governors, mayors, or other relevant state and local officials decide to open them. Meanwhile, as many Americans of a certain age learned from Schoolhouse Rock, the Constitution separates power between the president and Congress. Congress has the power to “regulate commerce ... among the several states,” a power that is broad enough that the federal legislature could probably enact a law preempting state and local orders closing private businesses. If Trump wanted such a bill to become law, he would have to appeal to the Democratic House in order to pass it, which is unlikely so long as Democrats believe that social distancing remains necessary to control the coronavirus pandemic. All of this said, Trump is hardly powerless. His most important power likely has nothing to do with the specific legal authority given to the president. Though Trump has never been a popular president, he remains very popular among self-identified Republicans — a recent YouGov tracking poll, for example, found that 66 percent of Republicans “strongly approve” of Trump’s job performance. Trump, in other words, has tremendous persuasive power over Republican partisans — including many Republican partisans who sit in governor’s mansions. If Trump were to order the economy reopened, it is likely that at least some red-state officials would be under pressure to cooperate. Historically, the federal government has been fairly cautious in writing public health laws not to exceed its authority under the Constitution. The federal law and regulations dealing with quarantines, for example, does not claim the power to impose a quarantine on any American anywhere in the nation. Rather, they permit quarantines of individuals entering the country or crossing state borders, while leaving the question of whether to quarantine individuals within a state’s borders to the state itself. Similarly, the raft of stay-at-home and business closure orders imposed on many Americans, as well as various orders closing public schools, have typically come from state or local officials. And, in many cases, these officials have already signaled that they plan to keep these orders in place well beyond Trump’s May 1 deadline. In Virginia, for example, Democratic Gov. Ralph Northam issued an executive order providing that “all individuals in Virginia shall remain at their place of residence,” except to perform limited activities like obtaining groceries, seeking medical attention, or traveling to work. Notably, the order provides that it “shall remain in full force and in effect until June 10, 2020, unless amended or rescinded by further executive order.” That’s a pretty clear signal that Northam intends to keep social distancing measures in place well into June, even if Trump would prefer to lift them at the beginning of May. Similarly, many states have announced that public schools will remain closed for the remainder of the academic year, including several states such as Alabama, Arizona, Georgia, Indiana, and Missouri that are dominated by Republicans.  As mentioned above, the federal government has no constitutional authority to reopen these schools, even if Congress enacted a law requiring them to reopen (Congress could conceivably try to set up an alternative network of federal public schools run by federally employed teachers, but the logistical challenge of setting up such a network on short notice would likely be insurmountable). If schools remain closed, moreover, it’s hard to see how many workers will be able to return to their jobs as if there were no pandemic. Public schools do not simply educate the next generation, they also give parents someone to look after their children while they are at work. If the economy were nominally reopened, but public schools remained closed, private daycare centers would be overwhelmed (if they reopened at all). And many parents would likely struggle to find babysitters who were willing to step out of their own homes while the disease still raged. All of this said, it is likely that at least some red state governors would lift stay-at-home restrictions and possibly even school closure orders if Trump asked them to do so. But even among Republicans, Trump’s influence may be limited. Some Republican governors, such as Ohio’s Mike DeWine and Maryland’s Larry Hogan, have executed an aggressive and serious response to the coronavirus pandemic, even as they’ve faced pressure from their fellow Republicans to back down.  It’s far from clear that these governors would respond positively to additional pressure from Trump. It’s also possible that Trump might divert the federal resources he does control to states that comply with his wishes. But it’s also far from clear that this tactic would move many governors to give Trump want he wants. Sure, a governor who reopens their state might get a few more ventilators to deal with existing coronavirus cases — but they’d also wind up with significantly more coronavirus cases. In the midst of the extraordinary shared sacrifice demanded by the coronavirus pandemic, it’s important to acknowledge that many of the most important decisions are not being made by governments. Indeed, it is a testament to the human capacity for solidarity that hundreds of millions of individuals across the globe have made the personal decision to stay at home in order to fight the spread of coronavirus. Similarly, countless private employers made the decision to close their doors or to order their employees to work from home, not because a government official made them do so, but because they wanted to do their part to prevent infections. Trump cannot order individuals back to work against their will. Neither can Congress. Nor any state or local official. The Constitution is quite clear on this point. The 13th Amendment unequivocally bans “involuntary servitude” within the United States. If Trump wants the economy to reopen, he needs to convince individual Americans that it is safe to return to a semi-normal life. The best way to do that is to actually make it safe. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  In a tense moment near the climax of the 2016 sci-fi film Arrival, Louise Banks (Amy Adams) tries to explain to a military commander why it’s not just the words they teach to their alien visitors that matter, but also the framing and grammar they use to teach those words. “Let’s say that I taught them chess instead of English,” she says. “Every conversation would be a game. Every idea expressed through opposition, victory, defeat. You see the problem? If all I ever gave you was a hammer ...” “Everything’s a nail,” the commander says, suddenly catching on to her meaning. With Banks’s help, the US government has been trying to communicate with aliens, 12 groups of which have landed on Earth and are communicating with different governments. In China, linguists are attempting to teach the country’s alien visitors to communicate through mahjong, a game that involves tiles printed with characters, rather than the more complicated language of Mandarin. But Banks says that a recent alien communication the Chinese interpreted as a threat may not have been a threat at all; it’s simply that the paradigm, the metaphor, through which they’ve been learning to communicate has a built-in bias toward concepts like winning, opposition, defeat, and wielding weapons. Arrival applies this idea to a sci-fi story, but the notion that language shapes the way we think isn’t science fiction — it’s a widely discussed linguistic theory. The American linguist Benjamin Whorf, working in the 1940s, is responsible for the theory’s modern incarnation. After studying the Hopi language, spoken by Native Americans in parts of Arizona, he posited that they understood things that are part of everyone’s “reality” — for instance, the passage of time — in a fundamentally different way than Americans who speak English. (In Arrival, Banks explicitly refers to the “Sapir-Whorf hypothesis,” the name for this theory.) Banks is a fictional linguist, and Sapir-Whorf is a contested linguistic hypothesis, not a strictly rhetorical discussion topic. But I find the way she speaks about the chess “language” useful as a means of explaining something a little closer to home: the effects that the metaphors we use to talk about non-human threats — specifically pandemics — have on the way we as people confront those threats. Why are we tempted to treat Covid-19 — the disease caused by the coronavirus — like a terrorist force, to not “let the virus win”? Why do we talk about medical professionals as if they are soldiers on the front lines of a war, rather than scientists and practitioners studying and caring for the health of others? Is it possible that saying “we are at war” prevents us from seeing all the ways we can both end this pandemic and prepare for the next one? Are we framing our current struggle to save lives and find a cure as a deadly battle or game of chess, when it’s really something else? On March 22, nine days after he declared a national emergency, President Donald Trump spoke to reporters about the lens through which, after weeks of stalling, he had come to view the threat that the coronavirus poses to American citizens. “A number of people have said it, but — and I feel it, actually: I’m a wartime president,” he said. “This is a war. This is a war. A different kind of war than we’ve ever had.” He continued: “And when you look at the economics of the war — in the past, we used to stimulate to get people jobs. Now we’re stimulating to protect people because we don’t want them to work, because we want them to stay away from each other.” There are plenty of reasons for presidents to position themselves this way, particularly in an election year: Presidents often see an uptick in popularity and public support in times of crisis. Trump has worked hard to make sure he is seen, at least by his supporters, within that framework. America is in a “historic battle to safeguard the lives of our citizens.” We are at war, “fighting the coronavirus on every possible front.”  Going to war requires identifying the enemy, something Trump has never had much trouble doing. Since the coronavirus emerged, he has repeatedly taken aim at old standbys — the “Opposition Party (Lamestream Media)” and the Democrats — as well as a range of newer targets, from China (and the “Chinese virus”) to companies like 3M to governors begging for more medical supplies for their states to a more nebulous “Invisible Enemy” he’s begun referring to in tweets: The Invisible Enemy will soon be in full retreat! “With the courage of our doctors and nurses, with the skill of our scientists and innovators, with the determination of the American People, and with the grace of God, WE WILL WIN THIS WAR,” he tweeted on March 28. “When we achieve this victory, we will emerge stronger and more united than ever before!” Obviously, Trump isn’t the first person to use war as a metaphor for fighting a virus, nor is he the only leader to evoke war while speaking about efforts to save lives and find cures. The metaphor isn’t linked to a particular political party or persuasion, either: In his March 30 press briefing, Democratic New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, who has likened health care workers to “troops,” explicitly agreed with Trump: In this situation, there are no red states, and there are no blue states, and there are no red casualties, and there are no blue casualties. It is red, white and blue. This virus doesn’t discriminate. It attacks everyone, and it attacks everywhere. The president said this is a war. I agree with that. This is a war. Then let’s act that way, and let’s act that way now. And let’s show a commonality in a mutuality and a unity that this country has not seen in decades, because the lord knows we need it today more than ever before. Dr. Richard Hatchett, CEO of the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations and a former member of the George W. Bush and Barack Obama administrations, has also said that war is an appropriate analogy for fighting the coronavirus. And he comes from a position of knowledge: In 2005 and 2006, Hatchett was the director for biodefense policy on the White House Homeland Security Council, and he was a principal author of the National Strategy for Pandemic Influenza Implementation Plan. Using war as a metaphor for illness during a pandemic or global crisis is not just a contemporary occurrence. “There is an ancient and cross-cultural tendency to frame disease in terms of war,” Lisa Keranen told me. Keranen is an associate professor of communications at the University of Colorado Denver and a medical rhetorician who studies how we speak about viruses and other biological threats. She noted that some scholars have located centuries-old uses in China of defensive and martial language to talk about defending your health. J. Blake Scott, a professor at the University of Central Florida who studies medical rhetoric and has focused on the AIDS crisis of the 1980s, agreed. “There are lots of reasons why that metaphor took hold,” Scott told me. In fact, he said, war as metaphor for fighting a pandemic has bubbled up across human history. “I think there are political reasons for that,” he said. “But more broadly, there are cultural reasons and historical patterns. Diseases accompany wars; we use military resources to combat disease and pandemics. Wars are thought of as winnable; you have winners and losers.” He also said that at times, people with diseases like cancer and diabetes find that war metaphors are empowering and effective in increasing morale. “That could maybe work collectively, too — there’s this communal mobilization,” he added. 
    Related
   And though you can’t scare a virus the way you can frighten an enemy, we still use that metaphor because it makes sense to us intuitively. “Even before we knew what a virus was, sickness is often cast as an invader to your system, something from outside,” Keranen said. This is a phenomenon that the writer Susan Sontag explored at length in her seminal 1978 essay “Illness as Metaphor,” which was collected in 1989 with her follow-up essay, “AIDS and Its Metaphors.” Sontag writes extensively of the war-like nature of metaphors used for cancer: The controlling metaphors in descriptions of cancer are, in fact, drawn not from economics but from the language of warfare: every physician and every attentive patient is familiar with, if perhaps inured to, this military terminology. Thus, cancer cells do not simply multiply; they are “invasive.” (“Malignant tumors invade even when they grow very slowly,” as one textbook puts it.) Cancer cells “colonize” from the original tumor to far sites in the body, first setting up tiny outposts (“micrometastases”) whose presence is assumed, though they cannot be detected. And that has a warping effect in the “war on cancer,” Sontag writes: “The bromides of the American cancer establishment, tirelessly hailing the imminent victory over cancer; the professional pessimism of a large number of cancer specialists, talking like battle-weary officers mired down in an interminable colonial war—these are twin distortions in this military rhetoric about cancer.” Yet metaphors are inescapable, no matter how apt, misleading, or simply inadequate they may be. They’re key to how humans to wrap their minds around phenomena they don’t totally understand. Sontag argued that we should try to resist metaphors for understanding illnesses (including AIDS), but convincing people to stop using them is an uphill battle at best. Anything mysterious, frightening, or unknowable will inevitably be stuffed into a framework drawn from something we do understand. Humans have understood war for all of human history. So it’s no big surprise that the war metaphor keeps cropping up. Metaphors like this “might be comforting, or give us hope in some way,” Scott told me. “Or they might reinforce differences that make us feel like we can do something to be safer.” Can we do something to keep ourselves and others safe during this pandemic? Sure. We can wash our hands. We can stay home as much as possible. We can donate money and sew face masks. We can promote and conduct scientific research, manufacture ventilators, care for the sick. We can pray, or engage in some other spiritual activity. How will those actions aid our fight against the “invisible enemy”? We don’t know yet. Right now, results are staggered and uncertain. But in the meantime, repeating the war metaphor could hinder what we’re trying to accomplish, both now and in the long term. The usefulness of any metaphor is limited by default, since they use one concept to explain another that is not precisely the same. Language itself is full of metaphors, and we can never describe reality perfectly through language. Critics of the war metaphor argue that it is an attempt, unconscious or otherwise, to alter reality, to not see a viral threat for what it is. (Even the idea of a “viral” threat has become metaphorical in the computer age, some critics have argued.) During my conversation with Keranen, she listed many reasons why the war metaphor can shape our ideas about how we should fight a pandemic — what we should do, what we shouldn’t do, who is to blame, and what gets left out of the picture. One problem is that the “war” metaphor can cause people to stigmatize those with the disease because they can’t “fight it off.” Sontag wrote of this stigma toward cancer patients, describing the shame and lack of openness about options for treatment in the 1970s because of the stigma. “Even today, we talk about people whose immune systems are ‘weaker’ because they can’t fight off Covid-19,” Keranen said. “There’s almost a smuggling of some implicit blame in there for someone who is a victim of a disease.” Framing Covid-19 or any viral outbreak as war can also influence the way we think about those who die. “It can imply that deaths are collateral damage and might just need to happen so that we can ‘fight on the front lines,’” Keranen said. “So if we’re prioritizing where ventilators are going to go, that means that they might go to New York and places that are seen as the battlefront, as compared to more rural areas.” The idea of lives as collateral damage has taken root among some of Trump’s supporters, who have suggested that his greatest enemies — and thus the group aligned with the virus — are Democrats, as well as those who take strict measures to limit activity in order to save lives: Dennis Prager: "That attitude that the only value is saving a life, that attitude leads to appeasement...No one can die? Then it's not a war" pic.twitter.com/jtMDtJBzYf Furthermore, war metaphors are inherently biased toward power, aggression, and even paternalism. “It makes our focus be on fighting and not on caring,” Keranen says. “It’s not that we’re not caring for people,” but if we’re fixated on fighting an enemy, “that might put us in a framework where we’re less thinking about support and care and broader networks that we need to put into place.” This mindset can draw focus away from scrutinizing broad preparedness and emphasizing its importance — perhaps counterintuitive, since governments exist in part to protect their citizens from enemies both within and beyond their borders. But using a war metaphor for a pandemic lets us minimize resulting deaths as inevitable, Keranen says. We were attacked, so deaths are “casualties” rather than unnecessary and preventable tragedies. “It shifts our focus away from government preparedness to individual responsibility,” she added. “If we all just wash our hands and stay inside, then we can do our part in this ‘battle.’” 
    Related
   There’s a geographic component to war metaphors, too, Scott says. And that component can reshape how we think about collective versus individual responsibility, leading to a “geography of blame” — the attempt to assign fault for the pandemic to one region, like China, Europe, or New York City. He pointed to Florida as example, noting that Gov. Ron DeSantis refused to close beaches to spring breakers for weeks in March but required people returning to the state from New York, New Jersey, or Connecticut to self-quarantine for 14 days. “He’s shifting the blame that way,” Scott said. A war metaphor can also have dark consequences. “If we look at history, during times of war, it’s often been the case that war is accompanied by abuses of medicine and the suspension of widespread ethical norms,” Keranen said, citing Nazi use of medicine or other public health trials that have been conducted on prisoners and war resistors over the years. “Especially now, we need to be on guard for this with the clinical trials and other product development that we’re undergoing, so that in our haste to ‘fight’ the disease with a military metaphor, we’re not giving away our fundamental ethical concepts and principles.” People are unlikely to stop using the pandemic-as-war metaphor anytime soon. But is there a better option to articulate what we’re facing, to illustrate the challenge of caring for the sick and finding a cure? There are certainly other metaphors. They’re imperfect, too. Yet just thinking about them can help us see what we lose when we resort to and rely on the language of war. Another possible metaphor for illness presents healing as a journey or a river, which can remind us of the passage of time and the connectedness of everyone who embarks on the same trek or follows the same path. It also emphasizes the need for preparedness, since journeys involve mapping out a route and rivers typically remain in their riverbeds, which means their route can be predicted. Certainly emergencies and the unexpected can happen, but there are some obstacles we can anticipate. Scott also suggested a metaphor that centers on an orchestra or symphony — built on the idea that responding to a pandemic requires everyone involved to be equipped to play their part, for everyone to have a role. “A lot of these metaphors blur distinctions between the self and the Other that war metaphors throw into relief,” Scott said. They emphasize the need to coordinate response, rather than only look out for oneself, and “they’re not focused just on causes; they’re focused on responses and preparedness,” he added. Keranen explained that another problem with using the war metaphor for a pandemic is that it reduces the complexity of the problem and focuses us solely on “beating” the virus, without fully considering the factors that might have facilitated its proliferation — like deforestation and destroyed habitats that could contribute to future pandemics — or possible risk factors, such as poor air quality, that may make humans susceptible. “It really masks that broader ecological picture,” she said. Indeed, everyone I spoke to while reporting this piece brought up the idea of ecology and microbiomes, not just as literal matters of concern with regard to the coronavirus but also as a strong metaphor for approaching the threat it poses to humans. Instead of thinking of this pandemic as a war — us versus them, humans versus invading virus — what if we reframed our thinking to imagine our goal as finding balance not only in the natural world, but in our social and cultural worlds as well? Their suggestions made me think about The Biggest Little Farm, a 2019 documentary about the owners of a biodynamic family farm in California. Over an eight-year period, they came to see new pests or problems on the farm as evidence that something was out of balance, not simply an enemy to attack and destroy. Jodie Nicotra, an associate professor at the University of Idaho, praised the ecological metaphor as a strong one. Nicotra is writing a book on the rhetorics of microbiome science. “In one of the Democratic debates, Bernie Sanders was asked how he would respond to the coronavirus situation,” she told me. “He started by talking about universal health care. Joe Biden was like, ‘We’ll get the National Guard out and set up field hospitals,’ and so on. There seemed to be more general praise for Biden’s approach. But I think more ecological, community-based thinking — basically, the opposite of whatever we do now — would have probably prevented a lot of these issues.” What an ecological metaphor offers that a war metaphor can’t provide — due to its dependence on drawing a line between winners and losers, between us and the enemy — is what Nicotra calls the “invisible connections” between things. “You don’t see how vast economic inequality connects to a virus, but it does,” she says. “You don’t see the webs of regulations and laws, or the production of equipment. You have to see that all of this stuff is bound up together and train yourself to see these connections between things.” In truth, metaphors are inescapable. We’re going to keep using them because they give us a way to imagine the world. They are a kind of grammar our brains rely on to operate. But that grammar is limiting nonetheless. We’re less limited in which metaphors we choose. And so, while the war metaphor may have some use, it would be wise for us to expand our thinking and the language we use to express it. There’s no reason we have to stick to just one metaphor, regardless of what certain politicians might prefer. 
    Related
   “If we take as a premise that we, as a culture, acknowledge a distributed expertise or set of solutions for dealing with something like this, then that kind of opens it up,” Scott told me. “There are more groups, more people, more institutions to figure out responses. Those we thought of as experts at controlling risk haven’t always been all that successful. We need alternative ways of thinking in response to these things.” We also need to maintain a healthy sense of skepticism when we’re confronted with a particular metaphor every day. Is it the only way to address the issue at hand? Are we flattening the problem in ways that benefit some people over others, or that lead us toward harmful conclusions? We can still use the language of chess, if it helps. But we shouldn’t ignore the vast array of human experience just begging to be tapped to help us more thoroughly understand what the problem is and how we might solve it — even in a pandemic. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Most evenings on her drive to the hospital, Gisella Thomas receives calls from her six children. They call from Las Vegas, Bakersfield, and the cornfields of Nebraska. They ask what she’s seeing at work. They want to know if she’s going to be okay. As a respiratory therapist at the Desert Regional Medical Center outside of Los Angeles, Thomas, 72, is responsible for assisting to intubate patients diagnosed with Covid-19. Intubating requires her to lean over and thread a tube down the patient’s throat to ensure oxygen flows to their lungs. Her face is inches from their mouth. If the patient coughs, infected droplets will splatter her protective face shield. Her job is among the most dangerous in the hospital.  After caring for up to 15 Covid-19 patients during her overnight shift, Thomas drives home just after sunrise and returns calls from her worried children. While she is old enough to retire, she says she cannot afford to. Three of her six children are unemployed. Two more rely upon her health insurance. Thomas tells her children not to worry. She’s going to be okay, she says. In private, though, Thomas is less confident. “I’ve got to believe it will be okay,” she said. “It has to be.” As Covid-19 overwhelms several hospital systems around the world, public attention has affixed on doctors and advanced practice providers, like nurse practitioners and physician assistants — the hospital’s leaders on the ground whose medical plans shape the field of battle. Less visible but no less important, however, is the army of support staff like Thomas, whose daily exposure to Covid-19 patients — from changing their clothes to inserting life-saving ventilator tubes — sometimes exceeds that of the doctors they assist.  We interviewed over a dozen hospital support workers, nurses, and academic medical professionals. (Eli Cahan, a co-author of this story, is a fourth-year medical student at New York University.) Many of these support staff earn lower wages, and some have unemployed family members or sick dependents. Others have young children at home with few options for child care because of family leave policies that have lagged behind widespread school closures. Some are older and have preexisting conditions that multiply their risk of severe Covid-19 illness — or dying from it. Lower in status at work than doctors, some feel unable to advocate for greater protections, fearful of provoking their superiors’ retribution.  Protecting these workers is also a larger safety issue. In previous epidemics, unprotected support staff have emerged as hidden “super-spreaders” as they traverse hospital floors serving lunch, cleaning linens, or taking X-rays. During the West African Ebola epidemic of 2014-’15, for example, support staff were up to 32 times more likely to become infected than the general population, according to the World Health Organization — and 48 percent more likely to become infected than doctors. And without these workers, the hospital’s delicate ecosystem would collapse.  Financially and medically exposed, support workers are at risk. And without proper protections, they are putting everyone else within their reach at risk, too. In a typical hospital admission in the US, a patient enters the emergency room and is greeted by a registration clerk — sitting a foot or so away, behind a desk. Then a triage nurse arrives to ask about their symptoms. Within minutes, a blood-drawing specialist (a phlebotomist) stops by to collect a vial or two. If the patient is admitted, a telemetry nurse wires them up to pulse monitors on a stretcher.  Transport staff may wheel them into the radiology ward for X-rays, where a radiology technologist fashions a lead vest and positions them in the scanner where the pictures are taken. After the patient leaves the darkroom, an environmental technician sanitizes the room behind them while a facilities engineer tightens a creaky hinge. Back in the waiting bay, the patient may snack on pudding delivered by a dietary specialist. After this routine, a doctor appears. Of course, Covid-19 has scrambled these procedures. To minimize exposures, hospitals have placed plexiglass at the registration desk and wrapped radiology equipment in plastic. Some have started performing intake interviews through video and now only draw blood when absolutely necessary. Others have made makeshift emergency wings separated from negative-pressure “bubbles” for Covid-19 patients.  Yet even after taking these precautions, many hospital tasks remain essential. Admitted patients require IV drips; someone must hang them. Patients will get blood clots if they don’t move; someone must help them walk. Someone must fetch broth and Jello to ensure they eat. Someone must bathe them. Someone must empty their bedpan. Someone must clean their soiled linens. At Methodist Hospital in Sacramento, that “someone” is often Irene Gourdine.  After a Covid-19 patient leaves the hospital, Gourdine, 63, dons a protective suit and holsters her sanitizer. She sweeps the floors and scrubs the gurneys of the vacated room. If she misses a spot, a patient or doctor could get sick. If she is careless, she could inhale the virus through her nose or smear it on her eyes.  According to GlassDoor, a website where employees anonymously submit their salaries, a typical environmental technician’s salary is $10 an hour. “I don’t know what people think of me,” said Gourdine, about her role. “Maybe that I’m a housekeeper, or a maid. But without me, this infection would be worse.” In unspoken hospital hierarchies, staff like Gourdine rank lower in the pecking order than doctors and advanced practice providers. They tend to receive safety information or personal protective equipment (PPE) like gowns, gloves, or masks later than providers do. Few expect to receive prioritized testing or expedited care should they require treatment.  At Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, one resident, speaking under the condition of anonymity for fear of backlash from the hospital, shared that amid PPE shortages, support staff “are putting their lives at risk and by extension the lives of their people at home.” They are doing so, the resident continued, without the “security or the praise the doctors or nurses receive.”  Sara Singer, a professor of medicine and organizational behavior at Stanford University, has found that disparities in perceptions of safety are common in health care organizations. As a result of these hierarchies, “we’re seeing the potential for rationing play out,” Singer said, adding, “When facilities are faced with shortages, they have to make decisions that implicitly place a higher value on the skills of some over others.”  Moreover, many hospitals have focused on staffing and maintaining wards containing Covid-19 patients, diverting resources away from auxiliary departments like facilities or nursing. In the short-term, such redistribution provides desperately needed relief. In the long-term, however, it risks creating shortfalls elsewhere. 
    Related
   “The Covid floors, they have the signs, they get the PPE,” said Mary Temple, a post-anesthesia nurse at St. John’s Regional Medical Center in Oxnard, California. “It’s the rest of the hospital I’m scared for. Like dietary. If they go down, we all go down.” (The hospital responded in a statement, “We provide all of our staff the equipment, training, and information they need to care for the patients they are assigned.”) Temple’s concern is not unfounded. Emerging evidence suggests that when they do contract coronavirus, health care workers are much more likely to die. A study at a hospital in Wuhan, China, the initial epicenter of the Covid-19 outbreak, revealed that 29 percent of those infected were health care workers. In Italy, a Lancet study found 20 percent of the health care workers developed infections. In the United States, nondoctor hospital workers like Gourdine make up a disproportionate share of the health care workforce relative to other countries. The morning after the night shift where he was instructed to re-wear contaminated gloves and gown, Frank Bagwell, 28, realized he would catch Covid-19.  Bagwell is a certified nurse’s assistant at Hi-Desert Medical Center in Joshua Tree, California. His responsibilities include spoon-feeding patients and transferring them to the toilet to defecate — along with bathing them and changing their undergarments if they don’t make it. Before Covid-19, reusing contaminated gear could get him fired. Now, he has been asked to reuse protective gear up to 20 times per overnight shift. Like Thomas, the respiratory therapist, Bagwell’s responsibilities require him to interact closely with confirmed or suspected Covid-19 patients. He can’t bathe or feed patients from six feet away. Hi-Desert Medical Center did not directly address Bagwell’s complaints. “Like many other health systems, we have temporarily implemented strategies for PPE conservation,” Hi-Desert said in a statement. The hospital claims that these strategies are “consistent with Center for Disease Control (CDC) guidance.” However, the CDC’s guidelines explicitly note that extended use of disposable isolation gowns “can be considered only if there are no additional co-infectious diagnoses transmitted by contact (such as Clostridioides difficile) among patients.” Bagwell noted having a patient with C. difficile on his most recent shift.   Yet even as his PPE allowance is rationed, management is relying on him more than ever. With auxiliary staff furloughed to, in management’s words, “reduce unnecessary exposures,” Bagwell is being asked to unclog toilets and fix broken appliances. Interviewed over video chat, he extends his arms like a zombie, demonstrating how to do something he says is “physically impossible”: safely re-don a contaminated isolation gown. Bianca Frogner, director of the University of Washington’s Center for Health Workforce Studies, acknowledges that support staff are “lower on the totem pole for getting PPE.” Although they are “a critical group” in the fight against Covid-19, she says, they “don’t get a lot of attention.”  In fact, a National Nurses Union (NNU) survey, focusing on the experiences of frontline registered nurses amid Covid-19, found that only a quarter of respondents — out of about 8,200 total — said their employer had sufficient PPE for a surge in patient numbers, as of March 16. Advocating for better protection has even gotten some staff punished. Thomas, the respiratory therapist, said that her “hospital has clamped down on the social media” and that posting pictures could “jeopardize [her] position at the hospital.” Jhonna Porter, a charge nurse at West Hills Hospital near Los Angeles, posted a Facebook plea for mask donations directly to the nurses’ association — not to the hospital administration. A few days later, she was suspended for an alleged violation of medical privacy laws.  The timing was suspect, Porter thinks; she believes the goal is to intimidate her colleagues into silence. “The nurses on my unit are terrified to say anything for fear of losing their jobs,” said Porter. West Hills Hospital disputed Porter’s interpretation. “The issue with Jhonna Porter arose when co-workers expressed concerns about her [sharing] specific information, including room numbers of possible COVID patients,” said West Hills Hospital in a statement. “Her later posts about masking and donations were not the issue.” Transparent and continuous information is just as critical to infection prevention as proper PPE. Yet even under normal circumstances, hospitals face knotted medical privacy laws that strangle communication between departments. In the pandemonium of Covid-19, communication has been stifled in some hospitals and support staff can remain in the dark. Paul Griffin, a facilities engineer at Trinity Hospital in New Port Richey, Florida, is responsible for fixing air conditioners and plugging leaky faucets. When dispatched to patient rooms, he isn’t told what threat the individuals residing there may pose to him. Instead, he says, he finds out “through the grapevine.” His co-workers clue him in on the rooms with “patients under investigation” — the term, he says, is used for anyone suspected of having Covid-19.   Griffin’s approach is mirrored by other support staff interviewed for this story. Gourdine, the environmental technician, “listens in at the nursing desk” for “chatter.” Aleida Morales, a phlebotomist in Southern California, relies on her colleagues for “tips” before making her rounds.  Many of these workers emphasized that procedures were changing daily. While workers differed in their assessment of their hospitals’ handling of internal communication, few felt that the hospital had communicated too much. In a questionnaire sent to 83 support staff across 28 hospitals conducted in collaboration with the Service International Employees Union (SEIU) in late March, nearly three in 10 felt that their hospitals’ safety standards were “minimal” during the Covid-19 pandemic — and over two-thirds felt these standards were “confusing.”  Kaila Brown, a patient care technician in New Port Richey, has struggled with a different sort of communication: explaining to her 7-year-old son the risks mom faces at work. Her son, Jeffry, had noticed his mother wiping down the door handle after returning home. When she told him about the pandemic, he asked her if it was “like the flu.” She said it was. Sort of.  In previous pandemics, health care workers have often emerged as “super spreaders” as they shuttle between hospital wards and the wider community. The original “Typhoid Mary,” Mary Mallon — who infected over 25 patients, families, doctors, and staff at New York’s Sloane Hospital for Women during the 1915 typhus outbreak — was a cook in the medical center’s kitchens. During SARS in 2003, a single hospital laundry worker accounted for many of Taiwan’s earliest cases. During Ebola in 2014, nurses and midwives ignited the disease’s rapid spread throughout West Africa. If these workers aren’t protected, the greater community is a risk.  And their household members face great risks, too. Hospital support staff seem intimately aware of this fact. Almost everyone interviewed adopted a similar routine upon returning home: They stripped near-naked at the door, threw all clothes into the laundry, then showered immediately. Workers with enclosed porches considered themselves lucky not to have to strip in front of their neighbors.  Many families of support staff are physically vulnerable. Gabe Montoya, an emergency medical technician (EMT) at Kaiser Permanente Downey, checked into a hotel to protect his husband and elderly mother. Tonya Moore, a telemetry nurse at the University of Miami Hospital, returns home to an 18-year-old daughter on immunosuppressive drugs. Support staff are not just in physical danger. They are in economic danger too. Like many American workers, thousands of nurses and other support staff have been furloughed, flexed, or fired as hospitals transform to treat Covid-19 patients.  Temple, the post-anesthesia nurse from Oxnard, lost six shifts after her unit was redesigned to accommodate a surge of Covid-19 patients that had not yet arrived. Temple borrowed money from her sister to pay the rent. If she is furloughed again next month, she’ll miss rent then, too. While unions have sought to protect vulnerable workers by advocating for home safety protocols and resources to support child or elder care — Mary Kay Henry, international president of SEIU, described protecting workers as a “patriotic and moral requirement in this moment” — many hospital support staff face a daunting choice. If they go to work, they risk infecting themselves and their families. If they stay home, they protect their families but risk their livelihoods.  Even if they could stay home, many workers say they would feel guilty abandoning their patients. Bagwell, the nurse’s assistant, never considered taking leave. Though his girlfriend’s mother, who lives with him, has diabetes and asthma, he nevertheless shuffles in and out of patients’ rooms, handling bodily fluids and applying lotion to denuded backsides.  “My patients need help,” he said. Quitting his job would be a “cop-out.”  Last week, Bagwell self-quarantined in his garage after being exposed without PPE to a patient with Covid-19. A few days later, he tested negative for the coronavirus. The result offered scant reassurance. Three coworkers tested positive, he said. Bagwell concluded he will inevitably become infected. He says he cannot risk exposing his girlfriend’s infirm mother to the virus. If she were to contract the virus, he confessed, “I’m not sure how we’ll deal.”  To make sure that doesn’t happen, Bagwell has a plan.   If he catches the virus, he’ll live out of his girlfriend’s mother’s car: a red Dodge SUV with interiors that he calls “pretty roomy.” His girlfriend, Donna, will bring food to the driveway. He’ll pull up to the curb and pick up the meal. Then he’ll find a spot by the roadside, park the car, and wait out the fevers. “I’m making some life changes,” Bagwell said, “but ... I’m fine for now.” Correction, April 15: A earlier version of this article misstated Mary Temple’s current employer. She now works part-time at St. John’s Regional Medical Center in Oxnard, to which her comments refer.  Eli Cahan is a Knight-Hennessy scholar at Stanford University completing a master’s degree in health policy and a fourth-year medical student at New York University. His work has been featured in PBS, Scientific American, TechCrunch, JAMA, and Health Affairs, among other publications. Matt DeButts is a Knight-Hennessy scholar at Stanford University. He previously worked in China as a special correspondent, writing for the Los Angeles Times, Sixth Tone, and Foreign Policy, among others. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Eric Schmidt, the former CEO of Google, thinks the coronavirus pandemic should teach Americans to be “a little bit grateful” for powerful tech companies — and angry at their government. One of the country’s richest people, Schmidt made his most extensive comments about the pandemic to date on Tuesday, criticizing Washington’s response to the crisis as so ham-handed that it “cost us lives.” To the contrary, Schmidt argued, private companies like Amazon have stepped up as leaders, which Schmidt suggested should soften our criticism of tech giants more broadly. “Think about what your life would be like in America without Amazon, for example. The benefit of these corporations — which we love to malign — in terms of the ability to communicate ... the ability to get information, is profound — and I hope people will remember that when this thing is finally over,” Schmidt said on a livestream to the Economic Club of New York. “So let’s be a little bit grateful that these companies got the capital, did the investment, built the tools that we’re using now and have really helped us out. Imagine having the same reality of this pandemic without these tools.” That messaging, which few other tech leaders have made so starkly, comes amid two related trends: Big Tech is indeed using its resources and know-how for the common good, such as the announcement last week that Apple and Google would deploy their technology to trace people who may be infected with Covid-19. But concerns are also mounting that these companies — and the billionaires leading them — will emerge more powerful than ever as we gravitate toward digital companies like Amazon and away from their competitors in traditional retail.  Some activists are worried that the calls for antitrust scrutiny of Big Tech — which have been rising from both the left and the right in the years leading up to the pandemic — will recede in part due to the big roles that tech companies and its leaders are playing during it. Schmidt is no longer operationally involved at Google and is now a technical adviser to its parent company, Alphabet. But he remains one of tech’s highest-profile figures, with broad influence in Silicon Valley, big-dollar philanthropy, and Democratic politics. And on Tuesday, Schmidt voiced deep frustration over US politicians’ speed, or lack thereof, in responding to the virus. Without ever uttering “Trump,” Schmidt said it was “amazing” and he was “curious” as to why the government had not acted more quickly to allocate money to scientists, organize research priorities, and ramp up testing capabilities in the first two months of 2020. “We probably were one month late in the way we organized ourselves,” Schmidt said. “That month cost us lives.” At this point, Schmidt is squinting to see if there is a way to begin reopening the economy anytime soon. But because of the lack of widespread testing, governors will essentially be “making stuff up” and are “flying blind” as they make some of the hardest decisions over the next few months, such as when to reopen schools. The hope would be to turn this judgment into a “straightforward math problem,” he said, where you could deduce which establishments are the easiest to open. “This will change our society for much longer than we think,” he said. “It’s not going to be a quick recovery back to the hugging and kissing and restaurants and all the behaviors that were perfectly fine before the pandemic.” And yet Schmidt appeared quite sympathetic to the notion that the status quo of total lockdowns could not go on, predicting a “significant bankruptcy cycle” if it persisted for another month or two. However, he said it will be impossible to reopen the economy until there is sufficient personal protective equipment, testing, and progress on a vaccine. “That strategy keeps us closed for months — which is neither a politically reasonable solution nor economically viable,” Schmidt said. “And it’s not fair to the people who are really suffering.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.With more than 100,000 confirmed cases, New York City has become the epicenter of the coronavirus pandemic in the US, but testing in the city — as is the case throughout the country — has lagged due to a shortage in test kits. Now it appears the city is taking matters into its own hands, with plans to make tests itself. Mayor Bill de Blasio announced Tuesday that beginning in May, the city will have its own supply of 100,000 test kits a week: 50,000 of these will be manufactured by companies in the city, and another another 50,000 will be purchased from Aria Diagnostics, a company based in Carmel, Indiana. “I’m sure New Yorkers wouldn’t have thought the cavalry would come from Carmel, Indiana, but it has,” de Blasio said. Kit shortages have meant that testing for Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, has lagged. The city performed 10,241 tests on April 6, according to Politico, but as supplies have dwindled, so has the city’s capacity. Only 25 total tests were conducted four days later. The mayor said the city searched everywhere for more kits after finding little support from the federal government, before eventually deciding to produce them in the city. “There’s nothing like it in New York City being made right now. Nothing even close,” de Blasio said. “If people can make them around the world, why not us?” Mass testing will be even more critical as the city considers relaxing its social distancing guidelines, and an uptick in available tests should allow officials to better understand where local outbreaks are occurring. But it is not clear whether 400,000 additional tests per month will be enough to allow a city of 8.6 million people to reopen businesses and schools. Experts differ on the number of tests needed to safely ease social distancing guidelines, as explained by Vox’s Umair Irfan: One of the lower-end benchmarks estimates the US will need 750,000 tests per week. The high-end proposal, from Nobel laureate economist Paul Romer, starts at 22 million tests per day and goes up. And not just one test per person, but repeated testing over time. On the lower end, that estimate translates to the US needing about 2.3 tests per 1,000 people each week; on the high end, it’s about 470 tests per 1,000 people each week. Should New York have only its 100,000 tests to rely on each week, it will have a number somewhere in the middle — 11.6 kits per 1,000 people. Now, those numbers are estimates, meaning New York’s testing program could allow it to become even more of a microcosm for the rest of the country’s coronavirus crisis than it already is. So far, the US has only managed to build out to conducting about 100,000 tests each day. Experts agree that more tests are needed before the US can safely reopen, but as Irfan notes, they aren’t sure exactly how much more. Data from New York’s testing, particularly if it begins easing some restrictions in May, could give public health officials on the national level some valuable information on which of those estimates is best to model policy after. And that kind of information is in high demand. While everyday Americans aren’t so sure reopening the country is a good idea, it’s become a priority for President Donald Trump and many members of his administration, some of whom are reportedly pushing for social distancing guidelines to be eased as soon as May 1. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.If there is any agreement with the coronavirus pandemic, it’s this: Everyone is looking forward to ending social distancing and reopening the economy. President Donald Trump has loudly advocated for it, sometimes in defiance of public health experts. Other officials, like former Vice President Joe Biden, and experts agree that they want the economy to reopen, but they’re more cautious with making any promises about when and how. Several experts and think tanks have released plans for what this might look like. The right-leaning American Enterprise Institute (AEI) and left-leaning Center for American Progress (CAP) put out detailed proposals. Nobel Prize–winning economist Paul Romer did as well. Harvard’s Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics, which has worked on bioethics issues in the past, has put out several white papers about confronting the crisis. (Biden also laid out a plan in a New York Times op-ed, but it’s pretty vague.) The plans are grim. They do suggest there’s a way back to normal life, but they make clear that it will likely take a long, uncomfortable, even painful time to get there. The CAP and AEI plans in particular suggest the US won’t be able to fully end social distancing until 12 to 18 months from now — with a true end requiring a vaccine or some other therapeutic to prevent or treat Covid-19, the disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus. 
    Related
   To put it in terms my colleague Ezra Klein did, these plans are a bit scary. They show the US is likely stuck with some level of social distancing for at least months and possibly a year or more. That’s going to lead to a significantly weaker economy, with lost wages and higher levels of unemployment. That’s less time people can spend with friends and family. It’s less time with favorite hobbies and activities. It’s a formula for a loneliness epidemic. But that’s all necessary, according to the plans, to slow and halt the spread of the coronavirus, which could lead to hundreds of thousands or millions of deaths if left uncontrolled. While they differ in important ways, the plans suggest the US will go through the crisis in three phases: The plans, however, really begin to differ when it comes to how social distancing can be eased during that second phase — with different views on what kinds of tools should be used.  AEI and CAP lay out a framework through which the US phases into more testing and less social distancing, although CAP focuses much more on digital surveillance and contact tracing through a phone app. Harvard’s Safra Center explicitly calls for much more testing than CAP and AEI, but it also envisions a wartime-like mobilization that seeks to, in essence, make the best out of the country’s time social distancing. Romer’s plan is perhaps the most aggressive and single-minded on testing, calling for a scale of testing that no one else does. A big caveat: These plans carry some assumptions, because there’s still a lot about Covid-19 and the coronavirus we simply don’t know. It’s uncertain if the virus could burn out in the months ahead or if hotter temperatures could slow its spread, which may cut the need for social distancing in the future. It’s unclear if people can become reinfected. Scientists are still figuring out all the ways the virus spreads and how deadly it truly is. These plans, then, are about trying to put forward the best ideas with the best information available.  One thing they don’t address is political feasibility, and it’s not clear the US could actually follow any of these plans successfully. America has already struggled with its response to Covid-19 — failing to prepare for a pandemic, botching the rollout of tests, and suffering shortages in health care supplies. It’s been slow to fix these problems. Even as cases and deaths have grown, some leaders, including the president, have suggested that reopening the economy is a top priority. All these factors should cast doubt on how well any of this will be handled. But the plans, at least, offer a way out — as grim and potentially unfeasible as the path may be. The plans generally all say that extreme social distancing, as most parts of the US are practicing now, is needed to get Covid-19 cases low enough that it’s safe to resort to softer measures. The CAP plan even suggests the US needs to lock down further, arguing that all states should issue and enforce stay-at-home orders — which hasn’t happened so far — for 45 days.  The US needs extreme social distancing in part because it let the outbreak get so out of control before taking proper action. As a recent New York Times investigation concluded, Trump received warnings from his administration’s officials and experts for weeks that the outbreak was getting bad and required quick action, but he ignored such warnings. Some local and state officials, like New York’s, were also relatively slow to act. That amounted to, in one example, weeks in delays in getting coronavirus tests out — what the Times dubbed “the lost month.” 
    Related
   “What social distancing is doing is reversing — of course, with the cost of tens of thousands of Americans dying — the losses of two months of inaction,” Ashish Jha, the faculty director of the Harvard Global Health Institute, told me. Every plan is clear that ending social distancing will require widespread testing — several times larger than the amount of testing the US is doing now — to track and control new clusters of outbreaks. Though the plans agree on that, they differ on how much testing is needed. CAP doesn’t set an exact target, explaining “the number of tests needed should be guided by conditions on the ground.” AEI initially set a target of 750,000 per week, but the report’s authors clarified that was a bare minimum for when there are no more regional outbreaks and that as many as 3.8 million tests a week, or more than 500,000 a day, could be needed. The Safra Center suggests at least millions of tests a day. Romer is the most aggressive on testing, calling for more than 20 million tests a day. The US is not there yet. Over the week of April 6, the country averaged about 150,000 tests per day. That’s an improvement from early March, when daily tests numbered below the dozens and later the hundreds. But the daily total hasn’t improved much compared with the week of March 30, when the US completed an average of more than 130,000 tests a day. And it’s a far cry from what any of these plans are calling for. Early on, there were regulatory hurdles to testing people and private labs doing Covid-19 tests. Today, the problems are largely focused on supply: There aren’t enough swabs, test kits, reagents, personal protective equipment, staff, or machines to run the specific tests required, with different places experiencing one, some, or all of these problems on a day-to-day basis. “Any one link in the chain of supply, any restriction in the chain of supply, can suddenly create a bottleneck,” Louise Serio, a spokesperson for the American Clinical Laboratory Association (ACLA), which represents the private labs, told me. “No labs have, really, the predictable, consistent access to all the supplies we need.” The tests themselves could also be better. More accurate, faster tests and ones that check for potential immunity could all help if they become widely available. For now, these other kinds of tests are still in development or scarce. According to all the plans, the US will need to fix its testing shortfall to safely ease social distancing anytime soon. Even with more testing, the plans generally agree, or at least imply, that there will not be a return to normal anytime soon. At the very least, building the testing capacity required will take weeks if not months. Getting Covid-19 cases down to a safer level, without that testing, will require weeks if not months. The ultimate point of relief will be a vaccine, which is likely at least 12 to 18 months away. Even once testing is scaled up, the CAP and AEI plans agree that the country will need at least some level of social distancing until a vaccine or effective treatment is developed. Both make it clear that, for instance, gatherings of 50 people or more should be restricted or banned, and people who are more vulnerable to coronavirus, like older adults or those with underlying health conditions, will have to remain vigilant and continue social distancing. One way to think about the plans: They’d likely let you visit friends or family in small gatherings in their homes, but you probably won’t be able to go to a stadium, concert, or movie theater anytime soon, even with these plans in place. Restaurants and bars will likely operate at limited capacity. Schools could open as well, but with some physical distancing measures in place. CAP’s proposed air travel rules are instructive: “Airline passengers must download the Contact Tracing app, confirm no close proximity to a positive case, and pass a fever check or show documentation of immunity from a serological test.” So air travel would technically be possible, but it would look very different from how it worked before Covid-19. Still, all the plans do suggest easing social distancing to at least some degree as time goes on. The difference is how, exactly, this is done. AEI calls for a soft reopening, with specific goals that have to be hit, including 14 days of a reduction in new reported coronavirus cases and enough capacity to test all people with Covid-19 symptoms, to move to the next phase. It suggests states will need to slowly build up contact tracing and health care capacity to ease social distancing. They should also be ready, the plan indicates, to shift back to stricter social distancing if Covid-19 cases rise. This gradual move toward less social distancing will play out state by state — and eventually the whole country should be able to fully open back up. CAP calls for a soft reopening that similarly relies on more testing and health care capacity. But CAP puts more emphasis on digital surveillance, particularly a phone app that would track people’s movements to help notify them if they’ve come into contact with someone infected with the coronavirus. (Apple and Google recently partnered to help make such an app possible.) CAP acknowledges that this could raise significant civil liberties issues in the US, outlining several safeguards — like putting a nonprofit group in charge and automatically deleting data after 45 days — to mitigate those concerns. The AEI and CAP plans also offer ideas for making it easier to social distance when it’s necessary. For example, they both suggest repurposing hotels, dormitories, and other currently unused living areas to offer space to people who don’t want to risk infecting family members when they get sick.  Generally, the AEI and CAP plans — which are the two plans put together primarily by public health experts — follow a similar structure: scale up testing and contact tracing; build health care capacity; ease social distancing over time; and remain vigilant for another wave of Covid-19 cases. They caution that at least some level of social distancing may be needed for as long as 18 months. The Safra Center’s plan calls for millions of tests each day — far more than CAP or AEI explicitly propose — and a kind of wartime economic mobilization to confront the outbreak.  The goal of the mobilization is to minimize the economic damage of social distancing, do things to help take on the outbreak now, and address longstanding social and public health issues elevated by the pandemic. It includes, for example, a dramatic buildup of the health care workforce, production of personal protective equipment (such as masks), more digital infrastructure (to allow better surveillance and working from home), widespread cleaning and sanitation services, and support for elder care.  “Freezing in place idle workers, empty spaces, and unused equipment at a time of such acute need would be costlier not just in narrow economic terms, but also in our ability to support and perform the most critical lifesaving functions,” economists Glen Weyl and Rajiv Sethi wrote. Romer’s plan, meanwhile, focuses entirely on testing — tens of millions of tests every day. He envisions the US running more than seven times the Covid-19 tests in a single day than it has during the entire duration of the coronavirus pandemic as of April 13. Using an economic model he developed to gauge the effects of widespread testing, Romer argued a very high level of testing would make it possible to stop most if not all the current social distancing measures.  
    Related
   The idea: If the US tests just about everyone, and retests people every one or two weeks to make sure their conditions don’t change, the nation would be able to isolate a much smaller fraction of the population — just those confirmed to be infected — instead of taking blanket social distancing measures. Romer’s model accounts for false negatives and false positives, which he finds aren’t a real drawback if testing is aggressive enough. The catch here, of course, is this requires dramatically scaling up testing — to roughly 150 times the current capacity. This is, to put it lightly, extremely ambitious; Romer compared it to building the US’s interstate highways, which took years. Testing at such a level would also take a massive investment in labs and supplies. Even if it’s possible down the line, it’ll take time — months, if not years — to scale up to that point, during which at least some level of social distancing measures will be necessary. But if Romer’s modeling is to be believed and if such a level of testing proves possible — and those are very big ifs — it’s a way out of widespread social distancing even before a vaccine or other treatment is widely available. At the very least, it shows how valuable it would be to simply test many, many more people. There is good empirical evidence that doing what these plans are calling for would work. One of the big lessons from the 1918 flu pandemic, which was linked to up to 100 million deaths globally and about 675,000 deaths in the US, is that early, aggressive, and layered social distancing works — not just to save lives, but to help economies recover after a disease outbreak. In a modern context, South Korea managed to control its coronavirus outbreak with the kind of aggressive testing-and-tracing strategy that all these plans propose.  What’s less clear is if any of these plans are practical or sustainable. These plans require at least weeks of extreme social distancing, followed by months of reduced but still significant social distancing and potentially new waves of lockdowns if coronavirus cases rise again. In total, people could be forced to do a year and a half — or more — of at least some social distancing. That’s … a lot. Less than a month since states issued stay-at-home orders, there have already been cracks in the process. Trump backed down from his hopes of reopening the country by Easter, but he has reportedly continued to push opening the economy soon, even as his experts advise against it. In the middle of an election year, Trump seems particularly eager to get the economy back on track. The general public and other leaders may come to side with Trump as social distancing drags on for months and months. “I don’t think people are prepared for that and I am not certain we can bear it,” Jennifer Nuzzo, a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, previously told Vox. “I have no idea what political leaders will decide to do. To me, even if this is needed, it seems unsustainable.” She added that while she may just be feeling pessimistic, “it’s really hard ... to imagine this country staying home for months.” Further complicating matters is that the benefits of social distancing are largely invisible while they’re occurring — because there’s no clear indication when a coronavirus case or death is avoided. “It’s the paradox of public health: When you do it right, nothing happens,” Tara Smith, an epidemiologist at Kent State University, previously told me. It’s the kind of situation that requires clear leadership from the top. But the US is dealing with this in a fragmented federalist system, with states largely on their own when it comes to public health policy and particularly mandating social distancing. Trump could offer some guidance here, but between denying that coronavirus was a major threat early on and more recently calling for a return to normal, he hasn’t shown he can reliably do that. (To this end, both West Coast and East Coast states have been forced to put together their own regional plans in lieu of a federal strategy.) All of this is likely to fuel greater demand to end social distancing, especially among risk-averse politicians eyeing their reelections. We know the risks: Cities saw resurgences in flu cases in 1918 when they pulled back social distancing measures, and several countries in Asia are seeing second waves as they’ve eased restrictions. But people can be very good at convincing themselves, especially when they’re already suffering, that maybe this time will be different. Meanwhile, the only plan that offers a quicker solution is Romer’s, but it proposes a level of testing that’s hard to imagine. The US has taken months to get to 150,000 tests a day. To get to 20 million would require a massive investment in labs, machines, and testing supplies — which Romer himself compared to building the interstate highway system, one of the most expensive infrastructure projects in US history. It also requires retesting people every two weeks, which a lot of the population just might not be up for. No federal policymaker has called for this level of testing — and some experts are skeptical it can happen. “I’ve talked to some people who want to do 5 million [tests] a day,” Jha, of the Harvard Global Health Institute, said. “I’m like, ‘Okay, let’s calm down.’ I would love to do 5 million a day too, but let’s learn if we can walk before we can run.” That’s the unsatisfying conclusion from reading these plans: While the US can do things to make the situation better, things likely are not going to be okay or normal for months and months. How the country deals with those circumstances and all the uncertainty involved isn’t something any plan can predict. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.     President Donald Trump has made it clear recently he is eager to end social distancing policies and get the country’s economic engine firing again, but a Gallup poll released Tuesday shows that Americans may be reluctant to do so. According to the polling data, just 20 percent of Americans would immediately return to normal activity once state restrictions are lifted, while 71 percent would wait to see whether the change in guidelines led to increased confirmed Covid-19 cases before deciding what to do. And 10 percent would continue limiting social contact regardless of developments. The survey of 3,881 US adults (which has a 3 percentage point margin of error) seems to suggests a disconnect between the Trump administration’s desire to reopen the economy and an American public that wishes to avoid dying from an easily communicable infectious disease. In Monday’s daily coronavirus press conference, Trump said he believes “everybody wants to open” the country back up and that “our people want to get back to work, and I think there’s a pent-up demand like there hasn’t been in a long time.” To this end, he recently announced a new committee tasked with planning and executing the end of social distancing in the country. And he has tweeted that the cure for coronavirus (social distancing and shutting down the economy) could be worse than the disease, recognizing that people need money under capitalism to provide for their basic livelihoods.  But Gallup’s work suggests a concern over the virus that transcends economic concerns. It found that 81 percent of those not currently working would not rush back to normal life should the country be reopened, with 71 percent saying they’d take a wait-and-see approach and 10 percent saying they’d indefinitely limit contact with others.  This is a striking result considering the pandemic has strained the socioeconomic system in unparalleled ways over the first three months of 2020. Over the past three weeks, there have been 16.8 million new initial claims for unemployment as restaurants, retailers, and other nonessential businesses have been shuttered to limit the spread of the virus. Previously, Trump toyed with the idea of easing social distancing guidelines before Easter, and it remains clear he wants to get the economy going again as soon as possible. Nevertheless, senior administration officials responsible for managing public health, like director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Dr. Anthony Fauci, have remained steadfast in their belief that the country should remain closed for the foreseeable future, with some lighter-hit geographic areas possibly opening in about a month. It is not going to be a light switch that we say, OK, it is now June, July or whatever, click, the light switch goes back on,” Fauci told CNN. “It’s going to be depending where you are in the country, the nature of the outbreak that you already experienced, and the threat of an outbreak that you may not have experienced.” It appears the majority of the American public hews closer to the Fauci approach for coming out of pandemic lockdown. Gallup found that people in rural areas were more likely than their suburban and city-dwelling counterparts to want to immediately return to normal activity, and urban areas like New York City have been among the hardest hit, while more rural places, like Wyoming (which recorded its first confirmed Covid-19 related death on Monday) have seen fewer confirmed cases.  The Gallup polling data also shows an ideological split. Party affiliation was the clearest indicator of who might immediately return to normal after social distancing ends. Almost a third (31 percent) of Republicans told Gallup they would immediately return to normal activity, while just 19 percent of independents and 11 percent of Democrats said they would do the same.  Ultimately, it’s not Trump but individual state governors who will make the decision that they feel is best for their states. To that end, several regional groups of states have begun coordinating to plan for an end to social distancing orders. So far, the West Coast states, California, Oregon, and Washington have joined in coordination, as have a consortium of mid-Atlantic and New England states. Regardless of government actions, however, it’s going to be the American people who will decide when, on an individual level, things go back to normal. And while this is just one poll, these results suggest they may be cautious about doing so. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. A campaign-style video President Donald Trump is promoting in an attempt to rewrite the history of his coronavirus response accidentally reveals the truth — that he didn’t really do much during a crucial period in February and early March when the virus was spreading undetected in America, besides downplaying the threat. The video, which premiered during Monday’s unhinged White House coronavirus task force briefing and was then posted to Trump’s Twitter account, features a timeline of what the video refers to as the president’s “DECISIVE ACTION” during that period. But the list of Trump’s anti-coronavirus actions is far shorter than it might appear as it ticks by your screen. For one thing, Trump had little to do with a number of the “actions” highlighted in the timeline. For another, the video includes a number of developments that are really nothing to brag about, such as the first US case being reported on January 20 and the CDC testing debacle that put the US behind the curve compared to other countries that have more successfully handled the coronavirus. And it skips right from early February to March, thereby revealing Trump didn’t do much during a period in which proactive measures could’ve been taken, saving lives and ensuring the country didn’t need to practice the sort of drastic social distancing we’re now enduring in a last-ditch effort to slow the spread. The timeline of Trump's “DECISIVE ACTION” in this video is so sad. The only pre-March thing he can take credit for is restricting travel from China (after virus was already spreading).It highlights 1st reported case & CDC testing debacles as if those are things to brag about! pic.twitter.com/vbshDWJoFU Here are some of the things mentioned in the timeline, followed briefly by the ways they actually illuminate the administration’s failings: 
    Related
   That’s a pretty underwhelming set of actions. And what the video doesn’t include are all the statements Trump made between January and March downplaying the coronavirus — such as his February 26 comment that “when you have 15 [coronavirus cases], and the 15 within a couple of days is going to be down to close to zero, that’s a pretty good job we’ve done.” Or his comment the next day that the virus would go away on its own “like a miracle.”  As of April 14, the US now has more than 587,000 confirmed cases and over 23,500 Covid-19-related deaths. Now, instead of saying the coronavirus will magically go away, Trump has tried to redefine success as keeping the death toll under 100,000. Later Monday, the Trump campaign followed up on the campaign-style video (one that was apparently produced by White House staff) by posting a list of Trump’s coronavirus accomplishments including similarly dubious things, like Trump mentioning the virus during the State of the Union and him talking about it with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi during a February trip.  Look at the things that made the list of Trumps COVID19 achievements just released by the Trump campaign. pic.twitter.com/h6UmmlV1IL But instead of being focused on the coronavirus during that India trip, upon his February 26 return, Trump reportedly chastised a number of government officials over the CDC’s February 25 warning that the virus might cause “severe” disruption to American life — not because he thought the analysis was inaccurate, but because it hurt the stock market.  Heading into a tough reelection contest against former Vice President Joe Biden, Trump is hoping to turn weakness into strength by convincing people that, unlike some in the media, he took the coronavirus seriously from the beginning.  The reality, of course, is that Trump was unprepared. He disbanded the White House’s pandemic preparedness team in 2018, ignored warnings from his top advisers in January and February that the coronavirus could be devastating to the US economy and kill a million or more people, and engaged in wishful thinking until the last possible moment that the coronavirus would miraculously disappear without doing damage to the US economy. Trump’s meltdown on Monday — and, seemingly, his “accomplishments” video — was a reaction to an in-depth story the New York Times published over the weekend that examines his coronavirus failures. The piece is packed with documents, email threads, and on- and off-the-record quotes from government officials — but instead of responding to it on the merits, Trump spent the weekend accusing the Times of fabricating sources. When the Failing @nytimes or Amazon @washingtonpost writes a story saying “unnamed sources said”, or any such phrase where a person’s  name is not used, don’t believe them. Most of these unnamed sources don’t exist. They are made up to defame & disparage. They have no “source”... At this late date, it’s no longer a surprise that Trump is fundamentally incapable of being accountable for anything. (Monday’s briefing came on the one-month anniversary of his proclamation on the state of the US coronavirus crisis: “I don’t take responsibility for anything at all.”) But the new coronavirus timeline video illustrates both the brazenness of Trump’s attempt to rewrite history and the sheer laziness of it. It tries to create the optics of action, but a close look at the things being highlighted as accomplishments reveals there’s really nothing there beyond bluster. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Governors on the East Coast and the West Coast have announced plans to coordinate reopening their economies, consulting health and economic development experts to guide their decisions. President Donald Trump is also putting together his own council to reopen the country’s economy. Among the advisers he might be tapping: his daughter, his son-in-law, and a commerce secretary who reportedly struggles to stay awake in meetings. The president is expected to announce a new task force dedicated to reopening the country as soon as Tuesday, though what it will look like, what it will do, and who it will include remain unclear. It is expected to be headed by Mark Meadows, the former North Carolina Congress member who now serves as the president’s chief of staff. Fox News released a partial list of potential members Monday, including Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross, Agriculture Secretary Sonny Purdue, Transportation Secretary Elaine Chao, and other Cabinet members. The outlet also reported that Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner, the president’s daughter and son-in-law, would also be on the task force.  The inclusion of two of the president’s relatives and a handful of people with no expertise in economics or public health set Twitter on fire Monday afternoon:  Noticing a significant overlap in members between the "Council to Re-Open America" and the "Council That Fucked Everything Up" from last month pic.twitter.com/UELTnH5pom At a press briefing later in the day on Monday, a reporter asked whether Ivanka and Jared would be on the task force, and the president said they would not. Donald Trump lies and exaggerates a lot, so we’ll find out whether they’re in it once it’s announced, but they’ve both been involved in the White House’s coronavirus response.  Buzz of this new task force began last week. (It will be in addition to the coronavirus response task force headed by Vice President Mike Pence.) Administration officials told the Washington Post that it would be a mix of private sector figures and top administration officials, including Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin and economic adviser Larry Kudlow. The name of the group is still being workshopped — at a Friday press briefing, Trump said he calls it the “Opening Our Country Task Force” or “Opening Our Country Council.” He said it will be comprised of “great business leaders” and “great doctors” and will probably be done by teleconference. When asked whether it would be bipartisan, Trump suggested maybe: “Bipartisan? I didn’t even ask. I mean, honestly, I think it’s bipartisan. The one thing I didn’t ask, ‘Are you Republican or a Democrat?’ Hard to believe, but I didn’t ask. So it would be. And I want their views on what they think.” Who is in the group seems like that’s still being workshopped, too.  At the same Monday briefing, Mnuchin said that he had reviewed names of 100 business people who may be chosen for the council. Those people, who he said the White House wants to represent “every single area of the economy,” had not yet been invited. As Politico notes, a lot of names have been floated for who might be on the task force over the past week, including economist Art Laffer, who Fox News host Sean Hannity suggested Trump should appoint, and Blackstone CEO Stephen Schwarzman, a longtime Trump ally. Per Politico: Laffer told Politico on Monday he had not heard from anyone at the White House about the group. And several lobbyists throughout Washington had not heard which, if any, companies would participate in the council. Some lobbyists had been urging CEOs to steer clear of joining the group, given concerns about whether its profile would be high enough for Fortune 500 executives. Other business leaders did not want to attract attention to their companies by joining the council during a national health emergency, after Trump went after 3M and General Motors by name in recent weeks. The president has been eager to get the economy up and running again, sparking concerns he might buck the interests of public health to do so. He initially flirted with the idea of declaring the country back up and running on Easter Sunday but eventually backed off. The White House’s stay-at-home guidance now extends to April 30, and it could be extended again. On Friday, Trump said he would “love” to open the country by May 1, but it’s not guaranteed. “I’m not determined anything. The facts are going to determine what I do. But we do want to get the country open. So important,” he said. To be clear, Trump doesn’t have the authority to mandate the whole country’s economy be opened up for business again. Governors across the country have largely been the ones deciding what to do about coronavirus shutdowns in their respective states, and some have formed regional pacts to decipher the path forward together. But the president, of course, insists he’s calling the shots. ....It is the decision of the President, and for many good reasons. With that being said, the Administration and I are working closely with the Governors, and this will continue. A decision by me, in conjunction with the Governors and input from others, will be made shortly! Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The early numbers from the coronavirus economic crisis are grim. Millions of Americans are waiting for federal help in the form of direct payments, unemployment insurance benefits, or food assistance.  In March, Congress officially passed a $2 trillion stimulus package, called the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, aimed at helping workers, businesses, and states deal with the economic fallout from efforts to curb the coronavirus outbreak. Though relief is on the way, there may be frustrating delays in getting assistance due to the overwhelming demand and unprecedented nature of some of these programs. For instance, there are reports of unemployment websites crashing and jammed phone lines in New York and Florida as state agencies struggle to keep up with so many new people needing services.  The channels for obtaining this stimulus also vary. For some aspects of it, like the $1,200 direct payments that will go out to most workers, the distribution of these funds will largely be automatic if individuals have filed a tax return in the past two years (more on that below). For others, including unemployment insurance and small-business loans, people will have to apply with their individual state agencies and banks.  While the stimulus aims to infuse the economy with support for workers and businesses, there’s still a lot of confusion about how to get that help. Vox has answered nine of your key questions about the stimulus bill below.  Each state has its own unemployment office; if you have been laid off or furloughed from your job, you can file there — either online or by calling.  Each state has its own guidance, but due to high demand, some states are advising people to call on certain days or at certain times depending on the alphabetical order of their last names or order of their Social Security numbers. Many states are also recommending filing online over calling, due to busy phone lines.  Vox has put together a chart of each state’s base weekly unemployment insurance benefits and links to each state’s unemployment website where you can get the process started. The new stimulus will add $600 per week to that base amount for four months, until the end of July.   The delays to sign up will be frustrating.  “Some are much better prepared than others or just have a different timetable. So one of the things we may have to do is get more resources to the state agencies that do this,” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi told Vox on a recent press call.   Part of the reason there’s such a high demand is more people are now eligible for benefits. The CARES Act opened up unemployment benefits to a range of people who weren’t eligible before, including gig economy workers like drivers for Uber or Lyft, freelancers, and independent contractors. Part-time employees who lost their jobs due to the coronavirus will also be covered, as will people who had to stop working to take care of a sick member of their family or homeschool their children. Bottom line: If the coronavirus is responsible for your layoff, furlough, or drastic reduction of your hours — or is preventing you from finding work because fewer employers are hiring — you have a good chance of getting these expanded benefits. It’s worth applying as soon as possible through your state’s website or phone lines, even if you are unsure whether you’ll be covered.  Laid-off or furloughed Americans who file for unemployment through their states will see an extra $600 per week added to that existing state benefit through the end of July. The average benefit in the US is about $385 per week, but some states are more generous than others (for instance, the maximum weekly benefit in Arizona is $240 per week while the maximum weekly benefit in Washington state is $790).  Just the increased $600 per week benefit alone adds up to about $10,000 over four months, said Andy Stettner, a senior fellow at the Century Foundation. It’s an attempt to ease the financial burden of laid-off workers struggling to make ends meet. “That is a way to get a lot more money to people who really need it,” he said. “It has the ability to prevent some of the real damaging parts of unemployment: reducing your savings, food security, having trouble maintaining your housing.” Many states are cautioning they don’t yet know when the additional federal money will show up but are still telling newly laid-off people to file a claim and get the process started. The process could be a bit more complex for contract or self-employed workers who need to file for a newly created program called Pandemic Unemployment Assistance and are waiting for states to set up these programs. Experts said these people should still file claims as soon as possible, rather than waiting. People who were already on unemployment and in the system before the coronavirus hit could see the changes happen the fastest. It could take a bit longer for millions of folks who are filing for unemployment all at once because states are still processing their claims. “The system’s a little clogged up right now,” said Michele Evermore, a senior policy analyst at the National Employment Law Project. “People should keep trying.” Evermore noted that even if some workers are being told they’re not eligible this week, that could change in the coming weeks as states start receiving the federal money.  For more information, check out this guide on how to receive unemployment benefits. Direct payments will be distributed based on the adjusted gross income that’s reported on an individual’s or couple’s 2018 and 2019 tax returns, broken down as follows:  There are also some key nuances to keep in mind:  If you have not filed a tax return for either of those years because your gross income is below the $12,200 threshold or for other reasons that mean you aren’t required to file taxes, the IRS now provides an online form for people to submit their information so they can receive these payments. That form can be accessed, here. Information required for this form includes Social Security number, name, address, and details about dependents. Completing this form does not put people on the hook for any taxes, but it is required to obtain the direct payment, and including bank account deposit information can expedite the processing of that payment.  For more information, check out this explainer from Vox’s Dylan Matthews.  The answer to this question depends on if you have filed taxes in 2018 or 2019.  The “Get My Payment” tool is now live, though it’s faced some glitches. In case you receive an error while trying to use this tool, check back in the coming days: the IRS has said it’s still updating the information for the portal and working on fixing problems that have come up.  The timing of payments will likely depend on how quickly this direct deposit information is processed. People will also be able to check the status of their payment via this tool.  The IRS is also able to mail checks directly to the address listed on the tax return, but mailed checks are expected to take up to 20 weeks, or five months. The Post indicates that individuals receiving checks by mail may not get up them until as late as September. According to USA Today, the earliest round of checks will be sent either later this month or in early May.  There are two main loan programs that include stimulus funds for small businesses and nonprofits: the Economic Injury Disaster Loan Program and the Paycheck Protection Program.  The two offer slightly different options aimed at helping both small businesses and private nonprofits deal with temporary closures and losses that are a result of the coronavirus outbreak.  Here’s what both include:  Applications for the EIDL are handled directly by the Small Business Administration, so organizations can apply directly on the agency’s website. The application is for the broader loan, but businesses can indicate that they want the $10,000 grant as part of it. Any business that feels it has incurred damages since a public health emergency was declared on January 31, 2020, is eligible to apply.  Businesses are able to apply for 2.5 times their monthly payroll costs, up to $10 million, and they can use any funds they receive to cover worker salaries, rent, and utilities. Businesses and nonprofits can apply for the PPP directly with their banks or lenders.  It’s worth noting that businesses and nonprofits can apply to both loan programs and ultimately receive both if they do not use the money for the same purpose. (A business could not use an EIDL loan to pay April payroll and then use PPP to do the same, for example.) Organizations could also refinance an EIDL loan they’ve received since January 31, 2020, into a PPP loan.  For both, businesses and nonprofits are encouraged to apply as quickly as possible given the expectation that there will be high demand for the programs. Since both also have a limited amount of funding, applying sooner is also important in case their allocated funding is fully used. Because the EIDL is already set up, experts tell Vox that the $10,000 grant it provides could be the fastest way for businesses and nonprofits trying to get money more quickly. Once the PPP is fully established, Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin has said that he expects loans will be turned around on the same day as the application. Since PPP is a new program, however, it could take a few days or weeks before it’s fully functional.  The federal government is automatically suspending direct government student loan payments from mid-March until September 30, 2020, which will impact the vast majority of student loan borrowers. Loans that are eligible for suspension include direct loans from the federal government received anytime in the past 10 years. Interest payments on these loans will also be suspended automatically. Students don’t need to take any action for this to go into effect, but they should check their individual loan provider for more information.  Loans that are not eligible to be suspended include those from private lenders like Sallie Mae or Wells Fargo, Federal Family Educational Loans (FFEL) not owned by the US Department of Education, Perkins loans, or loans from states. However, borrowers could consolidate their Perkins loans and FFEL loans into a direct consolidation loan in order to qualify for relief or a zero percent interest rate. If you’re not sure what type of loan you have, you should contact your loan servicer.  If you are still employed and have a stable income right now, you can still keep making payments on your loans, which will go to paying off your accumulated interest and principal. But not every federal loan qualifies; this may only be a good idea if you’re on a standard 10-year loan, not on income-based repayment.  Wage garnishing for those who were previously behind on their federal student loan payments will also be suspended for six months.    Recent college graduates or those who are about to enter the workforce at this time are at a disadvantage when it comes to applying for unemployment benefits because of their limited work history. There’s a provision in a bill from House Democrats that would allow recent college graduates to qualify for something called a “job seekers allowance,” which is about half of the benefits available for the rest of workers. But that didn’t make it into the final CARES Act, and unless Congress includes this in a future relief bill, recent college graduates are in a tough spot to get federal unemployment assistance. So far, there is no national rent or mortgage freeze, but certain states and cities are passing laws or putting in temporary measures to keep people in their homes.  So far, 34 states and Washington, DC, have passed measures to temporarily bar evictions, according to USA Today: Maine, New Hampshire, New York, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, Kentucky, West Virginia, Tennessee, North Carolina, South Carolina, Louisiana, Oklahoma, Texas, Nebraska, Kansas, Wisconsin, North Dakota, Minnesota, Illinois, Michigan, Indiana, Iowa, Arizona, Nevada, California, Oregon, Washington, and Hawaii.  Some municipalities want to go further. The Boston City Council recently passed a nonbinding resolution calling for an end to rent and mortgage collection during the coronavirus outbreak, but it’s not legally binding unless Boston Mayor Marty Walsh or Massachusetts Gov. Charlie Baker agrees to it.  Expanded unemployment insurance will theoretically help people pay their rent, but that program only runs until July — and we still don’t know how long the coronavirus will keep all of us social distancing. Vox recently asked Pelosi whether Congress should pass a rent moratorium. While Pelosi didn’t endorse that idea specifically, she said future bills need to contain stronger provision for renters. “It’s a very big challenge, and it’s frightening to people because they’re shelter[ing] in place and then they’re evicted,” Pelosi told Vox. “What? How do we deal with that? There are some provisions in the CARES Act, we certainly must do more.” Recent bills have added more funding to the SNAP program (also known as food stamps) as well as WIC, a nutrition program focused on providing food for women and children. Additionally, the Department of Agriculture has relaxed requirements for some of the aid it oversees, including coverage of school lunches for children who are now staying at home because of the coronavirus. The CARES Act contains $15 billion for food stamps, $450 million for food banks, and $8.8 billion for childhood nutrition programs. These funds are in addition to money passed in the Families First Act — the second coronavirus relief bill Congress took up. That contained $500 million for WIC and $400 million for the Emergency Food Assistance Program, which helps local food banks procure supplies. Pelosi has made it clear she plans to ask for more money in future bills.  Applications for both SNAP and WIC are handled individually by different states; links to each state’s website can be found here for SNAP and here for WIC. Depending on the state, people are able to apply via phone, online, or in person. Recipients for both programs need to meet eligibility criteria based on income and resources limits (like household assets, etc.). Importantly, you can receive SNAP if you are don’t have a fixed address or a place to stay.  Here’s more information on SNAP eligibility requirements and WIC eligibility requirements. SNAP applications are typically processed within 30 days, though applications can be expedited so benefits start coming in as quickly as within seven days.  Additionally, existing SNAP recipients could see more money directly deposited into their EBT accounts if they aren’t already receiving the maximum amount that each state allocates for their family size. The additional funding in recent stimulus bills is being used to make sure that states could distribute the maximum amount of money every family can receive in both March and April.  Families that have students who were previously receiving reduced or free lunches in school will also receive additional funds to cover these costs. Those that are already on SNAP will see this money added automatically, while those who are not on SNAP will have to fill out an application. This program is being implemented state by state, so applications will be handled directly on state websites; more information is expected as it’s implemented this month.  If you are able to help small businesses struggling with coronavirus closures and workers who are dealing with layoffs, there are several ways you can contribute.  Additionally, if there are other businesses you work with on a regular basis like hairstylists or child care workers who are currently unable to do their jobs, prepay for future sessions now or keep paying the regular amount you would if there were no coronavirus crisis. Journalist Yashar Ali, for example, has a crowdfunding campaign he started to send money to hourly workers who’ve been laid off or negatively affected by business closures related to the coronavirus. Many businesses have also used their social media platforms to let their customers know about other funding campaigns they may be doing as well.  Other organizations working to address the effects of the coronavirus include the National Domestic Workers Alliance, which is raising funds to give out $400 in emergency assistance to home care workers, nannies, and house cleaners; or No Kid Hungry, which is focused on providing food for children who are currently sheltering in place. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. When will social distancing end? When will life return to “normal”? And what will it take to get there?  Scott Gottlieb is a physician and public health expert who served as President Donald Trump’s first FDA commissioner, where he was the rare Trump appointee to win plaudits from both the left and the right. Now he’s a resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute where he’s emerged as a leading voice on the coronavirus response.  Gottlieb is one of the lead authors of a comprehensive roadmap for what it would take to end social distancing and reopen the American economy. The report divides the coronavirus response into four distinct phases (the US is currently in phase one, which requires the strictest social distancing measures) and documents key “triggers” that states need to meet if they want to advance to a phase with less intense social distancing and a somewhat normal economy. It’s exactly what the country needs right now: a specific proposal for what comes next that can actually be analyzed and debated.  Two themes drive this conversation. First, what are the challenges to simply getting out of lockdown? Why doesn’t the US have enough tests yet? What’s stopping it from making more? And second, what does the world look like out of lockdown but before a vaccine is discovered? What’s being imagined here isn’t a return to normal, either socially or economically, but a kind of limbo that it’s not clear America has the political will to sustain and that has few answers for the most vulnerable among us.  You can listen to our full conversation by subscribing to The Ezra Klein Show, available on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, Stitcher, or wherever you get your podcasts. A transcript of our discussion, edited for length and clarity, follows. Many of us are living under lockdown right now, but we remember what normalcy is like. And I think the expectation for many of us is that when lockdown ends, normalcy is what returns. Are we going back to normal any time soon?  I don’t think there’s going to be a binary point in time when we just return to what we were doing. I think world history is permanently altered by this episode.  As long as this pathogen is circulating in the background and we don’t have a vaccine and very effective therapeutics, this is going to alter the way we live and do business. Some of it is going to be subtle. You’ll see businesses advertising deep cleanings. People aren’t going to shake hands as much anymore. Wearing masks in public is going to become more fashionable in Western societies. Some of it’s going to be more profound. I don’t think the marginal customer for a stadium or a concert or a cruise ship is coming back soon. I think people are going to be more circumspect about travel, particularly international travel. Businesses are going to be more circumspect about bringing together large groups of people. So you’re going to see a change in the way we live, in the way we do business.  The question is: Can we get back to our normal level of economic activity with that kind of profound, pervasive change in the way we operate? It may be hard. That’s why I talk about the “80 percent economy.” Your plan divides the coming months into four phases and then it establishes triggers for states to move from one phase into the next. Tell me about those triggers. What we tried to do with the report was create really identifiable milestones and then tie policy decisions to those milestones. One of the very clear milestones that we identify is that 14 days after you have a sustained reduction in new cases, you can start to reopen the economy. You can start to lift stay-at-home orders and allow certain businesses to go back to work in a staggered fashion while still implementing certain restrictions.  But you also need to have the health care capacity to treat everyone. And you need the capacity to test everyone who may present with symptoms of coronavirus. Those were the three milestones that we identified for when you would make a decision to reopen the economy.  I think people understand the social distancing part of phase one. But are we doing enough on the testing and health care side of things in states like California and New York and Washington that are in intense lockdown? Is the huge economic sacrifice being made by the people locking down being matched by a true mobilization on the supply side?   We’re doing a lot to increase testing capacity, but we’re going to hit an upper limit. Getting from 100,000 tests to a million tests is going to be a lot easier than getting from a million tests to 1.5 million tests. The reason is that what we’ve done so far is take platforms and labs that already existed and made them available for coronavirus testing. That’s why we’ve been able to increase testing. By the end of this week, we’ll probably be at a million tests a week in terms of capacity. Next week, we’ll build on that.  But getting to the point where you have a 2-3 million test capacity per week — which is probably where you need to be initially as you do this transition — is going to be very hard. We’ve tapped out the available platforms and now we’re dependent upon creating new platforms and new supply chains to fuel those platforms. We’re approaching an upper limit in spare capacity. The question is how fast can Abbott and other companies build new testing platforms? And how fast can LabCorp and Quest scale up new labs that didn’t exist before? That’s a harder exercise.  When will we get there? I don’t think we’re gonna get there by May. I think that we’re still going to be under-testing relative to what is optimal from a public health standpoint. I think we have the ability to get there by September, but we need to be doing a lot of things right now to invest in that. Congress is going to need to ultimately act.  I’ve been looking at every one of the plans people have released for how to get the economy back up and running. Your plan, the Center for American Progress plan, the Harvard Safra Center plan, Paul Romer’s plan for mass testing. One thing I see in all of them is massive scaled-up testing. You talk about a couple of million a week. Some of those plans talk about a couple of million a day. Romer’s plan talks about 22 million a day.  So a huge question in all this seems to me to be: What are the constraints on how rapidly we can build up testing?  What we did up until now is stand up existing labs — we got them working on coronavirus tests. Now we’re going to be at a constraint in terms of not having available platforms. We’ve got to build more machines to actually run the tests. Building that hardware takes time. Deploying that hardware takes time.  The other limiting factor is the testing supply chain. It’s not the machines that we might not be able to build. We’re not going to have enough reagents or enough plastic tips to pipette samples, or enough plastic cartridges to put the samples in. We’re actually running short of swabs to swab people’s noses. It’s all the low-margin commodity products in the testing supply chain that we’re now having problems obtaining. That’s the weak link in the supply chain. We never envisioned being in shortage of swabs for nasal pharyngeal swabs or reagents. That’s what’s happening now.  Is this a situation where the resources exist and they need to be directed and mobilized through some kind of central planning, say the Defense Production Act? Or is this something where even if you put into play that level of aggressive direction, you still couldn’t get the resources you need to make this work?  I don’t know how much you can just create new manufacturing for some of these commodity products because the starting materials are the weak link in the supply chain. Even if you had extra manufacturing for, let’s say, N95 masks, the actual ingredient that goes into making those masks is manufactured outside the US — it would be hard to scale a new manufacturer for that. That’s what’s in shortage right now.  With respect to the point of care tests that I think we’re going to need, those are made by companies like Abbott and Becton Dickinson. And those companies control their entire supply chain. They make their own swabs, their own pipette tips, their own cartridges, and the toaster-sized box. That’s a supply chain that could be scaled a little more easily because they control it.  I want to talk about what your plan called the “comprehensive Covid-19 surveillance system.” On the one hand, you’ve got widespread and rapid testing. But then there’s what you call the “national sentinel surveillance system.” This is a way you can check the background rate of infection and do contact tracing. And there’s a lot of discussion about whether you could do IT-based contact tracing where people download an app — which seems to be happening to some degree in Taiwan.  This seems to me to be another area where at scale really helps. But the idea that every American is going to download an app that lets the government or some company trace who they’ve been near and who they’ve touched would require a very big cultural shift, especially in a moment of low trust in politics or corporations. Can you talk a bit about what a robust contact-tracing regime could look like and what you think the obstacles to getting there might be?  I don’t think we’re going to get to that kind of an app in the United States and I don’t think we should be doing that. I think where technology could be very helpful, though, is when it comes to case-based interventions and self-isolation.  If we end up identifying people when they have mild disease or asymptomatic disease, then we can ask them to voluntarily self-isolate or we can enforce that self-isolation. I think we should be asking people to self-isolate and enforcing it. Simply asking for voluntary compliance with self-isolation may not be enough. But we could use tools to enforce that self-isolation as opposed to public health workers to make it more efficient: text messaging people every day and asking, are you home? That would be the least invasive. Or requiring them to download an app and tracking their phone to make sure they haven’t physically separated from their phone.  The flip side of this is that you don’t want to impose restrictions that alienate individuals or make people concerned about their privacy. If you do, then you’re gonna discourage people from going out and getting tested and self-identifying when they have coronavirus. That’s the last thing you want. You want people to be encouraged to get tested and identified and diagnosed with coronavirus.  We need to balance whatever we impose against not discouraging people from actually getting tested. Where that line is is a debate we need to have. When people are identified as being positive with coronavirus, what do we ask them to do?   In the report, when you say we need to massively scale contact tracing, what does that look like?  At a basic level, it’s what states like Massachusetts are doing right now. They’re hiring 1,000 public health workers to do contact tracing. When they identify people with an infection, they’ll interview them. They’ll talk to them about who they might have been in contact with. They’ll trace down those individuals. They’ll ask them if they have signs or symptoms of coronavirus. They may ask them to get tested. They may ask some of them to self-isolate for a period of time, depending on the level of exposure and the likelihood that they could have could be infected. That’s the traditional boots on the ground work of public health.  We don’t have the capacity to do that at scale right now. We’ve underinvested in public health infrastructure for years. If there was a large outbreak in a city it would very quickly overwhelm the capacity of any city’s public health infrastructure to do that at scale. So we need to build that out. Now, you can use technology with respect to the case-based interventions in the self-isolation to augment. But you can’t use technology to augment all of it. Ultimately, you need people doing this work.   That brings us to the triggers for moving to phase two. If there’s a sustained reduction in cases for at least 14 days in a state, the state’s hospitals can safely treat all patients requiring hospitalization, the state is able to test all people with Covid-19 symptoms and is able to conduct active monitoring of confirmed cases and their contacts, your plan says that the state can begin to reopen and move into phase two.  Tell me what you think will reopen when we go state by state. I don’t think you mean that you can have an NBA game again. So if you manage to get to phase two, what kind of economy are we looking at? What is opened and what isn’t?  I think it’s going to be a gradual reintroduction of activity. You’ll probably lift the stay-at-home orders, but you’ll tell people to wear a mask if they go out for a period of time. You’ll allow certain businesses to go back to work, but you’ll tell businesses that they have to put certain restrictions in place to try to reduce the number of people who congregate together — basically maintain some social distancing in the workplace. You want to reduce human-to-human interaction as much as possible while having a functioning economy, allowing people to reengage in normal activity.  What’s going to be last to be introduced? It’s going to be places where a lot of people crowd indoors for purely entertainment purposes: bars, venues, concerts, clubs — things like that are going to be the last to open up.  What about those who are especially vulnerable to coronavirus — the elderly, the immunocompromised, those with lung damage. What kind of normalcy returns for them, if any? Or are they in a position of essentially self-isolation until there is a vaccine?  There’s a difference between what the government requires you to do and what you choose to do. I think there might be guidance that people who are in a vulnerable position with respect to this virus should avoid going out for a longer period of time. You’re not going to be pulling people’s licenses in the street and checking their age, but there might be some strong recommendations as certain individuals delay their reintroduction. I think people who are older or vulnerable are going to make decisions to limit their activity. That’s why I talk about the 80 percent economy. What you’re saying is that for the many people who are especially vulnerable, this is going to be a rough year. The most vulnerable among us are going to have to follow these restrictions through the fall; at the same time, everyone else is going to be moving around in a way that makes them more of a health threat.  I think about this myself. If social distancing is lifted because San Francisco or California has managed to make it to phase two, it becomes more dangerous for me to go see my parents because I’ve been in contact with more people. So in a perverse way, as the rest of the country becomes less isolated again, the people who are the most vulnerable might become yet more isolated because the folks who were being careful before now pose a higher risk.  I think the things that could really tip that balance is a very aggressive health monitoring system and a testing regime where you’re testing so many people on a daily basis for coronavirus that you’re likely to surface an outbreak when it’s only hundreds of cases, not thousands. If you can demonstrate that to people, it’s going to inspire a lot of confidence and people will feel fairly comfortable going out again. But if you don’t have that in place, your risk can be quite high and nobody knows it. That’s an uncomfortable position. If that’s the situation in perpetuity, people are going to be more reluctant to go out.  Phase three, which is a much more normal phase of life, works off of the development of vaccines and therapeutics. Where do you think we are on that front and what do you think is plausible in terms of therapeutics, let’s say, by the end of the year?  We’re not going to have a vaccine by the end of the year. We need to assume that a vaccine may be two years away. So we need other technology. If you look at what could be available by the fall, it’s a small subset of drugs. I would be focusing attention and resources on working aggressively with those manufacturers to try to pull those products through the development process and understand whether they are safe and effective.  What are those drugs? One is an antiviral drug — it inhibits viral replication. And it’s pretty far along. There’s data available right now that suggests that it’s active. A lot of doctors are using it. The other products are therapeutic antibodies. These are basically biotech manufactured antibodies — the same kind of antibody your body would produce if it is exposed to the virus in order to fight the virus if you’re exposed again.  That’s an attractive product for a number of reasons: First, it can be used as a treatment early in the disease. It can also be used as a prophylaxis — as a bridge to a vaccine. You might be able to give a monthly injection or bi-monthly injection to people that would prevent them from getting infections. You can use that for frontline health care workers. You can use it for TSA agents or food handlers who are coming into contact with a lot of people and more likely get infected and then spread the infection. You can use it in the contacts of someone who is sick to prevent them from getting sick. That could be a very attractive drug.  The combination could be very effective if you can have both of those by the fall: a treatment to help people who are infected and an antibody that can help prevent infection in those who are exposed. That’s a pretty potent combination.  The biggest obstacle is going to be manufacturing them at scale. That’s something we could solve for right now. We should be working on how we’re going to make investments to help these companies scale up manufacturing and get to large commercial scale manufacturing in time for the fall so that if one of them does work, we’re able to turn on the spigot and produce millions of doses a month. That’s the kind of position you want to be in.  There was money set aside in a recent congressional bill that set aside upwards of 10 billion dollars to do just this. That needs to be implemented. The companies need to be aware of it and pursue those opportunities. You need the agencies working to stand that up so that all has to happen. That’s the kind of thing I think we should be focused on right now.   In phase three you also talk about using serological surveys to determine population immunity. I’ve seen conflicting reports on whether people who’ve gotten coronavirus are immune. What is your best guess on that? If we had that serological testing, would it even matter?  Serological testing is important for understanding where the virus has been and who’s been exposed. It could be important for decisions about returning to work in certain professions where there’s gonna be high exposure like police officers or EMT workers or doctors and nurses. But by and large, what we’re going to find is that a very small percentage of the population has actually been exposed to this virus. If you talk to the modelers and the experts, they say anywhere from 1 to 5 percent of the US population has probably been exposed to this virus already.  If you look at the data coming out of Europe where they’re already using serology, it’s in the 5 percent range. So the idea that 30 or 40 percent of the population has had this virus is going to turn out not to be the case. It’s going to turn out to be a small percentage of the population — certainly in the single digits — that have the level of antibodies needed for immunity. And it’s not going to be enough to create herd immunity. It’s also not going to be enough to have this pool of people that can just return to work.  One of the things that worries me going forward is it has been hard enough to get states into phase one — not every state is there, even as we speak. Then if you move into phase two, I think there’s going to be a lot of relief. But something that is planned for in your proposal — and that we’re seeing in other places like Singapore — is that you may have to bounce back and forth between phase one and phase two for a while.  A president who clearly wants to get out of phase one as quickly as possible is not going to be excited in an election year about reestablishing it. It seems that the obstacles to being able to dance back and forth are very high. But if we don’t, we could end up back in a very, very difficult situation. I’m curious how you think about these obstacles.  I think there will be political obstacles, not just at a national level but at a local level as well. Ultimately these decisions are going to be made by mayors and governors — and that’s going to be hard because being the city that shuts down activity while the rest of the country is humming is not going to be in your best interest.  If you look at the history of this outbreak and this epidemic, Seattle should have taken more aggressive steps earlier. They kept the activity humming along far longer than they should have. That would have been the first city to really start to shut down economic activity and you saw a reluctance to do it.  So I think that’s going to be a challenge when you have outbreaks in cities: At what point do cities pull the trigger and start to shut down economic activity, not just to prevent spread in their cities but also to prevent spread more broadly in the United States?  This is going to be hard at a national level. But I’m more worried about the local decision-making and people being reluctant to take steps that could serve the national interests but maybe serve their local interests not quite as well.   You can listen to the full episode by subscribing to The Ezra Klein Show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, Stitcher, or wherever you get your podcasts. For more on this topic, I looked at not just the AEI plan but three others for this piece. I thought immersing myself in the plans to reopen the economy would be some comfort. Boy, was I wrong.  Also, Matt Yglesias and I discussed the AEI plan and three others on this episode of The Weeds last week.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  What will America look like on the other side of coronavirus? It’s hard to imagine a crisis of this magnitude not altering our society in profound ways. But the shape those changes might take is very much in question.  America’s hyper-individualistic culture may be harder to sustain after this, given the collective sacrifices we’ve all been asked to make. The idea of a universal basic income (UBI), long considered a nonstarter in American politics, seems way more plausible now. A health care system that ties coverage to employment and leaves people vulnerable when the economy tanks is certainly harder to defend at this point.  Rebecca Solnit has been writing about the social implications of disasters for years. Her 2009 book, A Paradise Built in Hell, was about how crises reveal our deep need for purpose and solidarity and create opportunities for community that are rarely found in everyday life.   They also, as she argued in a recent New York Times piece, pave the way for revolutionary transformations. “Every disaster shakes loose the old order,” Solnit writes. “The sudden catastrophe changes the rules and demands new and different responses, but what those will be are the subject of a battle.” I spoke to Solnit, who has just released a new memoir, by phone about this disaster and how it might change our society forever. A lightly edited transcript of our conversation follows.  You’ve argued that moments like this, moments of real crisis, present rare opportunities for dramatic change. How so? The first thing that a disaster represents is a failure of authorities to protect their people. It’s a sense that the people in charge aren’t really in charge because the crisis has outstripped their capacity to respond. That’s one layer. And, of course, there’s a huge difference between those who respond well and those who respond badly. Secondly, everybody’s life suddenly changes and often it’s a moment in which people become far clearer about what really matters and what doesn’t. I remember just before 9/11 there were a lot of essentially trivial scandals in the headlines and nobody was thinking about our foreign policy in the Middle East and the ways in which the Bush administration was failing on a grand scale. And then all of a sudden things crystallize for people in a dramatic way.  But what does that change look like on a more individual level, a more personal level? Well, I’ve written about a transformed internal sense where people feel closer to mortality, their own and other’s mortality, in the ways that can make them feel it’s more urgent to lead life according to their values, according to what really matters. But beyond that, we suddenly all have something in common. Some of the real and some of the arbitrary walls between us fall away. There’s often a deep sense of communitarian fellowship that can be profound in these moments of shared suffering and sacrifice. You can see it time and again, whether it’s a local disaster like Hurricane Katrina or an earthquake in San Francisco or some kind of international crisis that devours a whole country or region.  I was in Louisiana when Katrina hit and it was striking to watch this storm shake everyone out of their collective stupor in such a radical way. It was like the floor had suddenly dropped out beneath all of us, and everyone had to attend to the present at the same time. Yes! Disasters shake us up. I’ve called them a crash course in Buddhism. You’re suddenly aware of ephemerality and interdependence, the fleetingness of all things, and the connection of all things. Often that connection is a deep empathic, emotional connection for their neighbors and people undergoing the same experience that people don’t necessarily feel at other times. We often experience everyone around us primarily in terms of their differences rather than the commonalities. A disaster changes that in an instant.  I want to stick to this theme of government failure and the potential for societal transformation. My sense is that these moments have a way of heightening the contradictions of a society and forcing a collision with them. I’m curious what contradictions or illusions you think have been shattered by this pandemic. That’s a great question and a big one. I think economic inequality is in stark relief right now and other things like the toxicity of domestic violence. Home is supposed to be the safest place we can be — it’s where we’re all confined right now — and we’re being reminded that for some of us it’s the most dangerous place to be.  Homelessness is another issue. San Francisco, where I live, has a major homeless problem and now all of a sudden it has found the capacity to put large percentages of our homeless populations into hotel rooms. We’re supposed to believe something like that is impossible but in moments like this, we can see that it’s extremely possible.  The status quo perpetuates itself by convincing us that change is inconceivable, impossible, and unnecessary, and then suddenly it becomes conceivable, possible, and necessary. This is the biggest illusion that gets shattered in these moments.  Can I say one other thing about this? Sure. It’s interesting how a disaster does what activists are always trying to do — point out the contradictions. How does the medical system actually function? Who does it leave behind? How does the economy function? Who does it leave behind? In the aftermath of something like this, the answers are so clear. Who benefits from the status quo is so clear.  And so you’ll always have the winners of the old system pushing hard to reassemble it after it’s shattered in front of our eyes. But the status quo is dead. And the rest of us are saying, “Let’s go forward. Let’s not go back. Let’s go another way.” I do feel like we already had an economy in which so many people’s lives were so profoundly desperate, including in this country, whether it was hungry children, people crushed by medical debt, or dying for lack of medical coverage, and working full-time and unable to make basic living expenses without the right to organize at work.  But now that the contradictions are heightened, to use your word, we at least have a chance to see what’s broken and build something new.  Well, we’re in an interesting situation right now, one that could break any number of ways. We’ve witnessed what I think by any fair measure is a massive failure of government to protect the population. Will we, in retrospect, see this as a turning point of the sort we haven’t seen since Chernobyl in the former Soviet Union where the collapse of faith in government was enough to pave the way for a new order? One of the bizarre things about life under Trump is that there’s the 40 percent who will believe in him no matter what. A lot of my friends have been joking that a pandemic is essentially shooting a lot of people on Fifth Avenue and getting away with it. A lot of us were already so disillusioned that almost nothing could disillusion us more.  It’s been an odd situation, the long crisis of Trump, in that there’s so little movement. But I think this may remind people of the importance of good government and not “Big Government” in the ways Republicans railed about it, but adequately sized government that can deal with crises. Of course, the great hope of a lot of us, me included, is that this awareness will transfer to climate change where we’ve been asking people to make profound changes in everyday life, mostly for things that haven’t happened yet or are impacting other places and people. Maybe this will be a crash course in thinking systematically and the importance of preparing for things that haven’t happened yet. I don’t know how this doesn’t undermine the argument that we don’t need government, that we don’t need to plan for the Black Swans, the rare but powerful events, that we don’t need universal health care and the like. We’ve had this cowboy philosophy since Reagan that says we don’t need anything but ourselves — that can’t survive contact with a real disaster.  Maybe you’re right, but I’m not so sure. I think a lot about how reality intersects with ideology, especially when the gap between the two becomes impossible to ignore. And people always seem to find ways to keep their bullshit story about the world intact no matter how deeply reality intrudes.  There are always people who claim the right to dominate facts and truth and evidence. There are always people who treat facts and science like they aren’t non-negotiable things we have to respond to. It’s a kind of free market mentality applied to ... everything. But it’s just a way of bullying the facts into submission. That’s all Trumpism is.  But a pandemic is unique in that it can’t be bullied into submission. The virus can’t be wished away or ignored. You have to respond to it on its terms. It’s contagious, it’s deadly, it does this, it requires that, it won’t go away by saying “We can all go back to work now.” It just doesn’t work like that.  In the end, I’m always interested in possibilities. I look for hope in all the dark stuff, and I focus on the absolute unknowability of the future. The way that you and I and everyone else in most parts of the world are living today is something that was pretty unimaginable on New Year’s Day 2020. And so, I don’t know what’s going to happen, but I do know this is a “reality bites back” situation and a lot of people are quite possibly waking up to what matters and what works and what doesn’t matter and what doesn’t work. Going forward, a lot of what happens in terms of transforming societies depends on transforming governmental systems and that depends on how we tell the story of what happened. I’m hoping we tell the story of how limited this pandemic could have been in this country, how different it could have all been had we had a competent government that took it seriously rather than refuse to do what was necessary to slow it down. What do you think America looks like after coronavirus? How will the fault lines of American life be altered?  A huge portion of people lost their living and, presumably, we’re not going to let them become homeless and starve to death in those numbers. Preventing this from happening is going to mean recognizing how many jobs were not providing basic necessities as people worked full-time for a minimum wage and still couldn’t afford a two-bedroom apartment anywhere in the US, still had kids who went hungry, et cetera. I think we’re going to have to look at universal basic incomes and other social safety nets that allow people to survive in the free market system we have. We’re going to have to think about economies in radical new ways. The argument for basic health care, for universal health care, for stronger social programs, for relief from crushing debt, for housings rights for vulnerable communities — this isn’t abstract anymore, it’s all around us. I don’t think that the pandemic makes the case for us, but I think it makes the case we’ve already been making a lot more urgent and obvious. We will be pushing back against people who will be denying the reality of that suffering, blaming the victims for it, or coming up with false solutions for it. I guess I’ll wind all this up with one of my favorite anecdotes, which is about the Native American leader Sitting Bull. After his defeat, he joined Buffalo Bill’s Wild West circus and was well compensated but gave all his money away to distraught, starving street urchin kids who were coming to peek through holes in the tents and hang around outside.  His pronouncement on what he saw could stand for capitalism in general. “The white man is good at production but bad at distribution.” That’s apocryphal, but I’ve always felt that it addresses the fact that we’ve always had enough to go around, but we’ve always created systems that prevent it from going around. I hope this crisis forces us to see that problem with fresh eyes — and maybe also see the solutions. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. On the one month anniversary of President Donald Trump proclaiming “I don’t take responsibility at all” for problems with the government’s response to the Covid-19 pandemic, the president on Monday melted down on national TV in one of his more memorable scenes during the daily White House coronavirus press briefing. He went on to claim his “authority is total” as president.  The impetus for Trump’s spiral is a New York Times report published on Saturday under the headline, “He Could Have Seen What Was Coming: Behind Trump’s Failure on the Virus.” The piece details how Trump “was warned about the potential for a pandemic ... [but] internal divisions, lack of planning and his faith in his own instincts led to a halting response.” The piece is packed with documents, email threads, and on-and-off-the-record quotes from government officials — all of it backed up by Trump’s public statements at the time. Trump, however, rejected the idea that he could have known how bad the virus could get. Instead, on Monday, he attempted to blame the media.  Trump kicked things off by playing a compilation of TV news clips to the reporters in the briefing room meant to show that they were just as guilty as he was of downplaying the threat of the coronavirus in January, February, and March.  This is so bonkers. Trump is now playing TV clips back to the media to make it seem as though they were complicit in downplaying the coronavirus. pic.twitter.com/lmzc4QDnzK The difference, however, is that Trump either ignored or wasn’t informed about White House memos written in January and February by his top advisers which explained that the coronavirus pandemic could kill millions of Americans. Not only that, but as late as February 28, Trump was claiming that the coronavirus would go away on its own, “like a miracle.” Monday’s presser is an example of a larger goal for Trump. In recent weeks he’s attempted to rewrite history and paint himself in a better light. The compilation of video clips, which appeared similar to a campaign ad, was designed to make Trump look like he took coronavirus seriously from day one.   It was even accompanied by dramatic music. Watch for yourself: Straight up North Korea-style propaganda going on right now in the White House briefing room. Get a load of the dramatic music. pic.twitter.com/p3KO6Ap2Sp One of the first questions Trump received was from ABC’s Jon Karl, who remarked on the oddness of the video presentation.  “I’ve never seen a video like that played in this room,” Karl began. “It looked a bit like a campaign ad. Who produced that for you?” “That was done by a group in the office,” Trump said, basically copping to using public resources for political purposes. Trump ultimately refused to admit to making a single mistake during the coronavirus response, even though the United States has more total cases (over 582,000) and more deaths (more than 23,000) than any other country as of April 13.  Beyond the bizarre video presentation, the other objective of Trump’s Monday briefing seemed to be to establish that he has absolute power to overrule Democratic state governors if they object to his plans to relax social distancing as soon as possible. “When somebody is the president of the United States, the authority is total,” Trump said at one point. “And that’s the way it’s gotta be. It’s total.” TRUMP: "When somebody is the president of the United States, the authority is total. And that's the way it's gotta be. It's total." pic.twitter.com/zIuiBn1Mhw Trump’s claim is false — governors have broad authority to close schools and businesses in their states. Unsurprisingly, when Trump pushed to articulate a legal justification for his position, he couldn’t come up with anything.  REPORTER: In regard to some of your tweets earlier today, what provision in the Constitution gives the president the power to open or close state economies? TRUMP: "Numerous -- numerous provisions. We can give you a legal brief if you want." (He never named one.) pic.twitter.com/nMzmbgEGYJ But later, Vice President Mike Pence backed up Trump by saying “I support the president’s leadership under the national emergency declaration he signed.” The irony is that while Trump claims to have dictatorial power, state governors keep calling on him to do more to provide them with the medical supplies they need to make sure each Covid patient can receive adequate medical care. Characteristically, Trump on Monday lied about this state of affairs by claiming “nobody is asking for ventilators.” (Maryland’s Republican governor, Larry Hogan — chair of the National Governors Association — said on Sunday’s installment of This Week that “to say that everybody is completely happy and we have everything we need is not quite accurate.”) But conveying truthful information is not the point of these briefings. Instead, Trump’s objective is to reframe problems as the result of unfair media coverage and feed red meat to his base by sparring with reporters. On Monday, Trump attacked two female reporters — Paula Reid of CBS and Kaitlan Collins of CNN — when they dared to ask him questions about the government’s slow coronavirus response and his dictatorial statements, respectively.  “You are so disgraceful,” Trump admonished Reid at one point. “You know you’re a fake.” Trump to @PaulaReidCBS, who asked him about the slow federal coronavirus response: "You are so disgraceful ... you know you're a fake." pic.twitter.com/6iKl6eyPX3 That part of these coronavirus briefings is clearly kayfabe — part of the Trump show. But amid a pandemic, the dictatorial theatrics are less amusing than ever. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. For many of you, it probably feels as though it’s long past time we got to thinking about how to reopen society. We learned today that some of the public officials who will make those decisions have started doing so. Governors across the mid-Atlantic, from New England to Delaware, are working on a “regional reopening plan.” And the West Coast’s three governors announced shared principles that will guide their decisions to reopen. This is no time to celebrate, not with 22,000 people dead and more sadly to come, but life after coronavirus is becoming less of a hypothetical by the day. There are a few important scientific questions and pursuits that will underline those decisions. Many of these are within our control — testing, treatments, etc. — but there is one critical issue that is not: immunity to the coronavirus itself. Let’s start with this first group before turning to the second. On mass testing, as my colleague German Lopez wrote last week, America has still not achieved the level of testing we would like. In our latest update, by my and Rani Molla’s count, the US was still testing half as many people per capita as Italy (one of Europe’s epicenters) and Germany (a model for rapid testing). Our efforts would also be aided by serological testing, which tells us whether somebody has built up antibodies to resist the coronavirus — and is therefore more likely to be immune. Though serological testing has its limits (more on that later), Vox’s Umair Irfan covered the major implications of what that kind of testing could do at length earlier this month: In patients who have recovered from Covid-19 or may have carried the virus without realizing it, a serological test can show who carries antibodies, even if the virus is no longer present. Antibodies are proteins that help the immune system identify and eliminate threats. Once they’re made, they help the body neutralize future infections from the same threat. Establishing who is immune is important for figuring out who can safely return to work. For example, health workers are facing staffing shortages as Covid-19 spreads through their ranks, and serological tests may soon become necessary to keep hospitals and clinics running. These tests are also a forensic tool, tracing the spread of the virus through a population. This can solve some of the unknowns of the Covid-19 outbreak and help scientists get ahead of the next pandemic. Countries like China and Singapore have already used serological tests for contact tracing to see how the virus has spread. And, as Matt Yglesias reported over the weekend, every American will be able to get an antibody test for free. There are other relevant and related threads here. Can we come up with a reliable clinical regimen to treat Covid-19 in people who get infected? (More from Umair.) Can we eventually develop a vaccine? (A comprehensive guide from Umair, Brian Resnick, and Julia Belluz is here.) Oh, and don’t forget, we still don’t know how the coronavirus will behave when the weather changes.  If you want to know how all these things might merge together to answer the question of “When will life start going back to normal?”, Robin Wigglesworth at the Financial Times shared this graphic on Twitter, crediting it to Morgan Stanley: Morgan Stanley: “While we understand the desire for optimism, we also caution that the US outbreak is far from over. Recovering from this acute period in the outbreak is just the beginning and not the end. We believe the path to re-opening the economy is going to be long.” pic.twitter.com/dnrcTS89SV I wouldn’t take that timeline to the bank, by any means, but it’s useful in illustrating how smart people whose money will depend on a functioning economy — and healthy consumers — are thinking about it.  Many of these things — mass testing, antibody testing, cures, vaccines, ending social distancing — are within human control, at least to some degree. But there is one big variable that is left only to nature: immunity itself.  Most laypeople, including me, might think of immunity in pretty simple terms: You get infected by a virus, your body builds up antibodies to fight it off, and you are now immune from the virus because you have those antibodies.  But it’s not so simple. Immunity is a fickle science, as epidemiologist Marc Lipsitch lays out in a must-read op-ed for the New York Times: Immunity after any infection can range from lifelong and complete to nearly nonexistent. So far, however, only the first glimmers of data are available about immunity to SARS-CoV-2, the coronavirus that causes Covid-19. What can scientists, and the decision makers who rely on science to inform policies, do in such a situation? The best approach is to construct a conceptual model — a set of assumptions about how immunity might work — based on current knowledge of the immune system and information about related viruses, and then identify how each aspect of that model might be wrong, how one would know and what the implications would be. Next, scientists should set out to work to improve this understanding with observation and experiment. Lipsitch is a very accessible writer, so I’d encourage you to read his thoughts in full. But these were my main takeaways from his piece: But to bring us full circle, it’s difficult to ascertain herd immunity without widespread diagnostic and serological testing. The faster we can ramp up those capabilities, the more information we will have to make smart decisions about reopening society. ”Getting a handle on this fast is extremely important: Not only to estimate the extent of herd immunity but also to figure out whether some people can re-enter society safely, without becoming infected again or serving as a vector, and spreading the virus to others,” Lipsitch writes. “Central to this effort will be figuring out how long protection lasts.”  The questions about immunity are clear. Now we need to find the answers. Thankfully, the brightest minds are already hard at work to do exactly that. This story appears in VoxCare, a newsletter from Vox on the latest twists and turns in America’s health care debate. Sign up to get VoxCare in your inbox along with more health care stats and news.  Get our newsletter in your inbox once a week. Are you interested in more discussions around health care policy? Join our Facebook community for conversation and updates. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. We now know the coronavirus pandemic can’t be fought without widespread testing to find out who has the disease. Developed countries that have managed to keep their case counts and deaths tolls low or bring them way down — including Iceland, Germany, and South Korea — have generally tested a greater proportion of their population than the United States. It’s especially critical for finding those people who may be spreading the virus without showing symptoms.  With the most confirmed cases and confirmed fatalities in the world and a devastating spike in unemployment, the US situation is stunningly costly and the response inadequate. The status quo is untenable. To truly end the crisis, keep deaths low, and allow the economy to recover, testing has to happen on an enormous scale.  How enormous?  Vox’s Ezra Klein has gone through some of the major proposals from several think tanks and researchers mapping the routes out of the pandemic. All of them involve testing huge numbers of people. One of the lower-end benchmarks estimates the US will need 750,000 tests per week. The high-end proposal, from Nobel laureate economist Paul Romer, starts at 22 million tests per day and goes up. And not just one test per person, but repeated testing over time.  Test millions. Test early. Test late. Test over and over. Test until the whole damn pandemic is over.  Following through on this would require a massive increase in government funding, huge numbers of workers trained to administer the tests, and the coordination of raw materials, manufacturing, and delivery across the entire global economy. It’s a costly, brute-force approach. But it may be the only way out of the expensive and blunt measures already deployed to control the pandemic, from social distancing to shelter-in-place orders.  Right now, however, the US is struggling to test even 100,000 people per day, so getting to the scale some researchers suggest would demand a huge ramp up in capacity. Yet, they say, it’s possible to do it. And despite the immense financial and social costs of a national testing system, it may yet be the cheapest path to reopening the economy.   SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19, is almost perfectly optimized to infect huge swaths of a population. For one, it can spread directly and easily between people in close contact. Yet the symptoms of Covid-19 can be confusing, varying person to person, making it tricky to identify suspected cases. Meanwhile, asymptomatic carriers — up to half of the total number infected — can spread the virus unwittingly for weeks, triggering outbreaks in their wake. The virus can also turn dangerous and deadly in some people, particularly high-risk populations. But it can also be dangerous in a small percentage of otherwise healthy people.  While most can fight off the infection on their own, an epidemic like the one the US is facing with hundreds of thousands of infected people means tens of thousands will need to be hospitalized. Those patients in urgent or critical care can then spread the virus to health workers — a particular problem because of the shortage of personal protective gear — who end up sidelined and further strain the capacity of the health system to care for the sick. And since it’s a new virus, there is no cure, vaccine, or widespread immunity to SARS-CoV-2.  Controlling the spread of the pandemic, then, demands finding the infected and isolating them until they can no longer spread the disease, alongside broader measures like social distancing. With an untold number of asymptomatic carriers, the only option to find out who truly has the virus is to test. Meanwhile, a lack of testing hampers the response to the virus. Health officials can’t preempt outbreaks in new regions. The threat then silently persists, infecting, killing, and draining resources.  The main kind of test needed is one that looks for active infections, like RT-PCR tests that can detect the virus’s genetic material. There are also cheaper and faster serological, or antibody, tests that can identify past infections. But to control ongoing spread, screening for active infections is critical. It’s hard to overstate the enormity of the challenge of ending a pandemic.  Gregory Gray, an infectious disease epidemiologist at Duke University, explained that while the virus is spreading rapidly, the major epidemics seen so far in several countries are still only infecting a tiny sliver of the overall population. Even if one were to presume that the roughly 1.5 million cases diagnosed around the world so far represent a quarter of the total number of the infected, those 6 million infections leave more than 99 percent of the population still at risk of eventual SARS-CoV-2 infection.  “No matter whether you live in an area where transmission has been high (Hubei [China], Italy, New York City) or relatively low, there remain many susceptible people,” Gray said in an email. The reproduction rate of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in a population, a variable known as R0, also remains high in many parts of the world.  When the R0 is greater than 1, the outbreak continues. When less than 1, the outbreak will end. A recent paper from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) calculated that the virus had a median R0 of 5.7 during the outbreak in Wuhan, China, up from prior R0 estimates ranging between 2.2 and 2.7.  
    Related
   The magnitude of this problem — and the threat of having tens of thousands or more severely ill people requiring hospitalization at the same time — is why so many parts of the world are being forced to deploy drastic, onerous measures, like lockdowns and aggressive social distancing.  But replacing these tactics would require something just as massive to halt the spread of the virus, let alone gain ground against it, explained Danielle Allen, director of Harvard University’s Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics.  So testing has to occur on a vastly larger scale if it is going to help relax or replace social distancing. Right now, there are still not enough tests in the US to meet all the clinical needs, let alone widespread population testing. The health sector is focusing on testing patients who are symptomatic and people who think they may have been exposed. That leaves a huge segment of the population untested and potentially spreading the disease.  To end the pandemic, the US instead needs to actively seek out potential spreaders, particularly the asymptomatic spreaders. And that requires tests. A lot of them. The Safra Center put out a series of white papers on the various components of ending the pandemic. The paper looking at testing for Covid-19 suggests that between 5 million and 20 million tests per day will be necessary, between 2 percent and 8 percent of the US population, coupled with contact tracing to target the tests. (The Safra Center is planning to publish a more in-depth report on the recovery process this week.) Paul Romer, a professor of economics at New York University, wants even more: 20 million to 25 million tests per day, plus more frequent testing for front-line workers exposed to the virus.  He has run his own simulations of the impact of testing on the spread of Covid-19, finding that an ongoing testing regimen reduces the number of people that need to be isolated, allowing the remainder to return to work. That’s true even if the test isn’t perfect at identifying spreaders. Part of the appeal of an aggressive test-and-isolate approach is that it leaves less of the burden of fighting the disease to individuals, unlike other tactics like reporting contacts, wearing masks, and maintaining social distance.  But it does require testing repeatedly, on the order of the entire US population every two weeks.  “Health care professionals, police officers, EMTs — you may need to actually test them every single day to catch an infection early enough to make sure they are not spreading it to their colleagues,” Romer said. “What I would say right now is a good target would be 35 million per day. You can test everybody every two weeks, and then you’ve got 10 million front-line occupations that you can test every single day.” Such a level of testing would effectively bring the R0 below 1, according to Romer. And that will ultimately cause the pandemic to fade out. In a follow-up message, Romer noted that some infectious disease specialists have told him even 35 million tests per day may not be enough. He said that he is willing to scale up the number of tests in his proposal to whatever it would take because it would still be cheaper than the cost of persistent or sporadic shutdowns of the economy.  Testing millions of people a day until the pandemic is over is not as simple as buying more tests. It would require a national mobilization on the scale of a world war.  “There is no historical example of this without command and control,” Allen said.  To coordinate this effort, Allen and her colleagues have proposed creating a Pandemic Testing Board along the lines of the War Production Board created by the US government in World War II. The board would pool expertise from the private sector, government, and universities to iron out all the wrinkles in getting the vast number of tests needed. That could involve procuring supplies directly from manufacturers. The board could also use the Defense Production Act to compel companies to manufacture the requisite hardware, from personal protective equipment for health workers to the chemical reagents needed to run the tests.  The board would also come up with recommendations for training a workforce to run the testing apparatus, from collecting samples, to running the tests, to tracking the spread of the virus.  The tests themselves would also need to improve. The most common RT-PCR genetic tests for the SARS-CoV-2 virus can test dozens of specimens at once but can take hours to run at an in-house lab at a hospital or clinic. These tests can take days to get results if the facility has to ship the tests to an outside lab. The Food and Drug Administration recently approved a genetic test from Abbott Laboratories that can deliver a result in as little as five minutes. But the system can only run one sample at a time, and Abbott is currently aiming at running 50,000 tests per day, far short of the millions researchers say are needed, so further scaling up is necessary. An international research team recently presented a new genetic test for Covid-19 that they say could be “scaled to analyze millions of samples per day using existing sequencing infrastructure.” Romer noted that the United States would also need more laboratories to run these tests; academic biology labs and corporate biotech labs could be marshaled for the effort. He proposed a $1 billion prize to be offered to any lab that can process 10 million tests per day, an incentive that could spur an increase in processing capacity in a couple months.  Getting to 35 million tests per day would cost around $100 billion, according to Romer. It’s a steep price tag, but a fraction of the $350 billion or so in monthly economic losses due to the ongoing lockdowns and social distancing measures in the United States.  In fact, Romer envisions a federal agency with a $100 billion annual budget whose job it is to fight Covid-19 and prepare for future pandemics. The goal is to be ready to squelch an outbreak without shutting down the economy again.  “I think it would be enormously costly if we were to say that our plan is to relax and then when things get bad lock down again,” Romer said. “We need to give people confidence that we’re going back to normal.” There are social aspects that have to be accounted for as well. For people that test positive, the government should take steps to make it easy for them to self-isolate. In South Korea, officials sent comfort packages with food and cleaning supplies to people under quarantine, for example.  
    Related
   Testing the whole country is also a towering administrative challenge. The country that has tested the greatest share of its population and is on track to test everyone is Iceland, with 10 percent of its 360,000 residents tested so far. So testing a country of 330 million people on a regular basis may seem insurmountable.  But Allen pointed out that such a testing routine could be administered more easily at local levels. “This country has 3,000 counties. That makes our counties on average slightly smaller than Iceland,” she said. “I think it becomes conceptually not that hard to imagine having 2 to 8 percent of the population tested on a daily basis.” In many cases, that will require channeling federal money to local governments.  Together, these efforts form a logistical orchestra that needs to happen a hundred million times multiple times per week until the pandemic tapers off, which could be more than a year from now. Yet such coordination would allow people to safely begin to return to work, relieving some of the heaviest pressure of the pandemic. Test. Identify. Isolate. Repeat. Clearly, building a national pandemic response strategy around mass testing is not simple, easy, or cheap. But it may end up being simpler, easier, and cheaper than just about any other approach that’s been tried.  The recent CDC paper modeled how different tactics would work to curb the spread of Covid-19. The researchers reported that “active surveillance, contact tracing, quarantine, and early strong social distancing efforts are needed to stop transmission of the virus.” A combination of these measures have helped places like Taiwan, South Korea, and Singapore limit the spread of disease. But many of these areas are now seeing a rise in new infections, mainly imported from abroad, as they relax these measures to try to return to normal. Some places have had to restore lockdown measures. So no one is out of danger from Covid-19 just yet.  Truly ending the pandemic requires a complex strategy, since many of the tactics that have been deployed so far are inadequate on their own. And it would require far more effort to deploy them in a large, dispersed country like the US.  For instance, take contact tracing, the method of figuring out who an infected person encountered and could have infected. That can take the form of interviews with infected people or location tracking with mobile devices.  But contact tracing in the US would still require mass testing as well as information collection to limit the Covid-19 outbreak to levels of places like Hong Kong and South Korea. Many of the places that deployed contact tracing did so at early stages of the pandemic, when the prevalence rate of the infection was still low, which limited the numbers of contacts that needed to be traced. That made it cheaper and faster to conduct contract tracing. In the US, with a much higher prevalence of the virus, such tracing would still require testing for a much larger segment of the population than is currently available.  “Even if we were to use those methods, you would need vastly more tests,” said E. Glen Weyl, who co-authored the Safra Center’s paper on mass testing and works as a political economist at Microsoft. “And if you don’t want to use those methods, or you’re afraid that they won’t get enough take-up, then you would need truly enormously larger numbers of tests.” Weyl estimated that a completely random testing system without contact tracing would require about 100 million tests a day. Contact tracing could help economize the use of tests, but testing would still be needed for millions of people per day. So scaling up testing capacity is a no-regrets tactic for combating the pandemic. Meanwhile, the current social distancing regimen in the United States is not only a huge economic and social drain, it also has holes and inconsistencies. That means it could take several months if not longer to bring the prevalence of the virus down within the population on its own.  “40 percent of the workforce — four-zero percent — is in essential sectors, so our social distancing is being applied to maybe half of the people in the country,” Weyl said. “That slows things down, but there is a huge population where the disease is still almost certainly spreading because we just can’t avoid it.” Testing for antibodies could be useful for research purposes to identify who was previously infected in order to trace the spread of the virus. People with antibodies could also donate their blood serum to help treat infected people or to develop new therapies. And if it is confirmed that surviving an infection confers robust, lasting immunity to the virus, a positive antibody test could help identify people who can safely end their social distancing. That would be particularly useful for front-line workers who are desperately needed back on their feet.  But immunity testing is not an easy ticket to restarting the economy. The number of people who have survived the virus so far are nowhere near enough to reopen all the shuttered shops and offices. A scenario where there are enough immune workers to restart the economy would imply spread of the disease through the population, and with it, the inevitable spike in hospitalizations and deaths. And that is exactly the scenario most public health officials are trying to avoid. So any plan to resuscitate the economy and society will have to incorporate a major testing element. “It is just not realistic for us to greatly reduce the prevalence rates anytime soon without the application of [mass] testing or some regime like that,” Weyl said.  The fight against Covid-19 will continue for at least a year until a vaccine is widely available, so regular testing for the virus will have to become part of the milieu for the United States. What was once normal is still a far-off prospect. “I just don’t think never-SARS-CoV-2-infected people are going to quickly enjoy our previous way of life anytime soon, no matter where you live,” said Duke University’s Gray. The recovery will be slow, and the overall situation — infections, fatalities, job losses — will likely get worse before it gets better. But half-measures will only prolong the problem. Go big or stay home. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  Amid the coronavirus pandemic, President Donald Trump has been using lifesaving medical equipment as a way to score political points for Republicans at risk of losing their seats in November. On Friday evening, Sen. Martha McSally (R-AZ) became the latest Republican senator to trumpet the federal government sending fewer ventilators than are needed — and that were promised — to her state. “Huge news for Arizona,” tweeted McSally, who lost to Democrat Kyrsten Sinema in 2018 but was subsequently appointed to the Senate seat vacated by the death of John McCain. “I spoke with @realDonaldTrump on Wednesday afternoon to request additional ventilators from the Strategic National Stockpile. Today, POTUS delivers with 100 ventilators headed to AZ. Thank you to President Trump and @VP for hearing our call.” Huge news for Arizona! I spoke with @realDonaldTrump on Wednesday afternoon to request additional ventilators from the Strategic National Stockpile. Today, POTUS delivers with 100 ventilators headed to AZ. Thank you to President Trump and @VP for hearing our call. https://t.co/A7gA8yiGvZ To be clear, with more than 3,500 confirmed coronavirus cases and growing in Arizona, the federal government coming through with 100 ventilators is preferable to none at all. But it’s also worth examining how McSally’s announcement isn’t all it’s cracked up to be. The state of Arizona, led by Republican Gov. Doug Ducey and Health Services Department Director Dr. Cara Christ, initially asked the federal government for 5,000 ventilators. That ask was approved by federal officials. But Arizona’s request was dramatically downsized to just 500 ventilators last week as it became clear that the federal government didn’t actually have the resources to follow through on its original agreement. By ultimately sending 100, the feds are fulfilling just 2 percent of what they initially agreed to send and only 20 percent of the request the state made just last week. 
    Related
   So while Ducey praised Trump for his “urgent action and real leadership” in sending ventilators to Arizona and thanked McSally for “advocating for these ventilators and helping to make this happen,” the Associated Press reported that the shipment “falls far short of the number originally approved by federal officials for Arizona and is just one-fifth what the state’s top public health official said is needed quickly.” Republicans like Ducey and McSally — who currently trails Democratic candidate Mark Kelly by somewhere between five and 12 points — have gone out of their way to avoid criticizing the president. And Trump has made it clear that avoiding criticism is a viable path to receiving what tools a state needs. During an interview with Fox News late last month, he responded to Democratic governors like Andrew Cuomo (NY), Gretchen Whitmer (MI), and Jay Inslee (WA) criticizing his coronavirus response by describing his relationship with blue state leaders as “a two-way street.” “They have to treat us well, also. They can’t say, ‘Oh, gee, we should get this, we should get that,’” Trump added. Trump took things up a notch by telling reporters he had directed the official running the White House’s response effort, Vice President Mike Pence, to not call Inslee and Whitmer — even as hospitals in each of their states approached the point of being overwhelmed by coronavirus cases — because they aren’t “appreciative” enough of his efforts. “When they’re not appreciative to me, they’re not appreciative to the Army Corps, they’re not appreciative to FEMA,” Trump said. “It’s not right.” As a result, state leaders have been reluctant to criticize Trump — even as some of them respond to the federal disfunction by banding together on their own.  NEW: @NYGovCuomo says there'll be an announcement later this afternoon on a regional re-opening plan with governors from New Jersey, Connecticut, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Delaware. Last month, the Post reported that while staunch Trump ally Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis “promptly” received all of the supplies he asked for from the federal government, states with Democratic governors, such as Wisconsin and Illinois (not to mention New York and Michigan), were not having the same luck. It’s not clear that Trump’s political grudges drive disparities of this sort, but the Post reported some officials are “wondering whether politics is playing a role in the response.” Also of concern is the appearance that Trump is using the equipment in a bid to help the campaigns of imperiled lawmakers like McSally. Her ventilator announcement came two days after another Republican senator facing an uphill battle to keep their seat, Cory Gardner (CO), posted a similar tweet touting a federal shipment of 100 ventilators to his state.  Thank you @realDonaldTrump, 100 ventilators and approval of our National Guard assistance is outstanding news for Colorado. Coloradans are standing together as we get through the #COVID19 pandemic, even if we have to stand six feet apart. https://t.co/0d26KtMeEM As is the case with Arizona, however, Gardner’s announcement is not all that it might appear to be. CNN broke news on April 3 that the federal government swooped in and blew up a deal that Colorado’s state government, led by Democratic Gov. Jared Polis, made with a private company to acquire 500 ventilators. FEMA, instead, seized the ventilators for itself, leaving Colorado high and dry.  So the federal government ultimately provided Colorado with only one-fifth of the machines it would’ve acquired on the open market. Trump and Gardner, however, tried to reframe that development as a reflection of how the federal government and states are working together on the coronavirus response. 
    Related
   Some were clear-eyed about what seems to be going on. Following Gardner’s announcement, Rep. Diana DeGette (D-CO) released a statement accusing Trump of “playing politics with public health” and adding that the president’s “mismanagement of this crisis is costing lives and livelihoods.” The Denver Post published a scathing editorial accusing Trump of treating lifesaving medical equipment “as emoluments he can dole out as favors to loyalists. It’s the worst imaginable form of corruption — playing political games with lives. For the good of this nation during what should be a time of unity, he must stop.” Colorado’s tale has served as a cautionary one for other states. The Washington Post reported on Saturday that officials in one state are worried enough about the federal government interfering in their efforts to buy medical supplies that “they are considering dispatching local police or even the National Guard to greet two chartered FedEx planes scheduled to arrive in the next week with millions of masks from China, according to people familiar with the planning. These people, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, asked that their state not be identified to avoid flagging federal officials to their shipment.” Put it together and the picture that emerges is one where the federal government is seizing orders of medical supplies from hospitals and states, and then at least in some instances, redistributing in a way that gives the appearance of Trump doing favors for his Republican supporters. And in a quintessentially Trumpian twist, even the Republicans who reap the rewards of this flawed system aren’t getting all that much. It’s the Trump University of pandemic responses. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  President Donald Trump retweeted a call to fire Dr. Anthony Fauci Sunday evening, raising concerns about the job security of the public health expert, while once again highlighting the precarious role of experts and the overall uncertainty that has plagued the Trump administration’s response to the coronavirus pandemic.  The retweet came following a spate of television appearances by Fauci — who is head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and a member of the White House coronavirus task force — including a Sunday morning CNN interview in which the doctor said earlier action could have limited Covid-19-related deaths in the US.  A conservative former California congressional nominee who has been a sharp Fauci critic on Twitter, DeAnna Lorraine, responded to the interview by tweeting, “Fauci is now saying that had Trump listened to the medical experts earlier he could’ve saved more lives. Fauci was telling people on February 29th that there was nothing to worry about and it posed no threat to the US public at large. Time to #FireFauci...” Sorry Fake News, it’s all on tape. I banned China long before people spoke up. Thank you @OANN https://t.co/d40JQkUZg5 Trump had refrained from publicly criticizing Fauci, but Sunday, he retweeted Lorraine and added some of his own commentary.  While the president did not engage with the call to fire the official, he did once again push the unsubstantiated claim that he acted early and decisively to curb the spread of the virus.  Fauci himself suggested more could have been done by the administration Sunday on CNN’s State of the Union, when host Jake Tapper asked him what might have happened if the federal government promoted social distancing in February rather than in March, when the White House rolled out its “15 Days to Slow the Spread” guidelines.  “It’s — it’s very difficult to go back and say that. I mean, obviously, you could logically say, that if you had a process that was ongoing, and you started mitigation earlier, you could have saved lives,” Fauci said, adding, “But there was a lot of pushback about shutting things down back then.” DR. FAUCI on CNN: "You could logically say that if you had a process that was ongoing and you started mitigation earlier, you could have saved lives. Obviously no one is going to deny that ... But there was a lot of pushback about shutting things down back [in February]." pic.twitter.com/KpUDCrkS64 Fauci did not elaborate on what that pushback was and who it came from, but did say earlier in the interview when asked about the administration listening to expert advice, “We make a recommendation. Often, the recommendation is taken. Sometimes, it’s not.”    But we do know from reports — including an investigation published Saturday by the New York Times — that much of the pushback came from Trump himself.  Among other things, the Times report details how Dr. Nancy Messonnier, the director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases and one of the few federal voices warning the public in February of the threat the coronavirus posed, was sidelined due to these warnings. It also documents how Trump’s anger over her messaging led to a leadership vacuum at a moment when there was no time to waste, as well as to the cancellation of an important presidential briefing on mitigation strategies scheduled for February 26: On the 18-hour plane ride home [from a state visit to India], Mr. Trump fumed as he watched the stock market crash after Dr. Messonnier’s comments. Furious, he called Mr. Azar when he landed at around 6 a.m. on Feb. 26, raging that Dr. Messonnier had scared people unnecessarily. Already on thin ice with the president over a variety of issues and having overseen the failure to quickly produce an effective and widely available test, Mr. Azar would soon find his authority reduced. The meeting that evening with Mr. Trump to advocate social distancing was canceled, replaced by a news conference in which the president announced that the White House response would be put under the command of Vice President Mike Pence. Pence reportedly put a moratorium on messaging like Messonnier’s — which may explain Lorraine’s assertion that Fauci claimed everything was fine in late February. Fauci did in fact tell the public not to worry in February, but tempered that message by saying Americans needed to be prepared for a rapidly changing situation.  On February 29 on NBC’s Today, for instance, Fauci said: “At this moment, there is no need to change anything you’re doing on a day-by-day basis, right now the risk is still low, but this could change. ... When you start to see community spread, this could change, and force you to become much more attentive to doing things that would protect you from spread.” According to the Times’s report, Fauci and other public health experts on the coronavirus task force were more than convinced that not only “could” things change, but that they would — particularly after a February 21 meeting at which pandemic simulations were run, leading those present to believe “they would soon need to move toward aggressive social distancing, even at the risk of severe disruption to the nation’s economy and the daily lives of millions of Americans.” Getting Trump to reach the same conclusion became a weeks-long struggle, and it wasn’t just the advice of his public health experts the president reportedly shrugged off.  White House trade adviser and Trump confidant Peter Navarro wrote memos in late February warning of the looming coronavirus crisis in America. Trump told reporters last week, “I didn’t see ’em, I didn’t look for ’em either.” The National Security Council recommended shutting down large cities based on intelligence it gathered in January. As Vox’s Aja Romano writes, “The security experts went dismissed even as an unfounded conspiracy theory about the virus’s origin spread among some government officials and economic advisers pushed back against taking drastic measures to thwart China.” Although the president was eventually brought on board in March with mitigation efforts beyond border closures, the administration’s refusal to heed the advice of experts bearing dire warnings led to well-documented delays in scaling up testing, acquiring needed equipment, and offering consistent federal messaging on what was needed to limit the spread of the virus.  But the response remains a fractured one, sometimes plagued by infighting and frustration over who has taken on what. And as the president considers when to encourage Americans to resume normal life, it is still uncertain how much weight Trump is giving expert advice. When asked Saturday on Fox News what will influence his decision-making on extending social distancing guidance past April 30, the president said, “a lot of facts and a lot of instincts.”  In this context, what Trump’s retweet means — if anything — is unclear. On one hand, he has a history of communicating displeasure with members of his administration on Twitter before firing them, once tweeting, for example about his dissatisfaction with former Inspector General Michael Atkinson four months before suddenly firing him. On the other hand, Trump has been effusive with his praise of Fauci, calling him “extraordinary” and a “good man.” On Friday, Trump told reporters, “I have great respect for this group. In fact, I told Tony Fauci — I said, ‘Why don’t you move to New York, run against AOC? You will win easily.’ But he decided that he’s not going to do that, okay? I kid.” Given the president’s unpredictability, any number of explanations for the tweet are possible, from Trump blowing off steam at a moment of frustration over the CNN interview to him retweeting before having read the whole of Lorraine’s post.  Fauci is, like Trump noted, widely popular — a Quinnipiac University poll released April 8 found 78 percent of Americans believe the doctor is handling the pandemic well, compared to the 46 percent who said the same of Trump — so firing him seems inadvisable. Such a move would not only strip the US of a valuable expert at a time when such voices are badly needed, but would likely lead to widespread anger of the sort the president got a taste of Monday, as #FireTrump trended in response to his tweet. According to the White House, however, Fauci is in no danger of losing his job.  “This media chatter is ridiculous,” White House deputy press secretary Hogan Gidley said Monday. “President Trump is not firing Dr. Fauci. The president’s tweet clearly exposed media attempts to maliciously push a falsehood about his China decision in an attempt to rewrite history. ... Dr. Fauci has been and remains a trusted advisor to President Trump.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The novel coronavirus pandemic has killed tens of thousands of people and utterly reshaped the global economy. Perhaps unsurprisingly, it has also given rise to numerous conspiracy theories — about the origins of the virus and whom it infects, and even about the virus itself. There are people who believe, for example, that cellular data networks may be spreading the virus (a theory that, as Reason magazine’s Eric Boehm put it, “doesn’t even make sense,” as radio waves do not spread viruses). Truth be told, a pandemic had all the makings of a petri dish for conspiracies.  “Conspiracy theories flourish in times of crisis, which is obviously the case here,” Karen Douglas, a professor of social psychology at the University of Kent and an expert in conspiratorial thinking, told me. “They tend to surround big events that require big explanations [because] small explanations are unsatisfying.”  But there’s a second piece of the puzzle: Politicians both in the United States and abroad who consistently downplayed the virus, and in some cases, continue to do so. It’s no wonder, then, that as the virus spread, many argued that the risk was being overstated or was even a front for something more nefarious — a globalist government takeover (as a Los Angeles-area man believed, after attempting to derail a train near a naval hospital ship), for example. Conspiracy theories tell us about ourselves — what we believe or doubt, and what we fear most. The conspiracy theories that surround the coronavirus pandemic are no different, centering on existing concerns about globalization, new technology, and perhaps our most ancient horror: disease. But in the case of Covid-19, conspiracy theorists got an added boost: from political leaders as desperate to believe the conspiracies as they were.  Conspiracy theories from QAnon to the ones contributing to anti-Semitic violence nationwide have underlying belief systems that are similarly built. They aren’t created by evidence or even belief, necessarily, but by the desire to believe there must be something more to the events that shape our lives, culture, and politics than accident or happenstance, and even as a means of self-defense.  As I wrote in 2018: Where there is confusion, or even pain and tragedy, QAnon, or shootings termed “false flags,” or 9/11 trutherism brings some semblance of order and security. The 9/11 attacks were so horrific that they can’t possibly have happened without President George W. Bush being behind it somehow, orchestrating things behind the scenes. A mass shooting at an elementary school that killed so many small children is so terrible that it can’t possibly have really happened. And the Trump administration must only seem to be enmeshed in constant chaos. Pandemics are fertile ground for conspiracy theories as people seek to understand not only the disease but the economic and societal impacts the response to pandemics has had on daily life. Historically, with every plague and pandemic, there have been conspiracy theories to explain their origin and how to potentially stop their progression. Often, those conspiracy theories play on existing concerns and work within cultural contexts. For example, during the Black Death, a 14th-century outbreak of bubonic plague that killed at least 35 percent of Europe’s population, conspiracy theories targeted Jewish people — already the subject of ire and deep concern — as the source of the plague, leading to the torture and murder of thousands of Jews in response. (As anti-Semitism is itself a conspiracy theory, it’s not surprising to see anti-Semitic conspiracy theories arise during the coronavirus pandemic as well.) More recent pandemics have seen the rise of their own conspiracy theories, ones that formed in response to underlying concerns as much as they did to a virus or disease. “AIDS denialists,” for example — people who believe that HIV does not cause AIDS — were responding not just to AIDS, but to the context of AIDS in the United States of the 1980s, a disease that seemed to kill the most vulnerable and most despised in society with little attention or care from mainstream authority figures. That led some people, already experienced in distrusting institutions that had only served to disadvantage and oppress them, to distrust them even more in the face of a crisis.   As Charlie Anders detailed in the story of one former denialist in Gizmodo in 2015:  At this time, [Stephen] Kovacev had been a gay rights activist for a dozen years, having moved to New York’s Christopher Street in the wake of the Stonewall riots. He’d survived protests, clashes with the police, and “brutal” treatment from a homophobic medical establishment that treated him “like a pariah” when he sought treatment for anal warts. After all of this, plus Watergate and Vietnam, said Kovacev, “how could you trust anything that came from any institution?” So Kovacev was skeptical about a neat and tidy explanation for AIDS—and then he heard that a reputable scientist, Peter Duesberg at U.C., Berkeley, was saying he believed that HIV was a harmless virus, that had nothing to do with causing AIDS. (Duesberg still believes this.) So Kovacev and his friends didn’t know what to think. “We weren’t denialists,” Kovacev said of his fellow activists at the time. “We just didn’t fucking trust anybody.” During the H1N1 “swine flu” pandemic of 2009, conspiracy theories based in existing concerns about globalization and the pharmaceutical industry gained credence worldwide. For example, while some in the United States argued that undocumented migrants were being used by “terrorists” to spread the virus within American borders, some in Mexico and in Central and South America argued that the virus was purposely being spread by American authorities to benefit pharmaceutical companies: On April 27, 2009 the Chilean newspaper El Ciudadano, published an article on the origins of the “swine flu,” the virus’ colloquial name—which asked who had benefited from the emergence of the disease (Anonymous, 2009). The report itself was based on internet reporting in Spanish from California, which referred to accusations that the U.S. biodefense agency was working to “weaponize” avian influenza and that former U.S. Defense Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld stood to benefit from the outbreak. This article pointed to Rumsfeld’s long role with Gilead Laboratories in California, which manufactured Tamiflu, a possible treatment for highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI). The article concluded by referencing U.S. biological warfare tests that had been conducted upon unsuspecting populations in the 1950s and 60s (Anonymous, 2009). These articles circulated widely outside of Mexico, where conspiracy “theorists had a field day” with information about Gilead Laboratories (Ainsworth, 2009).  Coronavirus, too, has its own context — a general lack of trust in institutions, including the media, and in authority figures, including the very authorities tasked with asking millions of people to shut down their businesses and lives to stop the virus from spreading.  But it was authority figures who added an extra element to conspiratorial thinking taking place around coronavirus in the United States and elsewhere. Joseph Uscinski, a political scientist at the University of Miami who specializes in conspiracy theories, told me that rather than coronavirus itself being the fertile soil for conspiracy theories, “I think the bigger argument would be that because you had a president and some other political elites and a lot of celebrities pushing conspiracy narratives, you probably are getting more people buying into it than you otherwise would have.” Uscinski told me that we could think of conspiratorial views as a “constant” for some people, one that was unlikely to change regardless of current events. “Everyone to one degree or another has a worldview in which conspiracies dictate events and circumstances,” he said. “Some people have that worldview a lot. Some people have very little.” And so far, he’s found in his research that many of the people who share coronavirus conspiracy theories are people who already have a conspiratorial worldview.  As I’ve written before, conspiracy theories don’t tend to act on a right/left axis. Douglas told me that people are drawn to conspiracy theories not for political purposes, but for emotional needs, like the need for knowledge, the need for safety and security, and the need to feel like the groups we belong to are offering ourselves and our community a positive good.  But what differs with coronavirus is how political elites are responding to the virus — often,  by encouraging new conspiracy theories that downplay the severity of the pandemic. “Imagine if [President Ronald] Reagan had come out in the ’80s and said that AIDS was sent here by Moscow, or didn’t really kill people,” Uscinski said, “That would be really, really bad because our political leaders can influence a lot of people and that winds up taking the message beyond just the conspiracy-minded people to those who trust that political leader.” And that has been borne out in the United States, where some of President Trump’s biggest supporters followed him as he downplayed the virus (doing so, in his telling, because he’s a “cheerleader for the country”) and invented theories that the coronavirus was no worse than the common cold but was being wielded as a cudgel to take down down Trump (some of Trump’s supporters have pushed back on this conspiracy theory).  On social media sites, some Trump supporters have urged their followers to film their local hospital parking lots to prove that they were not being inundated by coronavirus patients.  Here's Fox News contributor and Hannity regular Sara Carter flirting with covid trutherism last night. pic.twitter.com/1HI9pRTw0V But America isn’t alone. In Brazil, President Jair Bolsonaro described coronavirus as “a little flu” and told reporters in March that the virus was largely a media invention, saying, “During the past year, obviously, we have had moments of crisis. A lot of that is fantasy. And coronavirus, which is not all the mainstream media makes it out to be.” And in Mexico, President Andrés Manuel López Obrador told reporters in mid-March that he was using amulets as protection against the coronavirus, also arguing that “not allowing corruption” prevents the disease.  Douglas told me the reason for downplaying coronavirus was fairly simple: “Downplaying the virus is a way to attempt to deal with the immediate existential threat, but it also serves the purpose of allowing individuals to carry on as normal. A lot of the behaviors that people need to observe to manage the spread of the virus are unpleasant (e.g., staying indoors, not seeing friends), and denying the problem also means that people can avoid these actions.”  Arguing that coronavirus is overblown, or a media invention, also permits those who believe in these theories to feel they are part of an exclusive club with secret knowledge, fulfilling the need we all have to feel as if we understand what’s really going on. As Douglas told the New York Times, “If you believe in conspiracy theories, then you have power through knowledge that other people don’t have.”  Conspiracy theories function as a self-soothing mechanism, an effort to make what doesn’t make sense sensible. And during the coronavirus pandemic, conspiracy theories have become an international effort, used by governments and individuals alike to evade blame for thousands of deaths and foist it on an easily available “other.” Meanwhile, the toll of the pandemic continues to grow.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. I first started quarantining in earnest on March 12, a Thursday. Vox’s New York office had just closed, and so had the campus of the college where I teach. That morning, I taught my first online lecture, then worked on a Vox story in the afternoon. By that evening, I was already feeling like I needed to bolt — like I just wanted to get away from what was about to happen, to hit the opt-out button. Escape was impossible, and I knew that. But the inevitability of the situation made me think a lot about the 2005 book Mediated, written by Tom de Zengotita, a philosopher and media theorist whom I first met when I took his courses in my MA program at New York University. (He later supervised my thesis.) Mediated is an engaging and sometimes lyrical book about, as the subtitle puts it, “how the media shapes your world and the way you live in it”; in it, de Zengotita explores some big concepts that are simple to feel but tricky to describe. He posits that our experiences today are so “mediated” that we rarely have to interact with reality — that everything most of us experience in our everyday lives comes to us through “packaged” means that help blunt the edges of reality and soften it so it “flatters” us.  Modern conveniences like electricity and waterproof materials keep us from having to deal with the reality of a rising and setting sun, or weather. But as more and more technologies, particularly digital ones, have permeated our world, we’ve been able to customize our existences to the point that we get annoyed when we can’t easily talk to a friend halfway across the world because the internet isn’t working quite right, or we have to look at a paper map because the GPS on our phone is scrambled. The opposite of reality, de Zengotita writes in the book, is not “fake” or “unreal.” It is “options.” We can blunt the harshness of reality with so many different possibilities because in our world, we have nearly unlimited options. The speed at which some Americans were able to transition to working from home once stay-at-home orders began to take effect across the country — some (like me) with little interruption to our actual work habits — is a testimony to how mediated our existences have become. So have the relatively petty annoyances the more privileged among us have encountered: not being able to order groceries online because all of the delivery slots are taken, or the frustration of not being able to hang out at a favorite bar or go see a movie.  Others have to juggle child care and work in hugely frustrating ways that still don’t compare to what medical or emergency services workers are dealing with. But some of us have a wide array of choices for how to pass the time while stuck at home, like a seemingly unlimited number of movies and TV shows to distract ourselves with, or the ability to talk to our friends online. We have options. That’s what made my fight-or-flight reaction especially striking to me. I had a visceral, almost primal feeling of needing to “opt out” — the word “opt” is key here — of what was coming, to find another reality to live in instead of this one. I wasn’t particularly scared of getting the virus, and I wasn’t thinking yet about the economic realities that were likely to hit. I just didn’t understand what I was living in and I wanted to skip it. I wanted another option. But this pandemic doesn’t give options. There isn’t anywhere to go to get away from it. It’s everywhere, it’s invisible, and it’s nowhere, too. I might be carrying the coronavirus; I might have had it; I might not have been infected, or I could currently be infected right now, even though I feel fine. I was in college when 9/11 happened and a recession hit after I graduated, but neither of those “realities” — which were startling and scary and felt like moments when ordinary life had been “punctured” — had the pervasive and eerie feel of this one. Mulling all of this over, I called Tom. He’s at his home in southern Vermont, teaching courses at New York City’s Dalton School via Zoom and working on a book. And unsurprisingly, he’s been thinking about this, too. Together we discussed my opt-out moment, the “atmosphere” in which we all find ourselves, the way he’s conceiving of what we’re going through, and whether living through the pandemic is going to fundamentally change how an entire generation of people thinks about and experiences “reality.” Alissa Wilkinson When this was all starting to become “real,” so to speak, a few weeks ago, I had this feeling of wanting to opt out. I felt like I can’t deal with this. Of course, that’s not possible.  Tom de Zengotita I talk a lot in Mediated about the evolution of the word “awesome” from something that meant truly awesome to a word we can now use to describe “awesome meals,” and “awesome French fries,” and all that. Something similar has happened to the word “surreal,” I think. Just as with 9/11, a lot of people are talking about the world we’re in right now, about the “surreal” feeling it has. The same thing happened after 9/11 for a long time — especially in New York, of course. But the odd thing about what’s happened is the word “surreal,” in the context of ubiquitous mediation, is that it actually now means something more like “real.” When reality intrudes on us in a way in which optionality is lost, the effect — if it’s a dramatic-enough example, but even if it’s small — the effect of that is to give us this little feeling of “surreal.” It’s just interesting to remember that when the original surrealists started using the term in reference to their art, they were stressing the word “sur-,” meaning “above” or “beyond” the real. And they thought of the “surreal” as being more than or other than “real,” which to them meant something more like routine and prosaic and so on. The weird paradox that I’m most aware of as I watch things around me is in the differences between how this thing — the effects and experience of living in a world where the virus is spreading — is manifesting itself in different places. I’m in southern Vermont. Before that I was in a little town in upstate New York; I was not in the city. It’s a whole different thing if you’re in the city from if you’re in Vermont, in its details. But I think the descent of this kind of dome, or globe — except it’s got no limit to it, there’s no containing it — this descent of this atmosphere of what I’ll call “surreality,” for a minute, is really a manifestation of a confrontation we’re having with reality that’s purer than almost any confrontation we’ve had with reality as a collective, as a culture. Beyond even 9/11. Because it’s everywhere and it’s nowhere. You can’t cover it. No matter how many charts they draw, no matter how many statistics they give you, no matter how good their predictions are, no matter what they show, cruise ships and hospitals, you can’t cover this goddamn thing. It’s invisible and it’s everywhere. Those two combinations of everywhere-ness and invisibility make it the sort of archetypal “thing,” in quotes, that can’t be mediated. It presents itself as something that isn’t optional. You’re being forced to exercise all kinds of decisions about how to live, little options that you have to decide among in order to cope with it. But it’s all under duress. You’re still online. You’re weirdly as free to be where you “were,” but it’s now like you’re in some kind of prison of option. I’m just on the edge of getting some concept that this thing is forcing on me. I hope to be clearer in a few weeks than I am right now. I can’t make myself get this — it has to happen as I’m watching and thinking. Anyway. The surrealists used to think of [the surreal] as something above and beyond the real, and the term has slowly devolved. It became possible to say of any kind of a weird, eerie situation, “Oh, this is so surreal.” What you really mean is that it’s weird or eerie or out of the ordinary, and it lost its dimension of being superior to reality, above reality, that it had for the original surrealists. Alissa Wilkinson I have been trying in my mind to compare this experience to any other one in human history. It shares characteristics with other times. Like 9/11, for instance. Or take the 1918 flu epidemic: People reacted very differently to the threat because we had different ideas about science, but we also just didn’t have the internet. The AIDS epidemic isn’t a good analogue, either. People my age clearly remember starting our careers in the midst of a recession, but there are plenty of people who were able to opt out of the recession, to not feel its effects very much. Nobody is able to opt out of the pandemic, no matter how hard they try. The feeling that’s come with living during the pandemic is everywhere. Do you think the unprecedented nature of what’s happening is messing with our notions of what we’re supposed to do? I have seen people, both young and old, try to refuse to accept that this was real, that it was happening, and that it would affect them. Does that come from living in a world of infinite options? From living in a reality in which big scary things are, for so many of us, always happening, but they’re not happening to us — we only experience them through a screen? Thomas de Zengotita The “I’m going to party no matter what” people, or the older tough guys who say, “If my number’s up, my number’s up, I’m not gonna let this bother me” — you know, I actually think those people are not only doing a normal, macho-style refusal to be among the sheep who shudder at every danger. It’s also just a feeling of strength that they get out of having that kind of attitude. That alone isn’t that different from people who are willing to drive at outrageous speeds on road and take ridiculous risks with cars or extreme sport. It’s clinging to the self-reinforcement, self-aggrandizement that they always have when anything threatens them. But I think — and again, I’d have to really talk to some of those people, and I will if I get a chance — my gut tells me that underneath that they’re actually, trying to do what you were trying to do: “Opt out of this.” In other words, they’re returning to the only way they know of to comfortingly and powerfully defy death. They’re returning to that gesture. But what they’re really defying is the giganticness of this invisible reality that would bring them to their knees in awe if they let themselves realize that they cannot possibly comprehend this. The incomprehensibility — almost in the literal sense of the term — is a defining characteristic of why it can’t be mediated. That’s what makes it different from other sorts of things that I describe as “real” in the book. All the examples I gave of things that escaped mediation did so for a while, like 9/11, until the media caught up with it and covered it. I used “coverage” as a pun — like they “cover” it, and they cover it enough that it’s covered, so now you think you get it. Now, horrifying though 9/11 was, it’s in a box, it’s contained: “Oh, now I know what 9/11 was.” The coverage expands to completely absorb the reality, to become a substitute for that reality. But mediation, coverage, of this pandemic can’t do that, because there’s no end to it. You can’t put this in a container of representation. When you say you were trying to opt out, I don’t think you were only trying to opt out of what this was doing to your everyday life, trying to find some way to just ignore it and be your regular self, although you were also doing that. You were also wanting to opt out of opening yourself up to the real, the uncontainable real. In a way, the chapter that’s most promising that’s in Mediated is the whole chapter on nature, the eventual mediation of nature, the containment of nature. I’ve got this whole thing in there on how museums and the movies have done such a fantastic job of representing the cosmos and the origin of the universe.  When I say a “fantastic job,” I’m literally talking about the quality and the quantity of their representations. At the Museum of Natural History in New York, you go through a whole experience about the birth of the universe. You climb down stairs to where there’s a tiny thread that represents the amount of time in which beings have existed on the planet Earth, compared to the whole experience of walking hundreds of yards down to it. You get an astounding — I was gonna say “awesome” — sense of the universe. But as you leave, it’s like leaving a great movie. You leave with that “whoa” feeling, and you feel as if you’ve contained it. The whole goddamn universe has been … you’ve experienced it in a kind of box. This won’t let you do that. Alissa Wilkinson I’ve been trying to talk with people about the metaphors we use to describe the pandemic and understand how we’re supposed to respond to it. People use metaphors of war, or ecology, all different things. But part of the issue is that almost nobody alive today in America has been confronted with something like this, a scientific thing that we don’t understand yet that directly affects our lives. The concept of a world that’s unknowable is so foreign to us that we’re scrambling to find any box put it into. Thomas de Zengotita There you go. The impossible search for an adequate metaphor. Earthquakes, wars — I mean, the effects of an earthquake are vastly more severe and disruptive and horrible, just horrible. A real disaster is just horrible. But it’s … there. You can take a picture of it. In this case, you can take a picture of a doctor, or a corpse, or a microscopic picture of the little virus. You can take a lot of pictures. But none of those pictures feel like they’re pictures of it. There will never be an adequate metaphor. Compared to what used to be the uncontainability of nature itself — I’m talking about the whole universe — the uncontainability of this is way more problematic. We’ve succeeded in finding metaphors, boxes, ways of containing or understanding our depictions and representations of nature, which have made us feel kind of equal to the task of existing in it. But existing in this atmosphere is like a permanent invisible fog. Because it’s invisible. You can’t mediate it. Even wars and earthquakes are mediatable, if the mediation technologies work hard enough. And when I say “mediatable,” I mean “covered,” in the pun sense of the word “covered.” But this sucker ain’t gonna be covered. It can’t be represented well enough to give us the feeling that we know what it is. I don’t mean “know what it is” in scientific detail. We can all know that. The “it” I’m talking about is the “it” I’m looking at, right now, outside my window. For me, the small manifestation of this — which is just so poignant and weird — is the way people in this little town are walking. You go for walks. You go alone, or with your dog, or with your partner and your dog, so the maximum number of walkers is three. The amount of waving to strangers that’s going on in the streets, and even between cars when you walk by someone, happens anyways, sometimes. But there’s no question of the poignancy of waving to someone whom you can’t get close to because of social distancing. The way in which you’re somehow sharing something in the very preservation of the distance between you, that’s sort of inciting people to wave. I feel it myself, to wave to strangers. It’s like, “Hey there. Here we are.” Again, this is only half worked out, but the emphasis we usually put on the phrase “social distancing” is on “distancing” — “Oh dear, we’re distancing ourselves.” But oddly, I’m finding, in many individual small cases, the sociality of the distancing is intensified by the narrowness of the channel of communication and the impossibility of bridging it. I’m not sure, but I think something of the same thing might be happening with these completely inadequate Zoom things that people are doing. My class [at the Dalton School] sucked. It just didn’t work as a class. But for me, and I think some of the kids, there’s this kind of [feeling of] waving to someone across a strange distance that was invisibly forced on all of us. I keep getting back to the invisibility part. The whole idea of a representation is a depiction. By definition, it’s kind of contained. Another way I’ve been trying to think of it: Sometimes I sit in front of a computer, and I look at a screen — the ultimate box — and I think of everything that’s accessible through that screen. It’s effectively infinite. It’s constantly growing. It’s indefinitely vast. Everything is online in some form or another. And it’s not visible, either!  Something is visible — whatever I’m looking at — but there’s this invisible infinity of stuff online. Yet I don’t feel contained in it the way I feel contained in this virus atmosphere. The atmosphere of the virus and everything implied in it — I feel like I’m the one that’s contained. And no matter how hard I try to get my metaphorical arms around it in some representational form, no matter how much I listen to Dr. Fauci do his thing, it doesn’t matter. Nothing is adequate to its vastness. But why isn’t it like that when I contemplate the infinity of the internet and the invisibility of it? That’s also invisible. Why don’t I have that same feeling? All because of that fucking screen, right? The ultimate box. I wrote in the Atlantic years ago about why Google Glass wasn’t going to work, before it really didn’t work. I was saying that the reason it wasn’t going to work is that what people are really in love with is their screen, not their access to everything. I mean, that’s cool, too — but the screen is what they love, because it’s this container. Alissa Wilkinson It’s a container for a reality that I can manipulate however I want. Thomas de Zengotita Yeah! You’re in total charge. You’re the producer of the movie if you want to be. You’re the consumer, you’re the star, you’re on it. You’re the god of the world, insofar as the screen can contain it, and nothing can touch you. In other words, you’ve succeeded in mediational optionality mastery of reality, insofar as it’s containable on the screen. The uncontainability of the — it’s not the virus itself, again, I’m not talking about concrete medical containability. The way they say, “Oh we’re going to contain this portion of the population,” that’s not what I mean, although it’s metaphorically interesting. I’m talking about the atmosphere that we live in, that we’re in. That’s what’s containing us. That’s what’s uncontainable. I don’t feel like the god of anything to do with this virus when I’m watching coverage of it. If they can get it all right and cure the fucking thing, I’ll be delighted, of course. But that won’t mean that we’ve contained it. That’ll just mean it went away, thank God. Alissa Wilkinson I’ve been thinking about how having lived through this might irrevocably change our perceptions, at least for a generation, about what reality actually is. Thomas de Zengotita I think there’s a possibility that for a generation, everyone who’s lived through this — whether they were deeply affected by it personally or not, whether the coming recession drives them down into grinding poverty or not — will remember, and, like muscle memory, will know, will understand, will have as a dimension of their character, the experience of the uncontainable real that hasn’t been accessible to anybody else since mediation took over. That’s why people go on expeditions, sail boats across the Atlantic all by themselves, climb cliff faces without ropes. They’re looking for that [uncontainable real]. It’s all there; they can make pictures of it. But this is different. And it’s everywhere. There remains to be made some great work of art or intellectual art, or theoretical creativity, or some phenomenological account of this that might actually have a permanent effect on people’s respect for reality. Here’s a little thought, just a tiny example: The way in which Trump and his enablers went from “Oh this is nothing” to “I’m a wartime president fighting the greatest battle since Churchill” in the space of three weeks. The way they did that, because of the science making it impossible for them not to see what was happening, because everything the scientists were saying was going on, went on in a month. If the timeline for climate change could be shrunk so that it paralleled the timeline for the virus, we’d see exactly the same development. Of course, we’re not going to get to see that. It’s too bad. But the humiliation and embarrassment of their tuning on a dime because of the overwhelming evidence of the truth, of the science, without admitting they were wrong … though of course, they’re not doing that. Alissa Wilkinson It has always seemed to me as if Trump’s greatest talent is not manipulating “reality,” but manipulating the surfaces through which we experience reality. He knows how to manipulate the mediation. Thomas de Zengotita This goes back long before media as we know it today. I’d say he’s a genius — I wouldn’t hesitate, in the original sense of the word: genius, genesis, the one who captures the essence of the age. He just marched in there with Twitter, saying what he was saying about John McCain. Everyone was saying, “You can’t do that,” and he just fucking did it. And it worked! I mean, it worked. Alissa Wilkinson And many people are willing and happy to believe that the mediation he’s manipulating is, itself, reality — because it’s the version of reality they want? Thomas de Zengotita Here, I don’t agree with you, based on the following quote from a Trump supporter and from my informal inquiries over the counter at the deli with some Trump supporter I talked to. She said, “I don’t actually believe anything he says is true, but I trust him.” Think about that. I suddenly realized that they all know this isn’t true — I mean, not all. A substantial preponderance of the people who are being fooled into believing Trump, according to conventional progressive left-wing wisdom, are actually part of the game of reality construction and fabrication that he’s playing. They’re building the fabrication with him. They know it’s not true.  By “they,” I obviously don’t mean every one of them. But if you watch a Trump rally really closely, they’re all laughing. They’re yelling, “Lock her up!” but they’re grinning. They’re not mad. It’s like a pro wrestling match. They’re having fun. It’s like a carnival, and the carnival is to mess with our heads — meaning you and me and other progressive liberal elites who’ve been condescending to them for 30 years — by not caring about the truth. They just go, “Oh, this is a hoax.” And they know it’s not! That’s what I think. I think they’re participating in making the fabricated reality that we think they’re sort of mindlessly absorbing, or being duped. Alissa Wilkinson But that’s just it; they’ve chosen a version of reality that they want, and are participating in constructing it. Thomas de Zengotita Right. That’s exactly true. But that’s a crucial inflection: They’ve chosen that, and they feel free to choose that, because all there is out there are versions of reality. And now you’re back to options. Alissa Wilkinson So the question for today, then, is what happens when you can’t choose? Thomas de Zengotita Yeah, exactly. [Laughs.] Alissa Wilkinson The college students I teach who are graduating are truly baffled, and rightly so, by what they are supposed to do. It’s not like they’re the first people to graduate into a bad economy, but they don’t even know if there is an economy right now. They’ve been raised in such a way that they believe that they can be whatever they want to be, and now they literally can’t. Thomas de Zengotita Again, to go back to your question about whether it’s conceivable this experience could be an encounter with reality for a critical mass of educated people, where they just wouldn’t be so absorbed in this “blob” [of mediation] as we all have been. I said something about some great artistic work that remains to be done; some great intellectual or phenomenological account moment remains to be given. My plan for my own students is to talk about this at the end of the course I’m teaching. Wittgenstein wrote The Tractatus while he was serving in an ambulance corps in the middle of World War I in the trenches, around 1917. He’d put earplugs in, and he wrote Tractatus Philosophicus when he wasn’t out on the line dealing with mangled bodies. What I’m saying is to focus on telling your students, “It’s up to you. I’m not sure how you’re going to make a living. But you fucking better well make meaning out of this.” Alissa Wilkinson It’s been a really strange spring. I teach a course on postmodern theory, and suddenly halfway through the semester we’re behind screens, talking about manipulation of metanarratives by the powerful. They get it. But it’s like we’re doing the live-action immersive version of the course, where we act out the theories we’re studying in real time. Thomas de Zengotita That’s a coincidence — co-incidence — that you can take advantage of, if you stay alert. To go back, though, to where we started: What’s important is just the uncontainability of this thing. Just think of the way the screen is able to contain the entire universe as we know it, from its inception at the Big Bang to where we are now, to someday when our sun will supernova and bap! Somehow or other, we can contain all that in representations and mediations. Of course, we have the option of not paying any attention, but it’s there if we want to immerse ourselves in that awesome experience before we go home for dinner. But with this, the key phenomenological features are invisibility and the uncontainability of the atmosphere, not the virus, the atmosphere. The atmosphere is containing us. We are not containing it. That’s an encounter with reality that’s analogous to an example I give in Mediated. It’s a little page-long thought exercise: Suppose your car breaks down in the middle of Saskatchewan, and you’ve got no gear, you’ve got no cellphone, you’ve got nothing to read, there’s nobody on the road, so you just sit there for three or four hours. This actually happened to me. What you notice after a while is the way in which everything around you is utterly indifferent to you. It’s not there for you. Every arrangement is accidental. Nothing is presented. You see what you happen to see. It’s indifferent to your view of it. It’s not for you! Whereas in a mediated world, everything, including street signs, everything is for you. It’s addressing you. I think the uncontainable, unrepresentable, invisible atmosphere of the virus has that same quality of indifference to you, and of you, and the impossibility of you containing it as opposed to it containing you. That’s as far as I’ve got with this so far. Thomas De Zengotita’s book Mediated: How the Media Shapes Your World and the Way You Live In It was published in 2005 by Bloomsbury. He is also the author of Postmodern Theory and Progressive Politics: Toward a New Humanism (Palgrave MacMillan, 2018). Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.As the coronavirus started to spread in the US, California, not New York, might have seemed a likelier place for the pandemic to peak.  California, the nation’s most populous state, was among the first to report cases. The first possible case of community transmission in the US was reported in California on February 26; the state reported its first death on March 4. New York lagged by days, reporting its first community transmission case on March 3 and first death on March 14. But as of April 13, the state has seen more than 23,000 cases and about 680 deaths — while New York state has more than 190,000 cases and about 9,400 deaths. Experts say it’s too early to definitively say why California is faring so much better than New York. One factor, though, is that California simply acted more quickly than New York once it became clear that coronavirus was starting to spread in the US. If cases in California remain under control while those in New York soar — still a very big if — the experience could carry important lessons for how to deal with Covid-19, the disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus. California’s experience likely reflects, at least in part, the value of quick, more proactive action — along the lines of what experts say is needed across the US, even in places that might not feel exposed to coronavirus right now. We “need to shift to a proactive mentality rather than reactive,” Krutika Kuppalli, an infectious diseases physician and emerging leader in biosecurity fellow at Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, told me. The reactive mentality “has been very much the way this outbreak has been from the beginning.” It’s also important, experts added, that California remains vigilant. With the huge economic harm caused by the coronavirus lockdowns, it can be tempting to ease off social distancing measures early. But to truly avoid a catastrophe like New York’s, experts say, California likely needs to stay at home as much as possible, at least until coronavirus cases appear to drop and proper testing and surveillance are in place to better track and mitigate new outbreak clusters. Los Angeles County officials said as much, warning about a potential peak in the next two weeks. “If you have enough supplies in your home, this would be the week to skip shopping altogether,” Los Angeles County Public Health Director Barbara Ferrer said on Monday. “Without everyone taking every possible precaution, our numbers can start skyrocketing.” There are other factors at play in the differences between the two states. One is the density of their largest cities: New York City is the densest city in the US (though San Francisco is second), and a lot of people packed closely together makes it easier for the coronavirus to spread. New York City also has higher rates of public transportation use than any other big city in the US, which could have helped spread the virus in public settings. And New York state has tested people at more than four times the rate of California, which could partly, though not mostly, explain the difference between both states’ reported cases and deaths.  A big factor — perhaps the biggest — is also chance. “There’s the possibility that there were just more introductions of the virus in the East Coast, in the New York area,” Jeffrey Martin, an epidemiologist at the University of California San Francisco, told me. But California also acted more quickly than New York once it became clear that coronavirus was starting to spread in the US. The San Francisco Bay Area issued America’s first shelter-in-place order on March 16, and California Gov. Gavin Newsom issued a statewide stay-at-home order three days later.  New York, meanwhile, didn’t issue a statewide stay-at-home order until March 22. (New York City didn’t implement its own order beforehand; Gov. Andrew Cuomo said he didn’t believe it would work if only one city did it.) And there’s evidence that social distancing was taken more seriously in some parts of California even before it was government-mandated. Restaurant data from OpenTable suggests that seated dining on March 1 was down 2 percent in New York City, but it was down 18 percent in San Francisco. (Though it was only down by 3 percent in Los Angeles, so not every place in California acted the same.) As March began in New York, officials were encouraging people to go about their business. On March 2, New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio tweeted he was “encouraging New Yorkers to go on with your lives” and “get out on the town despite Coronavirus” — offering a movie recommendation for The Traitor. That did come before New York state confirmed a case of community transmission, but it also came after Cuomo, in a press conference with de Blasio, called community transmission “inevitable.” Since I’m encouraging New Yorkers to go on with your lives + get out on the town despite Coronavirus, I thought I would offer some suggestions. Here’s the first: thru Thurs 3/5 go see “The Traitor” @FilmLinc. If “The Wire” was a true story + set in Italy, it would be this film. The same day, San Francisco Mayor London Breed, who had already declared a local state of emergency on February 25, warned the public to “prepare for possible disruption from an outbreak,” from dealing with school closures to caring for sick family members. California had confirmed a case of community transmission, in nearby Solano County, by then. New York officials seemed to take the threat more seriously in the coming days and weeks, particularly after community transmission and deaths were confirmed. The difference of a few weeks or days on public action and orders telling people to stay home may not seem like a huge deal. But it really is significant with the coronavirus, because the number of cases and deaths, especially early on in an outbreak, can double every few days if protective measures aren’t in place.  “With this virus, days, and even hours, matter,” Jen Kates, director of global health and HIV policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation, told me. By March 23, three weeks after Breed and de Blasio’s tweets, New York state reported around 5,000 new coronavirus cases a day. California reported fewer than 500. One of the big lessons from California: “Anytime you are dealing with an outbreak, if it appears like you overreacted, then you probably did the right thing,” Kuppalli said. That may be especially true for the coronavirus, because it can be a stealthy spreader. People with coronavirus can infect others before they develop significant symptoms or without ever developing symptoms (although we don’t yet know how common this is). Especially during the early stages of a Covid-19 outbreak, that means a lot of people could be walking around with the coronavirus and infecting each other without knowing it. The silent nature of the coronavirus’s spread was exacerbated by America’s lack of testing. Insufficient testing made it harder for officials to confirm people had the coronavirus, isolate them, then track down and quarantine their contacts. That made it much harder to detect any outbreak in the US and eliminated any chance of stopping it in its tracks.  From the start, then, America was missing a lot of Covid-19 cases. So once a community confirmed a coronavirus case, and especially after it saw a death, there was a good chance it already had a much more widespread outbreak — since most cases are mild (though still potentially very unpleasant) and even the worst cases can take days or weeks to show major symptoms. “Your chance of the first case being the one that comes to your attention is very, very, very, very small,” George Rutherford, an epidemiologist at the UCSF, told me. “By the time you have the first death, you have to figure that there’s been three full weeks of transmission, and there are at least several hundred cases in the population.” So once a city, state, or country is reporting a few Covid-19 cases and especially deaths, it’s typically safe to assume there is a much bigger outbreak going on — just one that’s not fully visible, at least yet, to the public. Given that coronavirus cases and deaths can double every few days, it’s especially important for the general public and officials to act quickly at that point to stop exponential growth. It’s in this context that a six- or three-day lag in issuing a stay-at-home order could really matter. It didn’t seem at the time that either California or New York had major coronavirus outbreaks just yet. But they couldn’t have known at the time — and the early action the states did take very likely prevented cases from taking off as badly as they would have otherwise. “I’m loath to criticize, and hindsight is 20/20,” Rutherford said. But “you’ve got to start early. You’ve got to do it before deaths start to accumulate. … And you’ve got to keep your foot on the brake throughout the entire period.” Some evidence on this point comes from the 1918 flu pandemic, which was linked to as many as 100 million deaths globally and about 675,000 deaths in the US. A 2007 study in PNAS found that the places that took quicker action on social distancing — closing schools and banning big public gatherings — saw better outcomes:  [C]ities in which multiple interventions were implemented at an early phase of the epidemic had peak death rates ≈50% lower than those that did not and had less-steep epidemic curves. Cities in which multiple interventions were implemented at an early phase of the epidemic also showed a trend toward lower cumulative excess mortality, but the difference was smaller (≈20%) and less statistically significant than that for peak death rates. One example cited in the study is the difference between Philadelphia, which was slow to act, and St. Louis, which was faster. As this chart shows, St. Louis did a much better job of flattening the curve and averting excess deaths: The goal with disease outbreaks is to look less like Philadelphia and more like St. Louis. So far, New York state looks more like Philly, while California has hewed closer to St. Louis. That California has so far avoided an outbreak as bad as New York’s does not mean that the state is in the clear now. To the contrary, experts cautioned, with the coronavirus still spreading quickly across the US, it’s entirely possible at this point that an outbreak could begin in any state where social distancing measures aren’t taken seriously. To that end, California and other states will likely need to maintain such restrictions for the next few weeks, if not months. Even once states see the number of coronavirus cases and deaths decline, they will need to wait some time from now for the threat to really be over. Again, the 1918 flu pandemic offers relevant evidence. St. Louis, although it’s now heralded for its early action, still appeared to, like many cities at the time, pull back social distancing measures too early. Based on a 2007 study in JAMA, that led to a spike in deaths. Here’s how that looks in chart form, with the line chart representing excess flu deaths and the black and gray bars below showing when social distancing measures were in place. The highest peak comes after social distancing measures were lifted, with the death rate falling only after they were reinstated. This did not just happen in St. Louis. Analyzing data from 43 cities, the JAMA study found this pattern repeatedly across the country. Howard Markel, an author of the study and the director of the University of Michigan’s Center for the History of Medicine, described the results as a bunch of “double-humped epi curves” — officials instituted social distancing measures, saw flu cases fall, then pulled back the measures and saw flu cases rise again. Notably, the second rise in deaths only appeared when cities removed social distancing measures, the JAMA study found: “Among the 43 cities, we found no example of a city that had a second peak of influenza while the first set of nonpharmaceutical interventions were still in effect.” For California and other states, the goal now is to not only get those curves flattened and bending downward in the next few weeks, but also make sure there isn’t another bump up. To some degree, that’ll require vigilance until a vaccine for Covid-19 is developed, which could take another year or more. But vigilance may not require a full lockdown until a vaccine. If the US scales up testing and surveillance capabilities, experts say, it could detect early warning signs of the disease and act accordingly: isolate people confirmed to have the virus, quarantine everyone they came into contact with, and, if necessary, take broader community-wide measures to make sure the virus doesn’t spread further. “If there’s enough testing around and people are willing to be tested, the brushfires can be identified and put out before the wildfire,” Martin, of UCSF, said. He emphasized, “The only way that a society can function is if the brushfires are identified and put out.” That doesn’t necessarily mean testing everyone, even those without symptoms. That’s largely impractical; for one, people who test negative would have to be retested regularly to make sure they remain negative. But it does mean testing everyone with symptoms and the people they’ve come into contact with on top of getting them to isolate and quarantine. That will allow the US, Martin explained, to reopen society and the economy more broadly. This is essentially what South Korea has done to contain coronavirus. As Max Fisher and Choe Sang-Hun reported at the New York Times, South Korean officials quickly rolled out thousands of tests — still testing, to this day, at nearly double the rate as the US — to track infections and contain them. The country has earned wide acclaim for its response, with its new coronavirus cases now on the decline after it suffered one of the biggest crises in Asia outside China. But even South Korea has braced for a potential second wave, showing the need for constant vigilance. To truly avoid more outbreaks like New York’s, the US needs to get closer to South Korea. But testing is still a problem across the country, including New York and California, experts said. The US has to fully address that problem to get back to normal.  Until then, cities and states need to take and maintain the kind of action that San Francisco and California took, both formally and informally, early on. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.    The American economy is in crisis, with record-setting new unemployment insurance claims likely pushing the overall jobless rate to its highest point since the Great Depression.  And even as President Donald Trump talks optimistically about “opening up” the economy again, the serious plans for doing so make it clear that even under the best-case scenarios, there’s going to be no rapid return to normal.  Developing and distributing a vaccine for Covid-19 will likely take at least a year, and until that happens, no edict from the White House is going to change the fact that significant sectors of the economy are going to be hamstrung by either state and local closure orders or basic individual or community-level caution about avoiding crowded places and unnecessary outings.  Meanwhile, the recession itself can easily become a self-propelling machine. People who lose jobs can’t spend money, which reduces others’ incomes. State and local governments are strapped for cash and need to cut back, which creates another cycle of falling incomes and spending. Since the virus is global, the United States can’t export its way out of the problem. And since this collapse is happening with the Fed’s main policy rate already at zero, there’s no easy lever to push to generate an automatic bounce-back. The US government ought to think of this as the equivalent of wartime, economically as well as epidemiologically, and take drastic steps to mobilize the economy for a long-term period of crisis.  Here are 11 specific ideas about how to do it. One of the most striking things about the three rounds of stimulus Congress has passed so far is the relatively small sums of money going to research and production of the tests, therapeutic drugs, and vaccines that are ultimately needed to bring the public health emergency under control again.  Keeping the country on lockdown costs the economy hundreds of billions of dollars a month, and just waving a wand to “reopen” things won’t actually solve the problem if people don’t feel safe. That means even small accelerations in the pace of treatment are incredibly valuable. If spending an extra $10 billion on something could cut the time between when a vaccine is approved and when enough people have been inoculated to establish herd immunity by one week, that would be money well spent. Some things can’t be rushed, but every single bottleneck that can be alleviated with money should have tons thrown at it. Economic downturns reduce state and local tax revenue, at which point balanced budget requirements force state and local governments to cut spending. Those spending cuts cause tangible harm by reducing the quality of public services. But they also exacerbate the downturn by reducing incomes. Congress has taken some small steps to alleviate the pain by helping state governments out with their specific health care expenses. But the budget crunch is much more general than that, and Congress could simply use its ability to borrow cheaply to transfer large sums of money into state and local coffers.  The Federal Reserve has announced a smorgasbord of new programs to bolster the economy, but its overall framework for conducting monetary policy remains the same — do a lot in the throes of a crisis, but always keep a steady eye on inflation to make sure prices don’t pop up by more than 2 percent a year. An alternative approach is what’s known as “level targeting,” where instead of staying below the 2 percent rate of inflation, the government tries to “catch up” to where inflation would have been had the recession never hit in the first place. This helps not because inflation is good, but because it creates confidence that emergency programs won’t be withdrawn at the first sign of green shoots. Congress agreed to send $1,200 to each American adult whose income was below a certain threshold, plus a smaller amount per child. In light of the depth of the economic despair, it would make sense to just do this again. And next time, Congress should be a little more open-handed about it — give everyone the same amount of money regardless of age or income.  The point isn’t just to identify people who “need help” and give them relief; it’s to bolster incomes and therefore spending levels all across the board to keep the economy humming. Why not do $100 a month for everyone and keep the money flowing until the emergency is over? Nobody likes to see price gouging during a crisis. But America has a shortage of critical medical supplies. And while it may be cheap to manufacture an N95 respirator mask once a factory is up and running, it costs quite a bit more to launch a whole new factory (or retool an existing one set up to make something else) than to recruit and train a new workforce. And people are especially unlikely to do that if they think excess demand is going to vanish in a year.  The federal government should identify a set of critical supplies — ventilators, respirator masks, face shields, disposable gloves, hand sanitizer, and hospital gowns seem like the big ones — and establish a large fund to offer zero-interest loans to finance retooling costs and to guarantee large purchases of these products at higher-than-normal prices. If this results in more supplies than needed, they could be given away to lower-income countries and stockpiled for future emergencies in the US.  While white-collar America works from home and millions lose their jobs, millions of other mostly working-class people are keeping society functioning by delivering parcels, staffing grocery stores, driving buses, and otherwise keeping the lights on. Meanwhile, front-line health care workers are risking their lives to save others. People working in these sectors — which the country absolutely does not want to shut down — should have their normal pay supplemented by a few extra dollars an hour at federal expense to address growing grievances. That will not only help stabilize the economy but will help the most important sectors of the economy actually add staff at a critical time.  Early in the crisis, President Trump called for a payroll tax cut as the main tool to bolster the economy. Congress rejected that in favor of targeting assistance to those who need help through a more generous unemployment insurance program. That was the right priority, but a cut in payroll taxes is a reasonable additional step that would have three big benefits — more money in the pockets of everyone still employed, less pressure on businesses suffering revenue drops to lay off workers, and easier expansion for companies that are seeing rising demand and considering adding staff.   Infrastructure stimulus faces a basic paradox — every politician likes the idea of taking advantage of low interest rates to build something useful over the long run, but spending on infrastructure is rarely a good short-term fix for a crisis. It’s clear that worries about coronavirus will continue to next year and beyond, so Congress can act now to make sure projects start rolling in 12 months.  Generic aid to state governments will bolster the pipeline of transportation projects, but the time is right to generously fund the construction of zero-carbon electricity sources, all of which tend to be characterized by high initial startup costs but low longer-term operating costs.  One of the things the Fed is currently doing is “quantitative easing,” where the central bank makes large-scale purchases of long-term government bonds to keep interest rates low. The Fed should enhance the potency of this move by setting explicit targets for how low it wants long-term rates to be, and commit to buying however many bonds it needs to buy to hit that target. Fed officials keep emphasizing that monetary policy alone can’t get the US through this crisis and they need big assistance from fiscal policy. Explicitly setting low long-term interest rates is the way to guarantee that Congress, and the public, knows the US can afford to borrow on a massive scale.  It’s extremely difficult to “open up” the economy again on any level unless children can safely attend school and day care facilities. But maintaining higher levels of distance, more frequent cleaning and sanitization, and more intense supervision of younger children to make sure they’re washing hands frequently and thoroughly will be costly. Big surges of cash to make sure schools have ample supplies and personnel will help create jobs in the short term, and make sure that children have someplace safe to be all day. Congress works under the tyranny of dates and calendars. But it’s foolish for members of Congress to try to guess how long emergency measures will be needed. There is no guaranteed way to know how rapidly scientists will develop a vaccine, how well new therapeutic drugs may work, how much shifting weather patterns will ameliorate the virus this summer and exacerbate it next fall, how developments in China and Japan will impact the global economy, or a dozen other relevant factors.  Emergency measures should be pegged to objective criteria. Spending directly linked to public health should taper off once a vaccine is developed. The Fed should stop capping long-term rates when it achieves its level target. Payroll tax cuts, aid to state budgets, and special infrastructure money should end when long-term rates rise above a certain level. And the direct checks to households should expire when the unemployment rate is low.  None of these measures is a panacea. There is no way to get around the reality that this deadly pandemic has led to a diminution of material living standards. Certain things a person might want to do will not be possible for a while. Others will be more cumbersome and expensive than they have been in the past. Americans ought to take the analogy between the pandemic and a major global war seriously. Even in the US, which had the good fortune not to be bombed or invaded, World War II was a time of relatively low living standards on the home front, with people forced to constrain consumption by rationing measures designed to maximize output of military equipment. But what did not happen during the war is mass unemployment, or a message that there was nothing to be done about the economy until the war was won.  The large segments of the American economy dedicated to leisure, hospitality, and food service are facing a temporary period of shrinkage. But rather than generating sustained mass unemployment and a prolonged depression, the government can and should take decisive action to reemploy people in making useful supplies, staffing grocery stores and pharmacies, enabling home delivery of necessary goods, and conquering the virus. The economic catastrophe can’t be wished away, but people also don’t need to simply endure it.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.President Donald Trump and two of his top public health advisers have taken different stances on the issue of when — and how — the decision to ease social distancing will be made.  Trump has advocated for aggressive goals in recent days, and said Saturday on Fox News that he plans to base his decision on when to adjust federal social distancing guidelines and ask businesses to reopen “on a lot of facts and a lot of instincts.” But two of his health advisers, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Dr. Anthony Fauci and Food and Drug Administration (FDA) commissioner Dr. Stephen Hahn, argued Sunday for a decision based only on the former. In separate appearances on CNN’s State of the Union and ABC’s Meet the Press, both officials emphasized that their recommendations would be based solely on constantly changing data, hesitated to make firm or sweeping predictions, and challenged the notion that there is a single, set time when the entire country will be “ready” to resume life as it once was. “It is not going to be a light switch that we say, ‘Okay it’s now June, July whatever’ — click, the light switch goes back on,” Fauci said on CNN. “It’s going to be depending where you are in the country, the nature of the outbreak that you already experienced, and the threat of an outbreak that you may not have experienced.” Trump has made it clear that he would like to see relaxed social distancing and businesses reopened soon as possible. Less than three weeks ago, he said he hoped to have the economy “opened up and raring to go by Easter,” a goal that both health officials and economists warned would backfire because it would accelerate the spread of the coronavirus and likely lead to the rapid reshuttering of the economy. Recent reports suggest the president now hopes to begin a return to normal by May 1, and there is growing pressure from some of his non-scientific advisers — as well as some Fox News personalities — to do so. On Fox News’s Justice with Judge Jeanine Saturday, Trump twice emphasized that conditions would allow the economy to begin returning to normal “soon,” and when asked how he will decide when is the right time to advise businesses to reopen, the president gave a less measured answer than Fauci. “I will be basing it on a lot of very smart people, a lot of professionals, doctors, and business leaders,” he said. “There are a lot of things that go into a decision like that. And it’s going to be based on a lot of facts and a lot of instincts also. Whether we like it or not, there is a certain instinct to it. But we have to get our country back.” This is not the first time the president’s stance on his administration’s coronavirus response hasn’t exactly aligned with the stance of his experts. But the contrast between Trump’s eagerness to reopen the country based on his gut feelings and the cautious rhetoric of top health officials does help underscore how Trump’s decision-making process on the coronavirus is detached from expert counsel and haphazard in its execution.   Trump’s health officials have been far more cautious and hesitant to offer gut-level appraisals about the future of the economy or when it will be safe to end social distancing.  ABC’s Martha Raddatz asked Hahn on Sunday if May 1 was “a good target” for reopening the economy. He responded by declining to set a date for the decision. “It is a target, and obviously we’re hopeful about that target, but I think it’s just too early to be able to tell that we see light at the end of the tunnel,” Hahn said. “I think it’s just too early for us to say whether May 1 is that date.” And Hahn was also careful to temper the optimism some have felt in seeing the confirmed case rate begin to decrease in a number of coronavirus hotspots, like New York. When asked if the worst has passed with coronavirus infections, Hahn said that the models show that “we’re very close to the peak,” but emphasized that it’s important to “take this day by day as the data come in, because this has to be a data-driven approach.” Fauci, too, during his CNN appearance on Sunday, was emphatic about how difficult it is to prognosticate in such a complex situation.  “You’re trying to balance two things: You want to make sure you don’t do something prematurely and precipitously; at the same time you pay attention to the need to try and get back to normal,” he told Tapper. When Tapper repeatedly asked when exactly the economy might be restarted, Fauci replied, “I think it could probably start at least in some ways maybe next month — and again, Jake, it’s so difficult to make those kinds of predictions.” “We are hoping that at the end of the month we can look around and say, ‘Okay, is there any element here that we can safely and cautiously start pulling back on?’ If so, do it, if not, then just continue to hunker down,” Fauci added.  Whether the president takes these words to heart remains to be seen. But he has signaled recently he intends to create a concrete plan to see the economy functioning as normal again. Friday, he said he’ll announce the members of a new “‘opening our country task force’ or ‘opening our country council’” full of “great business leaders, great doctors” and “some governors” this week. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. As the coronavirus pandemic spreads, new details continue to emerge about the way President Donald Trump mishandled the United States’ response. An investigation by the New York Times has revealed that experts and administration officials tried to warn Trump of the serious nature of the coronavirus pandemic early on. Alerts from high-ranking government experts began as far back as January, six weeks before his administration finally sprang into action on March 16, when he issued concrete guidelines for the public. The report exhaustively outlines numerous ways in which Trump avoided listening to government authorities as they proposed strategies for dealing with the pandemic. It also details an administration mired in political bickering, which hamstrung officials at every phase of their response. The report prompted epidemiologist Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, to respond that “obviously” lives could have been saved if the government had taken the warnings seriously. The report paints a portrait of Trump as being swayed by things like petty politics, one-upmanship, advice from his uninformed business associates, and his annoyance at inconsequential conspiracy theories, rather than the strenuous and sustained advice of experts — most of which he ignored for weeks. The delay resulted in a lack of effective quarantining measures, a dearth of testing centers and equipment, a failure to reallocate  existing resources, and widespread confusion about how seriously the public should be taking the disease. Here are a few of the most revealing warnings that Trump ignored or dismissed. The first reported instance of a Covid-19 case in the US was confirmed on January 21. On January 31, Trump announced a restriction on all incoming travel from China, effective on February 2.  But according to the Times, even though his own proclamation declared that “the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has determined that the virus presents a serious public health threat,” Trump himself was simultaneously telling administration officials not to “panic” over Covid-19.  Trump reportedly delivered this statement to his own health and human services secretary, Alex Azar, after Azar tried to warn him that Covid-19 could escalate into a pandemic, the night before Trump issued the ban. It was his second such warning, but Trump was dismissive: Mr. Azar was blunt, warning that the virus could develop into a pandemic and arguing that China should be criticized for failing to be transparent. Mr. Trump rejected the idea of criticizing China, saying the country had enough to deal with. And if the president’s decision on the travel restrictions suggested that he fully grasped the seriousness of the situation, his response to Mr. Azar indicated otherwise. Stop panicking, Mr. Trump told him. Trump would repeatedly display this attitude in public throughout the pandemic’s spread. Nearly a month later, he continued to claim to reporters that the coronavirus would simply vanish by April: “One day, it’s like a miracle, it will disappear.”  Multiple groups, working together and independently, attempted to alert Trump to the need for extreme action, taken early. As early as January 29, Trump received a memo from trade official Peter Navarro urging serious action to fight the virus or “leave Americans defenseless.” On February 14, another memo circulated by a group of administration experts urged social distancing, quarantining, and preparedness.  The White House’s coronavirus task force included a number of top-ranking officials who were convening to roleplay response preparedness scenarios, even before it was widely known that Covid-19 was often asymptomatic, meaning it could spread before signs of illness were detected. Then led by Azar, the task force included representatives from the CDC and the Department of Health and Human Services, as well as Fauci, representing the National Institutes of Health.  On February 24, members of the task force decided to present to Trump a plan for mitigation: a comprehensive strategy for containing the effects of the virus once it began to spread within the country. The plan, called “Four Steps to Mitigation,” called for “school dismissals and cancellations of mass gatherings,” as well as aggressive testing, quarantining, and social distancing efforts.  But the group never got to present the plan, because Trump was simultaneously infuriated over a CDC statement. Dr. Nancy Messonnier, the director of the CDC’s National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, announced in a press conference on February 26 that the virus was here and it was spreading. She also publicly announced a version of the  plan that had yet to be presented to Trump, called “Community Mitigation Guidelines to Prevent Pandemic Influenza.”   Trump’s anger at the announcement of these guidelines, and the effect it had on a plummeting stock market, prompted him to demote Azar as the leader of the White House’s response, replacing him with Vice President Mike Pence. He then stalled the White House’s efforts to enact social distancing measures and other community-level actions until March 16. Deputy National Security Adviser Matthew Pottinger had been investigating news of the outbreak since early January, suspecting correctly that China had restricted reports of the outbreak’s severity and spread. But his efforts to get news and updates about the outbreak through to senior officials and health administration officials constantly met with political obstacles. Health officials downplayed his information and politicians attempted to spin the information to benefit the US in its ongoing complicated relationship with China. The result was that Pottinger’s warnings, one of the earliest clear warnings within the administration about the coronavirus, went unheeded, as well as warnings from the National Security Council. The security experts were dismissed even as an unfounded conspiracy theory about the virus’s origin spread among some government officials, and economic advisers pushed back against taking drastic measures to thwart China.  Ironically, another conspiracy theory that the virus had come from the US, floated in a single tweet by a random Chinese official, angered Trump so much that it apparently altered his entire approach toward China. After the tweet, he shifted from tentatively praising the country’s response to calling Covid-19 “the Chinese virus” in press conferences.  The internal fighting and politicization among Trump’s administration, as well as Trump’s own capriciousness, wreaked havoc on the country’s ability to adequately prepare for the virus in time to ameliorate lost lives and widespread damage. The Times report aligns with predictions prior to the coronavirus pandemic that President Trump was setting the US up to botch its reaction to a hypothetical future outbreak, as well as criticisms once Covid-19 began to spread. “If we’d jumped into contract tracing and testing, social distancing, and health system preparedness as soon as we heard reports from China, we’d be in a very different situation now,” Céline Gounder, an epidemiologist at New York University, told Vox’s German Lopez in early April. In the wake of the Times report, medical officials echoed the opinions experts had voiced from the beginning. This morning, Fauci, the now-famous epidemiologist on the coronavirus task force, told CNN’s Jake Tapper that the US “obviously” could have saved lives if it had “started mitigation earlier.” “Could you have done something a little bit earlier? Would it have had an impact? Obviously.”  Fauci went on to stress that many factors were involved in the US response. But when Tapper asked if a more strenuous US response could have saved lives, he reiterated, “Obviously,” and added, “There was a lot of pushback about shutting things down back then.” DR. FAUCI on CNN: "You could logically say that if you had a process that was ongoing and you started mitigation earlier, you could have saved lives. Obviously no one is going to deny that ... But there was a lot of pushback about shutting things down back [in February]." pic.twitter.com/KpUDCrkS64 Fauci stressed that a huge number of considerations, from economic to logistical concerns, hampered the efforts, none of which are under Trump’s direct control.  But Trump also directly impeded efforts to fight the disease beginning years before the outbreak, when he eliminated the department of the National Security Council which would have been responsible for pandemic preparedness. He likewise worked to erode the CDC’s budget and autonomy, and when the outbreak began, he allowed petty internal infighting to take precedence over swift and effective responsiveness. Some of this was well-known before the Times report. But the Times report makes clear just how many people in Trump’s administration understood and correctly foresaw the need to act to prepare for the pandemic. It reveals just how much opportunity there was to have changed course much, much earlier. Instead, Trump’s delays and refusal to listen to experts may have led the country to a worst-case scenario — one that’s not over yet. Read the full Times report here. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The IRS has sent out the first batch of stimulus payments designed to both aid those experiencing financial difficulties and encourage spending as the coronavirus pandemic grinds the US economy to a halt. “We know many people are anxious to get their payments; we’ll continue issuing them as fast as we can,” the IRS tweeted on Saturday.  The IRS’s deposits will continue rolling out in the coming days, and the agency has said it is creating a website that will tell Americans who have yet to receive their stimulus funds when they can expect to receive them — the site is expected to be available by April 17.  The payments are being sent through direct deposit to people who filed taxes for 2018 and 2019 and authorized direct deposit for their returns. But CNN’s Sam Fossum and Kelly Mena note “people who haven’t filed returns, authorized direct deposits, or receive Social Security” may have to wait weeks — or months — to receive money. The cash transfers are part of the $2 trillion coronavirus stimulus package passed in March, which, among other things, expanded unemployment insurance and provided loans to small businesses and large corporations.  As Vox’s Li Zhou and Ella Nilsen have explained, the size of the deposits being sent out depends on income: Most adults making less than an adjusted gross income of $75,000 annually will receive a $1,200 one-time payment. Payments will go out to individuals whose income is as much as $99,000, but those bringing in more than $75,000 won’t receive the full amount. Married couples without children will receive a total of $2,400 if their joint income is less than $150,000 annually. Payments will go out to couples whose income is as much as $198,000, but those bringing in more than $150,000 won’t receive the full amount. Households with children will also receive $500 each for each child if the parent’s income qualifies for these payments and if the child is under the age of 17. Taxpayers who have filed as “head of household” in the past will receive the full $1,200 if their income is less than $112,500. There are some caveats to these rules — for instance, adults who are claimed as dependents by other adults, like many college students or adults with disabilities, will not be eligible for a direct payment. In order to get checks to those who have not filed taxes in the past two years (for example, people who make too little income to owe taxes but are not on Social Security, recently incarcerated people, and people who are homeless), the IRS has created a “minimal return” tool — essentially a mini tax return — that collects one’s essential information.  People who don’t need to use this tool include those who have already filed a federal tax return for 2018 or 2019, and people who receive Social Security retirement or disability benefits. It’s unclear if people who receive Supplemental Security Income need to fill out the form, but according to NBC News, tax experts recommend filling out the form to be safe. The IRS also plans to build an online portal for people who have filed taxes but need to update direct deposit information. For those who won’t be receiving money by direct deposit, the IRS is expected to begin sending out paper checks on April 24, and will prioritize lower-income recipients first;  higher earners receiving the funds by check can expect to receive their money by September.   Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  Even as most of America shelters in place to halt the spread of the coronavirus, a handful of governors have resisted the trend and declined to issue stay-at-home orders or comparable sweeping measures.  Arkansas’s Asa Hutchinson, governor of one of the holdout states, appeared on CNN’s State of the Union Sunday morning and defended his approach as a form of watchful waiting.  “If we need to do more, we will do more,” he said. “So that’s always an option on the table if we have to shelter in place. But right now, what we’re doing proves to be successful, this targeted approach.” The outbreak in his state is currently not bad, in other words, and if it gets bad he can always change his mind. This is true in a broad sense, and in fact his state has about 1,200 confirmed cases as of April 12. But given the virus’s exponential growth rate and potentially asymptomatic transmission, it’s a dangerous approach.  People in Arkansas could be infecting others now, and those infections — as well as spread resulting from those infections — wouldn’t be apparent for weeks. And as jurisdictions from Wuhan to Lombardy to New York have shown over and over again, bending the coronavirus curve is a relatively slow process. If you wait until the epidemic is already raging out of control, a lot of people end up dead before sterner measures take effect.  CNN reports that Hutchinson believes the low population density in Arkansas offers the state a measure of protection from the epidemic. Density has been widely cited by officials in New York City as an explanation for why the outbreak there got so out of control. And, indeed, New York is America’s densest city. On the other hand, the second-densest city, San Francisco, is widely cited as a model of successful policy response. The hotspot cities of Detroit and New Orleans are not particularly dense, and hard-hit Spain and Sweden are some of western Europe’s least-dense countries. Meanwhile, East Asian countries like South Korean and Taiwan are dramatically denser than any Western country, yet have controlled the outbreak much more successfully.  All this suggests it is unwise for a leader to rely on density alone to shield a population from the virus. But, Hutchinson also noted Sunday that it’s not as though Arkansas isn’t doing anything.  Schools are closed throughout the state, Walmart and major white-collar employers have told staff to work from home, and Tyson Foods has installed a temperature check protocol at its processing plants. Beyond institutional responses, individual Arkansans are also taking steps to protect themselves. “We have masks and social distancing,” Hutchinson told CNN. “And the people of Arkansas have embraced that.” It’s certainly possible that these steps will work — rigorous application of hand-washing, mask-wearing, school closures, and informal distancing could keep Arkansas safe, especially since few people are traveling these days. That said, the entire nation of Japan pursued this strategy, and while it seemed to be working for a while, it eventually led to a huge spike in cases.  The basic problem with watchful waiting is one seen time and again in jurisdictions with failed responses to Covid-19.  Unlike Ebola, which is extremely deadly but hard to spread, the SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes Covid-19 appears to spread very easily while being only moderately deadly. That means that, absent comprehensive testing and surveillance systems — things no US state has — by the time you notice a lot of people showing up at hospitals with serious Covid-19 cases, you have an order of magnitude more people bouncing around your community spreading virus everywhere. Since cases grow exponentially, your health care system can get rapidly overwhelmed, at which point the case fatality rate spikes because patients can’t be treated as carefully.  That Arkansas doesn’t have packed subway trains perhaps helps mitigate the risk. But Albany, Georgia, saw a massive outbreak driven by a super-spreading event at a funeral. And concerningly, even though Arkansas is a low-density state, it has an above-average level of crowded housing since it’s also a low-income state.  In other words, Hutchinson is running a huge risk of ending up caught behind the curve despite ample warning from experiences in other states and cities. If grassroots social distancing is sufficiently widespread, it might work out in the end after all. But the idea that you don’t need to lock down now because you can do it later instead is one that’s proven dangerously misguided. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.A number of churches across America are holding in-person services to celebrate Easter Sunday, despite federal guidelines calling for people to avoid public gatherings. The issue of whether to hold in-person Easter services has revealed a split among top conservatives, with President Donald Trump encouraging Christians to worship from home while observing social distancing protocols, and members of the House Freedom Caucus arguing that restrictions on church services are an affront to First Amendment rights of freedom of religion and assembly.   While many churches are remaining closed as part of a nationwide effort to slow the spread of the coronavirus, there are numerous reports of churches and even megachurches deciding to hold services. In at least eight states, religious organizations have been deemed essential services, allowing them to be exempt from stay-at-home orders. While the majority of churches around the country have experimented with alternatives to conventional services — things like livestreamed prayers and drive-in services in parking lots — there have been clashes over restrictions on Easter Sunday, which would in normal circumstances lead to a huge boom in church attendance.  State and local officials have begun taking action to limit attendance at religious services, with mixed results. For example, the mayor of Louisville, Kentucky, issued an order prohibiting drive-in church services for Easter weekend, but a church sued the mayor and the city — and won a temporary restraining order from a federal judge who deemed the policy unconstitutional. US District Judge Justin Walker wrote in his order: “On Holy Thursday, an American mayor criminalized the communal celebration of Easter.”    In Kansas, state lawmakers overturned the governor’s executive order restricting religious gatherings to 10 people ahead of Easter, calling the order “a blatant violation of our fundamental rights.” And other religious leaders have held services in violation of state orders.  The Life Tabernacle Church near Baton Rouge, Louisiana, expected a crowd of more than 2,000 on Easter Sunday despite a ban on gatherings of over 50 people in the state. The church’s pastor, Rev. Tony Spell, said his faith would protect him and his attendees from falling ill. “God will shield us from all harm and sickness,” Spell told Reuters. “We are not afraid. We are called by God to stand against the Antichrist creeping into America’s borders.” Spell made this proclamation despite having faced legal consequences for defying state restrictions in the past: He has already been charged with six misdemeanors for holding services. As Slate’s Daniel Politi reports, some churches think of Easter as simply too important of a day to conduct services online, and are trying to find ways to offer socially distant in-person services. The Glorious Way Church in Houston will split its services into two sessions, offer hand sanitizer, and limit a 1,000-person space to 100 congregants. “If it’s a crisis, the church should be able to dispel fear and panic and not join in with the fear and panic,” the church’s pastor John Greiner told the Texas Tribune. “We can’t really make a difference in our world just online.” House Freedom Caucus Chairman Andy Biggs (R-AZ) and Rep. Jody Hice (R-GA) wrote a letter to Trump, Vice President Mike Pence, and Attorney General William Barr on Saturday arguing against prohibiting services at places of worship.  “Calling on individuals to have greater awareness of their environments, keep reasonable distance from others, and strive to maintain better hygiene may all be warranted as we continue to confront the many unknowns of this virus,” Biggs and Hice wrote. “Prohibitions on worship have no place in these restrictions.”  “Members of many faiths are called upon to gather in community to worship,” they continued. “And the First Amendment protects their right to do so. Sadly, many leaders around the country have taken this pandemic as an opportunity to deem worship gatherings non-essential.” In particular, Biggs and Hice decried that Kentucky Gov. Andy Beshear’s ban on mass gatherings applies to church services, and that Beshear has pledged to record the license plates of people attending Easter services and impose a quarantine order on them. “There is no place for this behavior in America,” Biggs and Hice wrote. While Trump said in March he hoped to have “packed churches” on Easter, he has in more recent days encouraged people to continue observing social distancing orders on the religious holiday. On Saturday, he tweeted that he would be tuning into a livestream at Dallas’s First Baptist Church rather than attending a service in person. And on Sunday, he tweeted out a video message encouraging people to continue social distancing practices despite it being Easter.  HAPPY EASTER! pic.twitter.com/UX5Bhm82H2 “[T]his Easter will be much different than others, because in many cases we will be separated physically only from our churches,” Trump said. “We won’t be sitting there next to each other which we’d like to be. And soon we’ll be again. But right now we’re keeping separation.”  Clearly, not everyone agrees with the president on this issue. But should he want to ease social distancing in the weeks to come — as he has suggested is the case — Trump will have to find a way to convince the public not to gather in close spaces. Should such gatherings continue, reductions the country has seen in confirmed cases could halt, making the case for “reopening” parts of the country far more difficult to make.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  As the coronavirus pandemic spreads, misinformation is spreading along with it. And one of the most common misunderstandings people have about Covid-19 is where it came from.  While scientists are still researching the virus’s origins, at the moment, experts believe that Covid-19 likely came to humans from bats through an unknown intermediate animal. But a recent Pew study found nearly 30 percent of Americans believe something else — namely, the conspiracy theory that Covid-19 was created by humans in a laboratory. And nearly a quarter of those surveyed believed humans created Covid-19 intentionally.  The results of the poll may seem startling, but it also reflects just how difficult it’s been to convey accurate information about the pandemic clearly to those who need it the most. The Pew survey asked 8,914 American adults whether they believed the current strain of the coronavirus “came about naturally, was developed intentionally in a lab, was made accidentally in a lab, or doesn’t really exist.”  Only 43 percent chose “came about naturally,” while 23 percent of those surveyed said the virus was made intentionally by humans. Another 6 percent said it was created accidentally, and 1 percent said the virus didn’t actually exist. The survey, conducted from March 10 to 16, has a margin of error of 1.6 percentage points. These sentiments emerged despite a majority of those surveyed — 70 percent — saying that the news media had been covering coronavirus “very well” or “somewhat well.”  That’s a pretty revealing dichotomy. And it suggests that this particular conspiracy theory has infiltrated the news — or that journalists are not doing enough to clearly and convincingly explain what is known about the origins of the virus.  The belief that Covid-19 was created by humans stems from speculation by some scientists during the early days of the outbreak that the virus came from a laboratory. These scientists formed this hypothesis because while most of the earliest Covid-19 patients frequented the same animal market in Wuhan, China, not all of them had. So some scientists proposed that the origin point could have been a Chinese laboratory where humans were working with bats.  Microbiologist Richard Ebright speculated to the Washington Post that the virus could have passed to humans in a lab accident, “with, for example, an accidental infection of a laboratory worker.” That hypothesis was picked up and published in a number of media outlets, and quickly echoed by some government officials, including members of British Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s administration. There was little scientific evidence to support this belief, which seems to have been bolstered by the proximity of a branch of the China Center for Disease Control and Prevention to the Wuhan animal market, and not much else. The scientific consensus was that the virus came to humans by way of natural contact with animal hosts. But the idea spread anyway. As it spread, it formed a variant strand: a conspiracy that the virus not only came from a lab, but was created there.  Vox’s Eliza Barclay explained this conspiracy theory in March, noting how widely it had spread among right-wing pundits like Rush Limbaugh, and how Chinese media outlets were working to debunk it. Its popularity among the right-wing was arguably part of the ongoing wave of xenophobia directed at China in the wake of the outbreak. Another version of the theory, subsequently voiced by at least one Chinese official, held that the virus came from a lab in the United States.  Regardless of which country these conspiracy theories favor, it’s telling that variants of it have appeared alongside verified facts about the virus, often given voice by both media outlets and authority figures. It can be difficult to vet information in a time of crisis and rapidly unfolding news developments, and fake news about Covid-19 has circulated widely.  A more complicated factor in the spread of false beliefs in the US is the role the Trump administration has played in alternately downplaying, undermining, and rebuking efforts to take the pandemic seriously, with Trump himself repeatedly making false or unsubstantiated claims about the virus. As Vox’s German Lopez summed up in March: [Trump] previously tweeted comparisons to the common flu, which in fact appears to be less deadly and spread less easily than the coronavirus. He called concerns about the virus a “hoax.” He said on national television that, based on nothing more than a self-admitted “hunch,” the death rate of the disease is much lower than public health officials projected. And in February, he said of the coronavirus, “One day it’s like a miracle, it will disappear.”  Considering these kinds of claims, it’s unsurprising that right-wing media supportive of the president has also downplayed the seriousness of the virus. This, however, has had consequences. A March poll found that a majority of Fox News viewers think coronavirus fears are exaggerated. It’s the kind of news environment in which conspiracy theories flourish. But this sort of misinformation can have deadly results. Polling suggests the people most likely to believe coronavirus conspiracy theories are also the people most likely to be in danger from the virus.  According to Pew, respondents with a high school diploma or less education, as well as respondents identifying as black and Latino, were more likely to believe humans made Covid-19. Given the systemically unequal, sometimes horrifically racist history of health care in the US, it’s little wonder minorities might distrust the things scientists and health officials tell them about the virus.  But this systemic inequality, combined with inadequate government preparation and protection, means these are the populations most likely to die from exposure to the virus. For example, as of April 11, 41 percent of Michigan’s Covid-19 related deaths were of black people, despite black people being 14 percent of that state’s population.  Low-income, working-class, and minority individuals are all more likely to have unequal and intermittent access to health care and health insurance, to have underlying health conditions, to be located in danger zones where worse air pollution means more susceptibility to the virus, and to work at jobs that put them at increased risk of exposure.  All these factors mean the Pew survey isn’t just revealing conspiracy theories: It’s saying that those who believe misinformation about the virus are also the people most likely to be harmed by the pandemic. It says that despite most people trusting media to deliver them accurate facts, those most vulnerable to Covid-19 still aren’t getting all the information they need. This is particularly concerning given skepticism over the coronavirus has already wreaked havoc on some states’ efforts to battle the pandemic, and because limiting the spread of the virus requires not just government action, but action on the individual level. And that is why it is incumbent on the media to get out accurate information — about how the virus started and about how to curb it. Because making sure people have access to the clearest, most correct, up-to-date information can be literally a matter of life or death.    Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.The death toll in the United States from the novel coronavirus has surpassed 20,000 meaning the country has overtaken Italy for the highest number of confirmed fatalities from the pandemic. This grim milestone was expected, as the US recorded more than 2,000 deaths in a single day Friday. It was the highest number of deaths any country has recorded in 24 hours since the start of the outbreak.  Though the US now has the highest total death toll worldwide, Italy currently still has more deaths per capita. The global number of confirmed coronavirus cases is now greater than 1.7 million, and the number of deaths around the world topped 100,000 on April 11, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. Officials had previously warned that the US should brace for a sharply rising death toll in what was likely to be its toughest week yet of the coronavirus pandemic. “This is going to be the hardest and the saddest week of most Americans’ lives, quite frankly,” US Surgeon General Jerome Adams said last week on Fox News Sunday. The magnitude of the crisis differs among states and localities. New York alone has more confirmed cases than any other country right now. The state registered more than 8.600 deaths as of April 11, including 783 in the past 24 hours. These figures are likely an undercount, as people were dying at home without having had a coronavirus test, and so haven’t previously made it into the official count.  New Jersey and Michigan are the two other US states with fatality numbers that exceed 1,000. Wyoming is the only state, so far, without any reported coronavirus deaths.  “This is the end of the week, that famous week that we spoke about last week, in what was predicted to happen, happened,” Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease expert, said Friday at a White House press briefing.  At the end of March, the White House presented data that suggested between 100,000 and 200,000 people could die from the coronavirus. Though there have been some questions about the statistical models the administration used to make that estimate, Fauci said Thursday the estimates are now closer to 60,000 — in part because aggressive stay-at-home measures are working. That is still an astounding figure. Though the US now leads the world in confirmed coronavirus fatalities, Dr. Deborah Birx, coordinator of the White House coronavirus task force, said Friday the country had not yet reached the peak of the pandemic. “We have not reached the peak,” Birx said. “Every day we have to continue to do what we did yesterday, and the week before, and the week before that, because that’s what in the end is going to take us up across the peak and down the other side.” Different states are expected to peak at different times, and despite the startling death tolls, there are some glimmers of optimism. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Friday that, on average, the state is seeing a decline in hospitalization and ICU admissions. Experts say there are signs the curve is beginning to flatten in other hard-hit places, such as Michigan. Birx, and Fauci, emphasized that, despite some promising signs, maintaining social distancing measures remained imperative. “It’s important to remember that this is not the time to feel that, since we have made such important advances and success of the mitigation, that we need to be pulling back at all,” Fauci said Friday. This, though, is going to be a likely source of tension as the US begins to get a handle on the pandemic. The extreme measures that are limiting the spread of the virus have brought the US economy to a near-standstill, with businesses shuttered and millions of workers unemployed. The number of jobless claims filed in the week ending April 4 reached 6.6 million; in the past three weeks combined the number of claims has exceeded 16 million. A few weeks ago, President Donald Trump said he wanted to see packed churches for Easter, a vision he had to rescind once it became clear that, far from being back to normal, the country would be bracing for devastation if the administration did not extend its social distancing guidelines.  But Trump made that decision back when cases and deaths were increasing and increasing by the day; now, if the US begins to see signs that the virus is under control, pressure may intensify to try to ease restrictions and reopen segments of the economy. The Trump administration is reportedly pushing to reopen much of the country by May. And that, public health experts warn, could quickly mean a resurgence of coronavirus cases if it happens too abruptly.  “If you ease up prematurely the epidemic can rebound right back to the level we are at now in a matter of weeks,” Chris Murphy, a researcher for the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, which has been modeling Covid-19 projections for the US, told NPR. “So the potential for rebound is enormous if we let up on social distancing.” Of course, Trump doesn’t just have the power to simply re-open the economy. Those decisions will fall to states and localities, who will make their own determinations on when it’s safe to ease restrictions.  And this means, regardless of what recommendation the federal government chooses to make, reopening the country by May 1 is looking unlikely. Los Angeles County, for example, just extended its lockdown until at least May 15. New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio said an opening was possible in May or June, if New Yorkers “really work hard” and abide by social distancing. On Saturday, de Blasio said schools would be closed for the rest of the school year, though Cuomo, the governor, described it as an “opinion” and wanted to coordinate with other localities in metropolitan area. Any initiatives to end current social distancing measures — even if they are rolled out in the summer — depend on having an aggressive plan to keep the number of infections low. Any such plan will almost certainly require widespread testing and contact-tracing (identifying those infected, and who they’ve come in contact with, so everyone can be quickly quarantined), two things the US does not yet have the capacity, or a clear plan, to implement on such a massive scale.  Update: This article has been updated with more current statistics, and to note that the US’s population is greater than Italy’s.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.     US Surgeon General Jerome Adams is facing criticism for controversial remarks he made during a White House coronavirus press conference on Friday, during which he discussed how communities of color can fight the spread of coronavirus and asked them to observe social distancing protocols “for your big mama.” Adams made the remarks as he worked to address that the Covid-19 death rate is higher for Americans of color than it is for white Americans, pointing out, for example, that in Wisconsin’s Milwaukee County, African Americans make up 25 percent of the population, but 75 percent of the confirmed deaths.  But while Adams brought up a number of underlying issues that contribute to this tragic reality, his remarks on those issues were ultimately overshadowed by rhetoric many found offensive — and that appeared to suggest minority Covid-19 deaths were a matter of personal responsibility rather than part of an ongoing crisis public health experts have said they are struggling to control.  Adams, who is a member of the White House’s coronavirus task force and often speaks during its daily briefings, ended his remarks Friday by telling communities of color they “are not helpless” in working to limit the spread of the virus. After prescribing social distancing and hand-washing, the surgeon general said:  Avoid alcohol, tobacco, and drugs. And call your friends and family. Check in on your mother; she wants to hear from you right now. And speaking of mothers, we need you to do this, if not for yourself, then for your abuela. Do it for your granddaddy. Do it for your Big Mama. Do it for your Pop-Pop. We need you to understand — especially in communities of color, we need you to step up and help stop the spread so that we can protect those who are most vulnerable. Adams’s comments swiftly received sharp pushback from progressive commentators. Given that this kind of rhetoric has generally not been targeted at general audiences or white communities, it implicitly seems to hold people of color to a uniquely high bar. When Yamiche Alcindor, White House correspondent for PBS NewsHour, asked Adams to respond to criticism that his language was “offensive,” he said he was simply trying to be targeted in his communication. “We need targeted outreach to the African American community, and I use the language that is used in my family. I have a Puerto Rican brother-in-law. I call my granddaddy ‘granddaddy.’ I have relatives who call their grandparents, ‘big momma’,” Adams said. “So that was not meant to be offensive. That is the language that we use, and that I use, and we need to continue to target our outreach to those communities.”  He added, “We need everyone, black, brown, white, whatever color you are, to follow the president’s coronavirus guidelines.” Adams’s clarification did little to address the pressing social inequities that are contributing to the disparity in health outcomes — and ultimately, his attempt to “target our outreach” obscured the portion of his address that did begin to speak to the larger problems that have led Covid-19 to kill minorities more often than white Americans.  Adams began his remarks by saying communities of color are more vulnerable to coronavirus complications and fatalities because they suffer disproportionately from chronic health conditions, and due to the “burden of social ills.”  He pointed out that Latinos represent a majority of Covid-related deaths in New York City, the epicenter of the American coronavirus crisis, even though they make up less than a third of the population. “People of color experience [are] both more likely [to have] exposure to Covid-19 and increased complications from it,” Adams said. “But let me be crystal clear: We do not think people of color are biologically or genetically predisposed to get Covid-19. There is nothing inherently wrong with you. But they are socially predisposed to coronavirus ... exposure and to have a higher incidence of the very diseases that put you at risk for severe complications of coronavirus.” And this is true due to a long history of institutional racism and economic inequity, as Vox’s Anna North explained:  [B]lack Americans are more likely to have underlying conditions because of widespread racism and inequality, experts say. Many differences in health outcomes in America are “produced by access to things like adequate time to prepare healthy foods at home” and “adequate money to not be working three shifts and have really high stress levels,” Lynch said — access that white people are just more likely to have. As [Fabiola] Cineas notes, 22 percent of black Americans lived in poverty in 2018, compared with 9 percent of white Americans. Beyond poverty, a number of factors contribute to poor health among black people, from racism in medical settings to the physical health effects of discrimination. Redlining and other forms of housing discrimination have made black Americans more likely to live in neighborhoods affected by environmental contamination, which federal and state officials have been slow to respond to, in turn raising rates of chronic illness.  Adams did not clarify precisely what he meant by “social ills” or “socially predisposed,” but he mentioned — among other things — that people of color are more likely to live in multigenerational homes and that “only one in five African Americans and one in six Hispanics has a job that lets them work from home.” “We tell people to wash their hands, but as studies showed, 30 percent of the homes on Navajo Nation don’t have running water. So how are they going to do that?” Adams said. So Adams’s remarks did acknowledge that there are structural socioeconomic factors like housing and job conditions contributing to the acute vulnerabilities of communities of color. But he didn’t get into why they exist and how much of it doesn’t come down to individual behavior. Instead, his talk of personal responsibility — a familiar trope that’s often used to blame communities of color for their suffering — obscured the fact that a lot of these issues stem from a history of institutional racism. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.       One exchange during Friday’s White House coronavirus press briefing illustrated that President Donald Trump still fundamentally misunderstands why widespread and readily available testing is so crucial to his goal of getting the economy back up and running again.  Asked by NBC’s Peter Alexander how he could possibly know that the coronavirus “will soon be in full retreat” without widespread testing, Trump said he’ll know because “people aren’t going to go to the hospital, people aren’t going to get sick.” “You’re gonna see nobody’s gonna be getting sick anymore,” Trump continued. “It will be gone and it won’t be that much longer.” Trump says he doesn't think a massive testing protocol will be necessary because "people are not going to go to the hospital, people are not going to get sick" -- completely overlooking that asymptomatic people can spread the coronavirus pic.twitter.com/skP97TcEsq What Trump overlooked, however, is that the coronavirus can be spread by people without symptoms. So merely testing people who are already sick will not be sufficient to stop the spread. Those who have come into contact with others who have tested positive will also need to be tested to make sure they aren’t unwittingly spreading the virus. Public health experts understand this. As my colleague German Lopez detailed, new plans about what comes after the current period of stringent social distancing put together by the left-leaning Center for American Progress and right-leaning American Enterprise Institute both emphasize that “widespread testing will let public health officials detect and subsequently contain any future outbreaks before everything has to be locked down.” But the US is currently only completing about 130,000 tests per day on average — a far cry from the 500,000 or so experts agree will be necessary to contain the coronavirus until a vaccine is available. 
    Related
   At another point during Friday’s briefing, Trump claimed that “vast areas of the country” are not experiencing outbreaks on the scale of New York or Louisiana and therefore “do not need” to conduct widespread testing. “You don’t need testing there,” Trump said. "Vast areas of our country do not need this." -- Trump argues "there is no issue" with testing because there are enough to go around for America's most rural areas pic.twitter.com/0yg0cTozTl But with the virus having already spread to all 50 states, widespread testing will be needed to prevent future outbreaks from spiraling out of control. His comments also omit that, as New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo (D) said earlier Friday, more testing capacity will be needed to get New York’s economy back up and running. Cuomo suggested that Trump should use the Defense Production Act to compel private companies to manufacture test kits. Trump’s misguided comments about testing on Friday came one day after he categorically denied the necessity of a nationwide testing system.  “We have a great testing system. Right now, we have the best testing system in the world,” Trump said, ignoring that the US is still testing far fewer people per capita than countries that are having more success fighting the coronavirus, like South Korea and Japan. 
    Related
   The irony of all this is that nobody is pushing harder to relax social distancing than Trump, who faces a tough reelection fight this year that will be made more difficult unless the wreckage of the economy is put back together relatively quickly. In fact, Trump closed his briefing on Friday by insisting that “we have to get back to work. We have to get our country open.” “I have a big decision coming up, and I only hope to God that’s it’s the right decision,” he added, alluding to his deliberations about when it will be appropriate to recommend the relaxation of social distancing. Trump closes with this: "We have to get back to work. We have to get our country open. But we could have lost 2 million people ... so I'm very honored by our decisions, all of us ... I have a big decision coming up. And I only hope to God that's it's the right decision." pic.twitter.com/byldZVbEDq Public health experts widely agree that more robust coronavirus testing is the quickest means to that end. Trump not only doesn’t get that, but he is actively working at cross purposes: The federal government ended funding for local coronavirus testing sites on Friday. And when Trump was asked by CNN’s Jim Acosta on Friday about officials like Cuomo who say that more testing capacity is needed, Trump went on the attack, admonishing Acosta that “you shouldn’t be asking that kind of a question ... it is very insulting to a lot of great people.” Trump, however, seems resolved to plow forward with trying to restore the economy even in the absence of more testing. Asked on Friday what metrics he’ll use to decide when to relax social distancing, Trump pointed to his head and said, “the metric is right here. That’s my metrics. That’s all I can do.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.As nations like China and Singapore with more centralized governments and public health systems have been relatively effective in enforcing social distancing and containing coronavirus, the response in the United States has been fragmented and incoherent. California was the first state to issue a stay-at-home order on March 19, but as of April 8 five states still had no order and three others had orders for only some parts of the state.  Even as the last holdouts gradually give in and order their residents to shelter in place, data tracking mobile phone locations suggests that many Americans have not fundamentally altered their behavior. Unacast, a company specializing in the analysis of “human mobility data,” has put together a Social Distancing Scoreboard that measures average distance traveled as well as “nonessential visits” to venues like spas, cinemas, jewelers, and department and clothing stores.  The data is imperfect, but there is a strong signal amid the noise. As of April 7, for instance, the data showed that average mobility in the nation as a whole had fallen by more than 40 percent since February. But that figure obscures tremendous variation in behavior change across US states, and across counties within the same states.  Containing the spread of the coronavirus requires collective, unified action, but data on social distancing makes it clear this isn’t happening everywhere. The question is why. In what kinds of places are residents deciding to move about as if they are immune to the virus that has paralyzed much of the world? What do they look like, and why are they ignoring the calls for social distancing?  To get some hints, I put together several sources of data from US counties focusing on economic and demographic characteristics, voting patterns, civic engagement and social capital, and even attitudes toward climate change from Yale’s Climate Change in the American Mind survey.  Analyzing the data reveals that social distancing behavior is related to education; to race and ethnicity; to political identity and social capital; and to the impact that this virus has already had on the residents of particular counties. And the various sources of data also reveal a larger pattern.  One of the strongest and most robust predictors of social distancing behavior is found in attitudes toward another major challenge facing the United States: climate change. Places where residents are less likely to agree that global warming is happening, that humans are the cause, and that we have an obligation to do something about it are the places where residents haven’t changed their behavior in response to coronavirus. The analysis makes clear that we have a collective action problem much larger than Covid-19.  Almost 2 million people live in Bexar County, Texas, which contains the city of San Antonio and parts of several smaller towns and cities surrounding it. As of April 9, the county had over 500 cases of coronavirus and 18 deaths.  Mobile phone data from Unacast suggests the residents of Bexar County are taking the virus seriously. Travel has dropped by more than 55 percent since February, and nonessential visits have fallen by over 70 percent. Bexar is part of a string of counties in the south of Texas, running northward from San Antonio to Austin, where behavior has changed drastically since the emergence of Covid-19.  
    Related
   In the more sparsely populated counties just south of Bexar, however, residents haven’t scaled back their daily travel nearly as much. Atascosa, Wilson, and Gonzalez counties, all of which have confirmed cases of coronavirus, were each given a D in the Social Distancing Scoreboard. Further east, Harris County, the home of Houston, received a B mainly due to a sharp drop in nonessential visits. In neighboring Liberty County, where 14 cases have been confirmed, the decline in nonessential visits is not nearly as steep, and the county earned a D. Although the letter grades provide a simple summary that we all understand, it is important to put the numbers in the scoreboard into some context. Social distancing is simply impossible for some segments of the population who need to move around for work or for essential food and supplies, and daily travel looks very different in rural areas where residents are spread out. Yet similar counties exhibit different patterns of behavior, suggesting that some degree of choice, guided by local norms, is influencing behavioral change. At a moment when a unified effort is crucial to stopping the spread of this new virus, the uneven geography of social distancing may be the biggest threat to our success in containing Covid-19.  Data from the south of Texas shows a sharp divide between urban and rural counties, but the story of social distancing is not a simple story of population density. In fact, the lowest social distancing grades are found in non-metro areas adjacent to larger cities, rather than in rural, sparsely populated counties.  Other measures like the age profile of the county, the total size of the population, the racial and ethnic composition, and even the total number of confirmed cases of Covid-19 do not have a clear relationship with social distancing behavior. Different characteristics turn out to be much better predictors; the strongest predictors are shown in the chart above.  
    Related
   Counties that have experienced at least one death from Covid-19 are more likely to comply with social distancing guidelines, as one might expect. Grades are also higher in counties where residents have higher income, more education, and lower rates of unemployment (measured prior to the crisis).  Perhaps unsurprisingly, politics and civic engagement bear a strong relationship to social distancing behavior. Higher levels of social capital — a combination of voter turnout in federal elections, response rates in the 2010 census, the number of associations and the number of nonprofits per capita — is associated with more social distancing. By contrast, counties with the greatest share of votes for Trump in the 2016 election were least likely to practice social distancing. And the greater the share of residents who disagreed with the statement that global warming is happening, the worse the county’s grade received in the Social Distancing Scoreboard.  All of these characteristics of counties are intertwined in complex ways, which means the patterns in the chart are meaningful only in a superficial way. And some of the variation across counties might simply be driven by differences in behavior in blue and red states, where governors have taken more or less aggressive approaches to encouraging social distancing. To push further, it is useful to consider all of these county factors together, and to analyze variation in social distancing among counties within the same states.  To do so, I carried out a regression analysis with all of the county-level measures and including fixed effects for states — this approach means that the analysis focuses only on variation among counties within the same states. (I should note that the results are virtually identical if I get rid of the state fixed effects and make comparisons among all counties across the nation.)  When all variables are included in the same model, I find counties that have experienced a death from Covid-19 exhibit higher levels of social distancing, but counties with more cases exhibit lower levels. Counties with larger populations, with more educated residents, and with higher percentages of white and Hispanic residents tend to receive higher grades on social distancing, while the age structure, the median income, and the unemployment rate are no longer associated with social distancing behavior.  Social distancing grades rise with the level of social capital in a county, and grades fall with the percentage of the county voters who cast a ballot for Trump in 2016. Last, even after adjusting for all these other characteristics, counties within the same state where a greater share of residents do not agree that global warming is happening are substantially less likely to change their behavior in response to Covid-19.  In fact, attitudes toward climate change are one of the strongest and most robust predictors of social distancing behavior. In the full model I find that an increase of 10 percentage points in the share of residents who do not agree that global warming is happening is associated with a 1 point drop in the county’s social distancing grade — which essentially means shifting from, say, a C to a B- in social distancing behavior.  The same results apply no matter how I run the analysis, and they apply to just about every question asked in the Climate Change in the American Mind survey. In the places where residents don’t think global warming is real, where they don’t believe humans are responsible, where they don’t think citizens have a responsibility to act, residents are also failing to change their behavior during the coronavirus crisis.  America’s spatial divisions are being exposed and amplified during this period of crisis. Because Covid-19 isn’t bound by the administrative boundaries that divide one county from another, efforts to mitigate the spread of the virus in any given county can be undermined by residents one county over who are ignoring guidelines for social distancing. Divergence in social distancing behavior represents perhaps the most serious risk to our national efforts to overcome this crisis.  But the problem isn’t limited to the coronavirus. When we do get past this crisis, we will face a set of new challenges, along with others that have been around for decades but are becoming more urgent. How does our economy recover from Covid-19? How do we deal with the long-term rise of economic inequality, and the persistence of racial inequality and injustice? What do we do about the opioid epidemic? And how do we respond to climate change?  All these challenges require a collective, unified solution, and difficult decisions to protect the entire society and future generations. Yet we are a nation that has become increasingly divided along spatial lines. For decades, Americans have been encouraged to respond to major challenges like urban decline, social unrest, and environmental degradation by isolating themselves in areas that are increasingly segregated by class and by politics.  Covid-19 is exposing the limits of that response, but it also raises a question that is crucial to answer if the United States is going to prosper in the coming decades: In a divided nation, how do we come together — figuratively, for the time being — to solve collective challenges? Patrick Sharkey is professor of sociology and public affairs at Princeton University’s Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs. Follow him on Twitter: @patrick_sharkey. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.The state of coronavirus testing in America means that an end to social distancing is likely a long way off.  Two and a half months after the first reported coronavirus case in the US, America still doesn’t have the capacity that it needs to track all cases — a prerequisite for ending social distancing, according to a range of public health experts, health care providers, and private labs. More testing is a cornerstone of every plan that calls for ending the social distancing measures that have shut down huge swaths of the economy and confined many Americans to their homes. The idea, as outlined in plans from the left-leaning Center for American Progress (CAP) and the right-leaning American Enterprise Institute (AEI), is that widespread testing will let public health officials detect and subsequently contain any future outbreaks before everything has to be locked down. As Jeffrey Martin, an epidemiologist at the University of California San Francisco, put it, “The only way that a society can function is if the brushfires are identified and put out” — before they turn into a wildfire. There have been some recent improvements in testing capacity, with the reported number of daily tests increasing by tens of thousands in the past two weeks. But experts say the US is still very far from where it needs to be. “All of the talking points about how we have made massive progress has let everybody say that okay, this problem has been solved,” Ashish Jha, the faculty director of the Harvard Global Health Institute, told me. “But it hasn’t.” As of April 6, Quest Diagnostics, one of the largest private testing facilities in the US, still had a backlog of roughly 80,000 tests as it faces more demand than it can handle. Adjusted for population, the US has tested at just 74 percent the rate of South Korea — where widespread testing has been credited with containing the country’s outbreak — and is even further behind Germany, Italy, and Canada. On the ground, the lack of widespread testing makes it difficult for many, if not most, people with relatively mild symptoms of Covid-19, the disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus, to obtain a test. If you’re hospitalized with the disease, there’s a good chance you can get tested. But if you’re in an outpatient setting, experts said testing remains very difficult if not impossible. And even those who get tested can expect delays in getting results, with labs generally taking days — or even a week or more — to run and report tests. Every day this problem continues, America remains further away from reopening its economy, at least safely, and overcoming the current outbreak. Testing is crucial: It gives officials the means to isolate the sick, quarantine their contacts, and deploy community-wide efforts if necessary. Without that, the only way to deal with the outbreak is more social distancing, which further cripples the economy, or letting the disease run its course — which, in the case of Covid-19, could result in hundreds of thousands, or even millions, of deaths. So no matter how many improvements there have been, America still needs more testing. “It’s one of those things that is absolutely astounding,” Krutika Kuppalli, a fellow in the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Emerging Leaders in Biosecurity program, told me. “Three and a half months into this outbreak, we’re still talking about the basic issue of we need to get testing up and going.” Ideally, testing could be used to check not only everyone with symptoms but also their close contacts, who could subsequently be isolated or quarantined as well. More testing could also allow random community sampling, whether through home tests or by checking samples collected in doctor’s offices as part of other check-ups. This would allow public health officials to not only track and contain every individual case but also detect and curtail broader community outbreaks. The US is simply not there yet. “The country still has a problem with testing,” Amesh Adalja, a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, told me. 
    Related
   The nation was already behind, largely due to failures under President Donald Trump’s administration. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) sent out its own faulty tests and failed to correct the error for weeks. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) maintained regulatory barriers to private labs conducting tests even after the federal government declared a public health emergency in January. And the government failed to supply labs with enough testing supplies. That all amounted to a “lost month,” the New York Times reported, between late January and early March as Covid-19 cases grew in the US. (The CDC, FDA, and White House didn’t respond to requests for comment.) That reflects America’s general lack of preparedness for pandemics — a problem many experts warned about even before the Covid-19 outbreak. Experts emphasized that proper preparedness would have allowed the US to quickly scale up testing nationwide, whether by easing regulatory hurdles, coordinating efforts, fixing supply lines, or doing anything else that’s necessary. Things have improved in recent weeks: During the week of April 6, the US completed roughly 150,000 tests a day, according to the Covid Tracking Project. That’s a big improvement from early March, when tests numbered below the dozens (and later the hundreds). But the daily total hasn’t improved much compared with the week of March 30, when the US completed an average of more than 130,000 tests a day. There is no widely accepted number for how many tests America should run each day, but the current number is generally considered far too low by experts. Jha put the ideal at 500,000 tests a day. Scott Gottlieb, former FDA commissioner and coauthor of the AEI report, suggested that everyone who goes to a doctor could be tested, which would amount to more than 500,000 a day. A Harvard model proposed millions of tests a day. On the ground, the testing shortage is apparent. Though LabCorp, another large testing company, no longer has a backlog (unlike Quest Diagnostics, which had a backlog of 80,000 as of April 6), a spokesperson for the company told me that turnaround for results is still around three to four days, with longer delays in places that are hit particularly hard by Covid-19. Health care facilities trying to test have also faced issues. After calling around to suppliers, Elaine Cham, a pathologist at UCSF Benioff Children’s Hospital in Oakland, California, repeatedly found it could take weeks to get the proper materials for in-house testing, which “would be way faster,” Cham said. “We could get results in hours instead of days,” she added. While many of the initial problems with testing were linked to strict criteria around who could get a test, the problems today are predominantly about supplies. Complaints vary, but labs say they don’t have enough swabs, test kits, reagents, personal protective equipment (PPE), staff, or machines to run the specific tests required. “Any one link in the chain of supply, any restriction in the chain of supply, can suddenly create a bottleneck,” Louise Serio, a spokesperson for the American Clinical Laboratory Association (ACLA), which represents the private labs, told me. “No labs have, really, the predictable, consistent access to all the supplies we need, from reagents to test kits to PPE.” Labs face a couple of major problems in fixing these issues. First, private and public health insurers tend to have fairly low reimbursement rates for Covid-19 tests — they aren’t willing to pay labs very much for testing — which makes it more difficult to recoup the investment required to scale up. Second, labs have lost the bulk of their revenue flow as fewer elective tests come in, while they’ve had to pick up more costs with an influx of uncompensated Covid-19 tests. So as labs are being asked to do more, they have less money to do it. Policymakers could step in and address some of these shortfalls. The ACLA called for stimulus funds and better reimbursements for labs — though not exactly a surprising proposal from a trade association for private labs, it’s an idea with which outside experts agreed. Jha backed more federal oversight and coordination to fix the various chokepoints, making sure labs, cities, and states are getting the funds and supplies they need to run tests. Another issue is that the US simply needs better tests. An analysis in Mayo Clinic Proceedings suggested that the current tests could miss tens of thousands of potential Covid-19 cases with false negatives — and recommended more sensitive tests, a combination of testing, and new procedures. Faster tests that can get results within minutes, not hours, for many samples at once would also help. And there still aren’t good, widespread tests to check for potential immunity, which could play a major role in ending social distancing. All of that will simply require scientific innovation and mass production to get faster, more accurate tests out there. The goal of widespread testing is not just to understand how widespread Covid-19 is in the US. It’s to leverage that information to help the country return to normal, or at least as close to normal as possible. To be clear: Experts widely agree that some social distancing will be required until a safe and effective vaccine is developed, which could take as long as 12 to 18 months. Both the AEI and CAP plans make it clear that, for instance, large gatherings of 50 people or more should be restricted or banned, and people who are more vulnerable to coronavirus, like older adults or people with underlying health conditions, will have to remain vigilant. But better testing and surveillance infrastructure would help ease up on social distancing for people who aren’t in those vulnerable groups. Here’s how easing social distancing would work in practice, based on the AEI and CAP proposals and my conversations with experts: One big caveat is the country has to be ready to go back to social distancing if necessary. Even the Asian countries that did a good job controlling coronavirus cases early on, like Taiwan and South Korea, have reportedly seen signs of a second wave of Covid-19. That’s in fact a reason more testing and surveillance is needed: It allows public health officials to see if social distancing is being pulled back too much or too quickly, giving them a warning that restrictions are again necessary to prevent an even bigger outbreak. After all, it’s strong testing and surveillance systems that allowed South Korea and Taiwan to detect an uptick. “You want to make sure that whatever cases that do occur after social distancing occur at a slow enough clip that it doesn’t overwhelm hospital capacity,” Adalja said. “It’s not a question of whether there’s going to be more cases after you lift social distancing. They are going to occur. We just want them to occur at a rate that is manageable. And the only way that’s going to happen is with testing.” Another way this plays out is that the country shifts back and forth between relaxed and stricter social distancing measures until a vaccine arrives. In a New York Times editorial, public health experts Ezekiel Emanuel, Susan Ellenberg, and Michael Levy compared it to pumping a car’s brakes on an icy road: “Either doing nothing or slamming on the brakes leads to an accident. So we pump the brakes — pushing on the brakes, then easing up, and then applying them again — and after three or four times we slow down enough to stop.” That’s still better than a year or more straight of social distancing, since it would give the public a bit more freedom here and there. But it requires more testing and surveillance to know when it’s okay to ease the brakes and when they need to be pushed down once again. Testing is only part of the story. Along with testing, the US will also need to build up public health infrastructure to trace sick people’s contacts and quarantine them. It might need to build living spaces where people can be voluntarily isolated or quarantined. People could download apps to their phones that would track them to see if they came in contact with anyone found to have Covid-19. The health care system also needs to be scaled up — to raise the line as well as flatten the curve. Shortages in PPE, including face masks, need to be fixed, particularly for health care workers. But the linchpin to getting all of this right is testing. It’s the basic essential to tracking and controlling big disease outbreaks. So if we want to get our lives back to normal, it’s the first thing, experts say, we need to focus on — even today. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Rep. Pramila Jayapal (D-WA) thinks the current stimulus programs don’t go far enough when it comes to protecting people’s jobs and salaries.   Under her new proposal, the Paycheck Guarantee Act, the government would fill in gaps that existing programs have left out. If a company is struggling because of the coronavirus pandemic, the federal government would help them cover 100 percent of their base payroll costs for at least three months, up to an annual salary of $100,000 per worker.  It’s an incredibly ambitious plan — similar to what we’ve seen in countries like Denmark — and it’s one that’s intended to support businesses of all sizes and the workers they employ as they grapple with the economic fallout that’s currently taking place because of the coronavirus outbreak. Additionally, it’s a bill that tries to ensure a speedy recovery once the US has been able to combat the pandemic.  “I really believe that mass unemployment is a policy choice,” Jayapal told Vox. “This proposal is directed to preventing mass layoffs and keeping the businesses going so they can quickly and safely restart.” It’s not just Jayapal, the co-chair of the House Progressive Caucus, who’s proposing creative progressive solutions that would have been non-starters in the US Congress before the coronavirus economic crisis. Sen. Josh Hawley (R-MO), whom my colleague Emily Stewart argued “reflects a post-Trump populism within the Republican Party,” has also supported an effort that would do something similar. His approach would cover a slightly lower proportion of company payrolls.  “Beginning immediately, the federal government should cover 80 percent of wages for workers at any U.S. business, up to the national median wage, until this emergency is over,” Hawley wrote in a Washington Post op-ed on Thursday.  As the thinking behind the two proposals goes, if the government can help businesses stay afloat and cover their payroll, those companies won’t have to lay workers off, and they’ll be ready to more quickly continue operations once the economy is fully functioning again.  Currently, if companies lay people off, there is an expanded unemployment insurance program that workers can apply to, but the decision to let workers go still means plenty of uncertainty for a lot of people as well as major delays for the company when they need to rehire later on.  And recent numbers indicate that the need for such support is severe: In the past three weeks, 16.8 million people have filed for unemployment insurance.  Jayapal’s plan intends to provide more stability for both workers and businesses during this tumultuous time. It’s a proposal that’s a lot like one that’s recently been implemented by Denmark, where the government is now covering 75 percent of workers’ salaries, including at private companies. And it’s one that’s picked up the backing of several labor groups including SEIU, the American Federation of Teachers, and Unite Here.  Jayapal said she’s currently working on building more support for the program, which has been cosponsored by multiple members of the House and endorsed by the Progressive Caucus. Bringing more Republicans onboard would be the next challenge. As economist Cecilia Rouse, a former Obama administration official, previously told Vox, the  biggest need right now is for the US to keep on providing people with liquidity while the economy goes into lockdown mode. “If we can get the liquidity right, so that people feel comfortable and are willing to stay home, it will mean that we can recover from this much faster,” she said.  Jayapal’s proposal would take big steps toward ensuring that workers can endure this pause.  Jayapal’s proposal enables companies that have been negatively affected by the coronavirus outbreak to apply for grants issued through the Treasury Department.  If a company, regardless of size, is able to demonstrate that it is dealing with challenges tied to the coronavirus, it could be eligible for a lump sum grant that covers three months of base payroll costs including salaries and benefits for workers, up to a $100,000 annual salary per worker. Companies would have to keep all workers on payroll to be eligible for the full grant and those that have furloughed or laid off people would still be able to obtain the entirety of the benefits if they rehire these employees.  These grants would be calculated based on a company’s 2019 quarterly payroll tax return, from either the second or third quarter. They would then be disbursed to companies directly via existing Treasury systems that have already been used to distribute paid family leave tax credits or they’d be sent through a tool that’s built in conjunction with a payroll software firm or the IRS.  If the crisis extends beyond the three-month timeframe, they could be renewed on a monthly basis, based on the proposal.  The delivery mechanism for these funds is intended to reduce the friction that’s already been observed for other stimulus programs. Because government agencies already have the information they need to calculate the amount of these grants, the Paycheck Guarantee program could avoid some of the same issues that small business loan programs have run into, where there’s been a lot of confusion about what each entity can receive and where people can apply.  In mid-March, Denmark implemented a program similar to the Paycheck Guarantee Act with the government covering 75 percent of workers’ salaries that companies pay out, up to a certain amount.  It was a massive investment and one that’s intended to reduce unemployment across the country. According to the Local Denmark, the country has seen twice as many people apply for unemployment support on a daily basis since the beginning of coronavirus isolation measures in mid-March. It’s a notable uptick but it’s an increase that’s much lower than what’s been observed in the US.  In the past two weeks, more than 6 million people have applied for unemployment insurance in the US each week. Those figures are way above the pre-coronavirus high of roughly 700,000 claims.  “If nothing changes, the unemployment rate will soon exceed 20 percent,” says UC Berkeley economist Gabriel Zucman, a supporter of Jayapal’s plan, in a statement. “The federal government needs to guard against mass unemployment by guaranteeing paychecks, like many other countries are already doing.”  But the cost of implementing a program like Denmark’s are high, according to the Atlantic’s Derek Thompson. “The plan could require [Denmark’s] government to spend as much as 13 percent of the national economy in three months,” he writes. “That is roughly the equivalent of a $2.5 trillion stimulus in the United States spread out over just 13 weeks.” Jayapal says there isn’t currently an estimate on exactly how much this program would cost quite yet, but she notes that the costs of not offering such benefits could well be higher in the long term.  “We’re paying it one way or another,” she said.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Over the past few weeks, as the scale of the Covid-19 pandemic has become clearer, journalists, politicians, and economists have all made analogies to World War II. The scope of the challenge and the scale of economic dislocation invite these comparisons, as does the experience of shared sacrifice to combat a common enemy. World War II offers valuable lessons for the current moment. But when many people picture the World War II economy, they’re thinking about how it operated by 1944 and 1945, when early problems had been solved and war production was at its peak. By then, industries large and small had joined the war effort: Washing machine manufacturers made artillery shells. Vacuum cleaner companies made bomb fuses. Tanks, airplanes, and anti-aircraft guns rolled off assembly lines that had once produced automobiles. American industry produced more than 96,000 planes in 1940 alone — a 26-fold increase over the 3,611 airplanes produced in 1940. An official military history credits American war production in its heyday with “virtually determining the outcome of the war.” The current state of the coronavirus pandemic, though, is far more similar to the dark months after Pearl Harbor, when US leaders faced the daunting task of transforming the US economy virtually overnight, than it is to those triumphant final years.  Then as now, every day mattered. In the first months of 1942, top US officials feared that due to lack of equipment, America might lose the war before it got a chance to start fighting it. Their primary goal was transforming the economy as fast as possible.  “It was plain that all our plans would have to be revolutionized to meet the immediate necessities of a crisis as explosive as the bombs dropped on Pearl Harbor,” Donald Nelson wrote in Arsenal of Democracy. “It was no longer a question of guns and butter; the guns had to come first.”  Their experience still has lessons for policymakers today. Here are five of them. Without effective coordination, states and the federal government have entered bidding wars for desperately needed medical equipment. Shipments to states have been confiscated, prompting elaborate schemes like Massachusetts Gov. Charlie Baker’s efforts to get 1 million N95 masks delivered to Massachusetts. Chaos reigns as hospitals try to sort through the confusion of disrupted supply chains. President Trump insists that the federal government is “not a shipping clerk,” but in fact such coordination is precisely the federal government’s role. The US faced a similar problem during World War I, when purchasing was decentralized. Different branches of the military, including numerous departments within the Army, competed with each other in bidding for contracts. This led to production delays and increased prices for critical supplies. In World War II, Franklin Delano Roosevelt created the War Production Board. Decisions about what equipment was needed were made by the military, but the board oversaw and coordinated all war production. Its initial role was to get production going in sufficient, previously unthinkable, quantities and to arrange new supply chains to ensure materials ended up in the right hands. For relatively simple production orders, the board publicized production requirements for the goods it needed and facilitated matching products with interested firms. The more complex and difficult orders were sent to the large, established firms with the greatest expertise in relevant production processes.  But the board’s role did not diminish once production got going. Rather, its focus changed to ensuring that scarce resources were being allocated optimally. Since it takes time for suppliers to expand production to meet demand, ramping up war production so quickly led to short-run scarcity. The War Production Board was subject to both extensive public scrutiny and congressional oversight from the Truman Committee. Its appeals board heard complaints from business and labor leaders, members of Congress, and state and local politicians. Because requirements were determined by the military, procurement decisions were largely apolitical. Researchers Paul Rhode, James Snyder Jr., and Koleman Strumpf found no evidence that World War II contract placement was systematically biased by political factors. There are clear parallels to today’s war against the coronavirus. Without a clear centralized authority to place orders for critical medical equipment and personal protective equipment and to distribute finished products where they are most needed, the US risks a muddle of delays, inefficiencies, and needless price increases like those faced in WWI. Dramatically increasing the available supply of testing, protective gear, and medical equipment will reduce the incentive for politically motivated allocations of equipment. Vigorous oversight from both Congress and the media, a transparent process for dispute resolution, and insulation from political pressure — ideally drawing on the judgments of medical and public health professionals — can help ensure that coordination of procurement benefits all states and localities during this crisis.  After Pearl Harbor, policymakers faced the need to transform the economy at a rapid pace. American policymakers feared the war could be lost before it had fully begun, so speed was paramount. One key element of the transition to a wartime economy was policymakers’ decision to transform existing institutions rather than create entirely new ones. War Production Board Chair Donald Nelson left purchasing and procurement decisions in the hands of the armed forces, using the board to manage and coordinate. This was one of his most controversial decisions, but it was the right choice — at least for the initial phase of the war — for two reasons. First, in 1942 as in 2020, every day mattered. Keeping purchasing and procurement in the hands of the agencies that had previously made these decisions saved precious time and allowed production to ramp up faster. Second, only trained military officers had the expertise needed to evaluate whether specialized products such as airplanes, tanks, and radar met quality standards and fulfilled military needs. Nelson recognized that a civilian agency could not match the military’s expertise in determining such technical details. Depression-era unemployment offices were also repurposed for the war. As unemployment fell sharply in the early 1940s, the US Employment Service pivoted from coordinating services for the unemployed to matching workers to war production jobs, helping employers find replacements for workers entering the military. The lessons for today are clear: While the US needs central coordination for purchasing key equipment, specific procurement decisions — the specifications and requirements for medical equipment, as well as decisions about how much medical equipment is needed — must remain in the hands of medical professionals. Local unemployment offices around the US are still well suited to help respond to the crisis, especially if the government works to expand their administrative capacity. They can contribute in many ways, such as administering furlough insurance for workers whose jobs are temporarily suspended or helping coordinate increased labor for key industries and labor-intensive pandemic response work, such as large-scale testing and contact tracing. During World War II, strategic materials, not labor or manufacturing capacity, proved to be the binding constraint on US wartime production.  That is likely to be just as true today. Constraints on manufacturing capacity are orders of magnitude less severe now than in WWII. More than $100 billion of military contracts were placed in the first six months of 1942, compared to $20 billion in defense contracts over all of 1941 and a 1941 GDP of $129 billion. Production capacity initially fell far short of what was needed for the war effort, even with extensive conversion of civilian manufacturing capacity. Today the US needs vast increases in the production of medical equipment, particularly ventilators, personal protective equipment, and test kits, but the total volume of equipment needed is significantly less than a full year’s GDP.  Similarly, given the recent explosion in unemployment claims in the wake of the crisis, constraints on labor capacity are less immediate. Unless the pandemic is left unchecked, growth in the number of available workers should outpace the number of workers sickened by Covid-19 infections. The point at which labor force capacity would become a binding constraint is far past the point at which the health care system would be overwhelmed — a situation that must be avoided at all costs.  The US needs to worry about materials availability first and foremost. Although the country avoided nationalizing most industries during WWII, the federal government did take direct control of the production of rubber and metals.  The US did not nationalize major industries to achieve its World War II production miracle. US war production relied primarily on manufacturing by private firms, as the war aligned manufacturing firms’ incentives with those of the nation.  The Defense Production Act is a good mechanism for mobilizing industry — indeed, it was written when the experience of WWII was recent memory — and should be used aggressively as needed. But with clear and effective federal leadership, its necessary application may be narrow. There are other ways to push industry to produce needed supplies. A government guarantee to buy all medical equipment meeting stated specifications and produced by specified dates at a set price, combined with the incentives provided by the crisis itself, would provide enough incentive for most firms. Voluntary agreements authorized under the DPA would allow firms to cooperate effectively and scale production faster, mimicking the inter-firm cooperation that defined the home front during World War II. A number of private firms are already converting their production lines to key equipment, from small distilleries making hand sanitizer to Ford Motor Company’s production of ventilators, even in the absence of clear leadership and communication from the federal government.   In WWII, most US firms faced a choice between sitting idle —a home appliance producer cannot produce appliances if it cannot acquire the metal needed to make its products — and participating in war work. The government’s control of raw materials created the incentives for firms to convert voluntarily: Firms that volunteered for war production were able to acquire inputs, while other firms were not.  There was also an overarching incentive for war production: The sooner firms produced the needed materials, the faster the war could be won, and the sooner everyone could get back to real life. That same overarching incentive exists today, and it is powerful. Lockdowns, quarantines, and abruptly rising unemployment have sharply reduced demand for many goods. Manufacturing firms in sectors that now face reduced demand, such as car manufacturing, have every incentive to volunteer to produce needed medical supplies as soon as a centralized process for placing orders can be put into place. What’s needed is a mechanism for matching production needs to firms’ manufacturing capacities.  During WWII, when multiple manufacturers expressed interest in producing a good, often contracts went to all of them because demand was so high. Then as now, overproduction is a problem the US can only dream of facing. Any excess ventilators or protective equipment left over at the end of the pandemic can be stockpiled or sold.  In 2020, the key strategic materials are different: chemical reagents needed for testing, synthetic materials capable of blocking airborne particles, and so on. Ensuring the availability of these materials must be a top priority. The government must act to build adequate supply chains for scarce raw materials, particularly the specialized paper pulp used in the production of PPE.  A key concept in macroeconomics is the fiscal multiplier, which measures how much GDP responds in proportion to a change in government spending or taxes. If the fiscal multiplier is large, spending increases or tax cuts will be an effective way to stimulate the economy, but if the multiplier is small, government spending or tax cuts will be inefficient stimulus. Recent research in economics has emphasized that the fiscal multiplier varies significantly depending on context. First, the multiplier will be higher on some kinds of government spending or tax cuts than on others, often depending on who benefits. Second, recent research has emphasized state dependence in the multiplier, or the idea that the fiscal multiplier is larger when the economy is in a recession. Although the US has entered a (severe) recession, the multiplier is likely to be smaller than usual during this pandemic, not larger. The country can expect to see a significantly larger fiscal multiplier when the pandemic ends — whenever that may be.  My research found that the fiscal multiplier in WWII was much smaller than the typical multiplier because the savings rate was so high during the war. Many products, particularly durable goods, were not available for purchase during WWII because they were not produced at all. Consumer spending rebounded strongly after the war ended, particularly on goods, such as cars and appliances, that were not available during the war. The experience of WWII suggests that when consumption options are significantly restricted, people may spend a smaller share of income than in other times. Specifically, the closest substitute for buying a particular good now is buying that good in the future, when it is available again, rather than buying another good. The extreme uncertainty of the current situation may also depress the multiplier, since people will delay making decisions and larger purchases.  Today, significant sectors of the US economy have ground to a halt, particularly the travel, arts, and restaurant industries. As in WWII, the ordinary lives of millions of Americans have been abruptly transformed. Significant portions of people’s regular consumption baskets are unavailable, even though no formal rationing has been enacted. So, as in WWII, the multiplier on relief spending may be lower than in a “normal” recession. The evidence from World War II strongly backs up the paradigm that policy should focus on relief now and stimulus later. Targeting relief funds may help increase the multiplier to the extent that most relief funds are used to buy basic necessities. People who lose all or most of their income in this pandemic recession will be more likely to spend on necessities rather than saving, which would increase the fiscal multiplier. However, perfect targeting may be difficult to achieve quickly. Further evidence from late in the Great Depression suggests that fiscal stimulus may be particularly effective after a long period of downturn, as it can support pent-up demand. This suggests that policymakers should focus on relief for as long as the pandemic continues, including with further rounds of such relief as needed, but then be sure to follow relief with broad-based stimulus to help the economy rebound.  Gillian Brunet is an assistant professor of economics at Wesleyan University. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. A month after being declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization, the coronavirus has caused deaths in every state in America. It has taken the lives of celebrities like John Prine as well as local grocery store workers, transit operators, and other service employees. Tom Hanks has shared his thoughts on quarantine, and so have teens on TikTok. Millions of Americans of all walks of life have been ordered to stay at home, with no clear end in sight.   For this reason, some have described the coronavirus as an “equalizer.” “Everyone is subject to this virus,” New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said in March. “I don’t care how smart, how rich, how powerful you think you are.” But with every day that goes by, it becomes more clear that the virus isn’t an equalizer at all. Instead, it is exacerbating the inequalities in American society, taking a disproportionate toll on low-income Americans, people of color, and others who were already marginalized before the crisis hit. It starts with who’s able to shelter in place — while many white-collar workers can work from home, a disproportionate share of the front-line workers still going to their jobs in many industries are women and people of color. And among those staying at home, inequality is still a huge issue, with some able to order delivery and others forced to visit overstretched food banks to meet their needs. Meanwhile, early data suggest that black Americans are becoming ill and dying of coronavirus at much higher rates than white people, potentially as a result of existing health disparities that have their roots in structural racism and economic inequality. In Michigan, for example, black residents made up around 40 percent of coronavirus deaths as of April 9, even though only about 14 percent of the population is black, as Khushbu Shah reports at Vox. The prevalence among black Americans of heart disease and other “chronic conditions that are related to socioeconomic status” is “making the effect of the Covid crisis much worse,” Julia Lynch, a political science professor at the University of Pennsylvania who studies health inequality, told Vox. The pandemic has also brought with it an economic crisis — and that too has been far from an equalizer. Low-wage workers are especially vulnerable to layoffs during this time, as Vox’s Emily Stewart and Christina Animashaun report, with restaurant and retail workers especially at risk. That has left many workers who used to have jobs with the country’s major restaurant chains scrambling to keep a roof over their heads, Anthony Advincula, public affairs officer and national policy coordinator at Restaurant Opportunities Centers United, which works on behalf of low-wage restaurant workers, told Vox. But “if you look for the executives of these restaurant chains, they’re probably in their vacation houses,” Advincula said. Overall, the lesson of the pandemic so far is that while the virus itself can infect anyone, those hit hardest by the national and worldwide crisis around it are those who were already hurting — experiencing racism, housing instability, job insecurity, and other ills that disproportionately affect marginalized communities around the country. And many fear that unless policymakers do more to address the disparate impacts of the virus, the result will be a country that’s more unequal than it was before, even long after the pandemic is over. Despite repeated claims of being an “equalizer,” the coronavirus has always had a disproportionate impact on people who are already vulnerable — and often ignored. People over 65 and those who are immunocompromised are at higher risk of serious illness if infected, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. That fact led some younger, healthy people to dismiss the virus initially as something that “only” harmed the old and sick.  Such an attitude “relegates people who have a chronic illness, people who have disabilities, and older adults” to a category of people who somehow don’t matter to society, sending the message that “we don’t have to care about this group as much,” Stacy Torres, an assistant professor of sociology at the University of California San Francisco, told Vox in March. With much of the nation under stay-at-home orders, there’s a greater understanding that people of all ages and without underlying conditions can become seriously ill from the virus. But that doesn’t mean it’s impacting all groups of people equally.  Instead, preliminary data from states and cities around the country suggests that black Americans are disproportionately likely to get sick and die from Covid-19. Michigan, where the majority-black city of Detroit is emerging as an epicenter, is just one example. In Chicago, black people made up 50 percent of cases and 68 percent of deaths as of April 7, Fabiola Cineas reports at Vox, even though just 30 percent of the city’s population is black. And according to preliminary data released by New York City on April 8, the coronavirus death rate for black New Yorkers is twice that of white residents.  There are a number of possible reasons for the disparity, but a big part of the reason black Americans are being affected so much more than white people in many places is “the underlying health problems that they are already experiencing,” Lynch said. Those include hypertension and diabetes, which can worsen the effects of the coronavirus — and which affect black Americans at disproportionately high rates.  And black Americans are more likely to have underlying conditions because of widespread racism and inequality, experts say. Many differences in health outcomes in America are “produced by access to things like adequate time to prepare healthy foods at home” and “adequate money to not be working three shifts and have really high stress levels,” Lynch said — access that white people are just more likely to have. As Cineas notes, 22 percent of black Americans lived in poverty in 2018, compared with 9 percent of white Americans. Beyond poverty, a number of factors contribute to poor health among black people, from racism in medical settings to the physical health effects of discrimination. Redlining and other forms of housing discrimination have made black Americans more likely to live in neighborhoods affected by environmental contamination, which federal and state officials have been slow to respond to, in turn raising rates of chronic illness. In Flint, Michigan, for example, where much of the majority-black population has been affected by lead-contaminated drinking water, the pandemic is “a crisis on top of a crisis with a side of crisis,” Mayor Sheldon Neeley told Shah. Essentially, inequality in all facets of American society appears to have set up black Americans to bear the brunt of this crisis. That inequality also extends to whether people can get (and pay for) adequate care during this time. Funding for public health clinics that serve low-income Americans has been drying up, Lynch said, leaving people who rely on such clinics without an obvious place to go for care, or even for information about whether they might be infected. And while the Trump administration now says it will pay for the treatment of Covid patients without insurance, some people have already incurred thousands of dollars in bills. Danni Askini, for example, was being treated for lymphoma when she contracted the virus, according to Time. The bill for her Covid testing and treatment was $34,927.43. “I personally don’t know anybody who has that kind of money,” she told the magazine. Underlying conditions are likely only part of the reason Covid is hitting some Americans harder than others. In a time when people are being advised to stay home to minimize their risk of exposure, many literally can’t afford to do so. To begin with, there are people whose jobs can’t be done remotely, like grocery store cashiers, delivery workers, and bus drivers. These workers have already seen a devastating impact from the virus, with 41 New York City transit workers having died and about 1,500 testing positive as of April 8, according to the New York Times. Grocery store chains are also beginning to report the deaths of workers, according to the Washington Post, with deaths of a Trader Joe’s employee in Scarsdale, New York, and two employees at a Walmart in Evergreen Park, Illinois, among the first to be publicly reported.  Workers in these front-line industries are also disproportionately female, according to a recent report by the Center for Economic and Policy Research. In many occupations within these industries, such as bus driving, warehouse work, and building cleaning, people of color are overrepresented. And about a quarter of all front-line workers live in low-income families. While some health care workers, like doctors, can make a high income, inequality shows up within the health care workforce as well. Women and people of color are “much more likely to be in those really front-line staff positions where they’re less well-protected,” Lynch said, such as catering or janitorial services in hospitals. Especially given current shortages of protective equipment, these workers may be less likely than doctors to have the masks and gloves that can help keep them safer. In one Service Employees International Union poll of 250 hospital workers, mostly housekeepers and nurse’s assistants, 75 percent said they were told they did not need protective equipment or had to ask a nurse for it, according to Reuters.  Just as Americans’ jobs affect their risk during this time, so does their living situation. While people with means have been able to leave coronavirus hot spots like New York City for their vacation homes (sometimes sparking conflict with local residents), most Americans lack the mobility to leave areas that are hard-hit by the pandemic. Race and class also determine how much people can isolate themselves — housing discrimination and other inequalities contribute to the fact that black Americans are more likely to live in  multigenerational homes and share resources like cars, as Cineas reports, making social distancing more difficult and increasing their exposure to the virus. For incarcerated Americans and those who are homeless, the risks are especially acute. Cook County Jail in Chicago, for example, is the site of one of the nation’s largest coronavirus clusters, and at least 1,324 confirmed cases had been linked to prisons and jails across the country as of April 8, according to the New York Times. Meanwhile, as Vox’s Catherine Kim reports, homeless Americans are disproportionately at risk due to a lack of shelter space — especially as shelters try to adapt to distancing recommendations and deal with a lack of volunteers during the crisis. Even for people who do have a home to go to, getting necessities can be difficult and risky in this moment — and like everything else, it’s more difficult and risky for those with less money. In a time when the White House has advised Americans not to go to the grocery store at all, some are able to order delivery from services like Instacart or Peapod. Demand for these services is skyrocketing — Instacart, for example, has seen a 300 percent increase in order volume in the past week, compared with the same period last year, Eater reports.  But “it’s the middle- and upper-class families who have the income to not only purchase items through these delivery systems but also the ability to pay for the delivery and the additional fees,” Daphne Hernandez, an associate professor at Cizik School of Nursing at The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston who studies food insecurity, told Vox. Fees vary by service and order, with Instacart, for example, charging between $3.99 and $9.99 to deliver an order under $35, not including tip. Grocery items may be more expensive on some delivery platforms than in stores as well. The services also require internet access, something not all low-income families have. So while wealthier people are able to order groceries on their phones (if they can get a time slot), lower-income families may have to go a store — and if they are still working, they may have to go at night, when shelves are more likely to be empty, Hernandez said. That means that lower-income people are both putting themselves at greater risk to get groceries right now and likely feeling the brunt of food shortages. Meanwhile, people who rely on food assistance programs are facing difficulty buying staples, because the brands designated as eligible for these programs have already been bought by other shoppers, BuzzFeed reports. 
    Related
   Add to that the fact that many resources that usually help food-insecure people are struggling right now. Many children used to rely on schools for free or reduced-price breakfast and lunch, Hernandez points out — around the country, about 30 million kids qualify for these programs — and although schools set up food distribution centers when the crisis hit, some have shut down as a result of stay-at-home orders or a rise in infections. And food banks around the country are struggling to meet a spike in demand as a result of the pandemic. Overall, “we’re going to see food insecurity rates spike,” which could lead to increases in health problems like obesity and diabetes among low-income Americans, Hernandez said. That, in turn, would set them up to be even more at risk in future public health crises. In addition to its devastating impact on Americans’ health, the virus has ushered in an unprecedented economic crisis — the most serious since the Great Depression of the 1930s, according to the International Monetary Fund. In the US alone, more than 16 million new jobless claims were filed in just three weeks in March and early April. The effects are being felt across the economy, from restaurants to tourism to media, but as with everything else about the crisis, the economic effects are being felt most keenly by those who are already most vulnerable. In March, experts estimated that those most vulnerable to layoffs during this time were those who could least afford to lose a paycheck, like low-wage workers in the restaurant and retail industries, as Vox’s Stewart and Animashaun report. And across industries, those least able to weather a period of unemployment will be “lower-wage, lower-income households, which also tend to be disproportionately black and Latino households,” Valerie Wilson, the director of the Economic Policy Institute’s Program on Race, Ethnicity, and the Economy, told Vox. Lower-income people are less likely to have savings to fall back on in such a time — and because of the racial wealth gap in America, black and Latino families are less likely than white Americans to have money put away. While the median wealth for white Americans was $171,000 in 2019, it was just $17,600 for black Americans, as Trymaine Lee reported at the New York Times Magazine. The economic impact of the virus isn’t just about layoffs. It’s also about people who get sick, Wilson noted: “What will that mean in terms of their ability to work and support and care for their families?” And since black Americans appear more likely to get seriously ill and die from the virus, their families are more likely to feel the economic impact of that as well. The federal government has made moves to help, bolstering unemployment insurance, promising stimulus payments for many, and mandating paid sick leave for some. But those efforts leave out a lot of the most vulnerable Americans. For example, companies with more than 500 employees are exempt from providing paid sick leave to workers. While some large companies, like Walmart and Target, have said they will offer sick leave anyway, others, like Dine Brands, the parent company of the restaurant chains Applebee’s and IHOP, have not. In an especially tone-deaf move, Applebee’s recently offered laid-off employees a 50 percent discount on Applebee’s orders, ROC United’s Advincula told Vox. (Applebee’s told Vox in a statement that 96 percent of its restaurants are franchise-owned, but that “for the 69 company-owned Applebee’s restaurants, we have a paid sick leave policy for our team members in accordance with applicable laws.”) Moreover, applying for unemployment has become very difficult for many, with state unemployment offices overrun. And undocumented workers — who make up more than 10 percent of the restaurant workforce, according to Advincula — can’t get unemployment or stimulus payments. Overall, there are a lot of gaps in the federal government’s efforts to stem the economic impact of the virus, Advincula said, and “a lot of restaurant workers have fallen into those cracks.” Ultimately, the coronavirus pandemic stands to worsen the already enormous problem of inequality in America. But it doesn’t have to be that way. A variety of solutions would help protect the most vulnerable during this time, and set up the country for a more equal recovery. “Obviously and most basically, people need to be able to go to the hospital and get care if they need it,” Lynch said. “We need to have universal access to health care that is affordable and of a high quality.” Beyond that, robust paid sick leave in America would both allow people to care for themselves and family members when they are sick and help prevent the spread of disease. And the country needs to get to work on “generally reducing socioeconomic equality and deprivation,” because those are driving the prevalence of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and other underlying conditions among people of color and low-income Americans. “People who are living lives close to the economic margins are always going to experience more of these kinds of conditions, and so reducing the poverty and inequality that generate ill health is going to make people more resilient in the face of these kinds of new illnesses,” Lynch said. One way to promote health is to combat food insecurity. To do that right now, the US needs an expansion of SNAP and other food assistance programs for a minimum of six months, Hernandez said. After the Great Recession began in 2007, food insecurity rose about 30 percent the following year, she said. “We’re going to see something like that again unless we have programs in place that will sustain people after all of this is over.” And, she added, food assistance programs need to be coupled with assistance paying for utilities and other necessities. “If people are having trouble accessing food,” she explained, “they’re also having problems paying for their bills.” ROC United is asking the federal government to eliminate loopholes that allow large companies (as well as those with fewer than 50 employees) to deny paid sick leave. The group also calls for a loosening of unemployment restrictions, payments to unemployed workers who are undocumented, and a nationwide moratorium on evictions and utility shutoffs during this time. It’s also asking the Occupational Safety and Health Administration to issue standards for safe working conditions in light of Covid-19.   “Another pandemic is going to happen, so if we’re not ready again, this would hurt the economy and the country again,” Advincula said. The Trump administration, however, has shown little appetite for many of these reforms. For example, the Department of Labor earlier this month issued guidelines giving small businesses broad latitude to deny their employees paid sick leave, according to the New York Times. Still, members of Congress have been pressing the administration to pay attention to the ways the virus could be magnifying inequality. In March, Sen. Elizabeth Warren and Rep. Ayanna Pressley of Massachusetts sent a letter to the Department of Health and Human Services calling on it to address racial disparities in the nation’s coronavirus response, including collecting and releasing nationwide data on cases broken out by race and ethnicity. “Without demographic data,” they wrote, “policy makers and researchers will have no way to identify and address ongoing disparities and health inequities that risk accelerating the impact of the novel coronavirus and the respiratory disease it causes.” State officials are taking action too; Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, for instance, created a task force on April 10 to address racial disparities in the virus’s impact on Michiganders. “We know that generations of racial disparities and inequality has a detrimental impact on the lives of people across the state,” Lt. Gov. Garlin Gilchrist II, who will chair the task force, said in a statement. “The coronavirus pandemic has shown this inequity to be particularly true.” As the disease continues to spread and the economic impact increases, more and more people around the country will be in need of help — whether it’s caring for loved ones, healing from their own illnesses, or paying their bills. The impact of the pandemic, now and in the future, will likely remain concentrated among those who were already at a disadvantage before it hit — unless the country acts now to remedy the inequities that made them vulnerable in the first place. Update: This story has been updated to include a statement from Applebee’s. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  A seemingly innocuous tweet President Donald Trump posted about Colorado receiving ventilators from the government actually raises troubling questions about the extent to which the president is using lifesaving medical equipment as a form of political patronage. On Wednesday Trump announced that he was sending 100 ventilators to Colorado — a development he credited to a request from a Republican senator facing an uphill reelection campaign this year, Cory Gardner. Will be immediately sending 100 Ventilators to Colorado at the request of Senator Gardner! https://t.co/Nj4EPxfZl6 That tweet might look unproblematic, and perhaps even praiseworthy on its face. Colorado is one of many states asking for more lifesaving supplies in the middle of a global pandemic.  But recent reports have suggested Trump has been playing politics with the allocation of medical supplies. CNN broke news last Friday that the federal government swooped in and blew up a deal that Colorado’s state government, led by Democratic Gov. Jared Polis, made with a private company to acquire 500 ventilators. FEMA, instead, seized the ventilators for itself, leaving Colorado high and dry. “A congressional source told CNN that many of the orders Colorado places for supplies, including an order for 500 ventilators, has been canceled, because the items are being bought by FEMA,” CNN reported.  Polis subsequently confirmed the report during a CNN appearance in which he criticized the move, saying of the federal government, “either you’re buying them and you’re providing them to states and you’re letting us know what we’re going to get and when we’re going to get them. Or you stay out, and let us buy them.” Trump has repeatedly deflected criticism that the federal government is doing more to help states by insisting the feds are just a “backup” and states should be doing more on their own. But in Colorado’s case, when the state tried to help itself, it was stymied by the feds. Viewed in that context, Trump’s tweet giving Gardner credit for Colorado receiving ventilators has a whiff of impropriety. Colorado ended up with 400 fewer ventilators than it would’ve had without federal bigfooting, and instead of Polis getting credit for his efforts, all of it was given to a senator from Trump’s party who could use the boost. In response to Trump’s tweet, Polis said he was “grateful” for the ventilators. But Rep. Diana DeGette (D-CO) was less diplomatic. “Governor Polis and our Congressional delegation have been working to get more ventilators to Colorado for weeks. In fact, Colorado was set to receive 500 ventilators until FEMA blocked the shipment. Now, President Trump says we will get 100 as a courtesy to Senator Gardner,” DeGette said in a statement. “That means, because the president is playing politics with public health, we’re still 400 ventilators short from what we should have received. His mismanagement of this crisis is costing lives and livelihoods.” The timeline surrounding Trump’s tweet prompted the Denver Post to write a scathing editorial headlined, “Trump is playing a disgusting political game with our lives.” “President Donald Trump is treating life-saving medical equipment as emoluments he can dole out as favors to loyalists,” the editorial begins. “It’s the worst imaginable form of corruption — playing political games with lives. For the good of this nation during what should be a time of unity, he must stop.” Colorado’s experience in this regard isn’t unique. The Los Angeles Times noted on Tuesday that hospitals and clinics in seven states reported having medical supplies seized in a manner similar to what Polis described. “Officials who’ve had materials seized also say they’ve received no guidance from the government about how or if they will get access to the supplies they ordered,” the Times reported. “That has stoked concerns about how public funds are being spent and whether the Trump administration is fairly distributing scarce medical supplies.” On Thursday, the Bellingham Herald reported that a delivery of Covid-19 test kits that were on their way to Washington state “were seized and diverted by the federal government to the East Coast.” FEMA denied the report, even though it was confirmed by a local hospital system. Throughout the coronavirus crisis, Trump has attacked Democratic governors like Andrew Cuomo (NY), Gretchen Whitmer (MI), and Jay Inslee (WA) for not being “appreciative” enough of federal efforts.  Failing  Michigan Governor must work harder and be much more proactive. We are pushing her to get the job done. I stand with Michigan! Late last month, Trump even admitted that he’d directed the official running the White House’s response effort, Vice President Mike Pence, to not call Inslee and Whitmer — even as hospitals in their states approached the point of being overwhelmed by coronavirus cases — because they’ve had the gall to publicly criticize the president for not doing more, leaving their states to largely fend for themselves. “I tell him — I mean I’m a different type of person — I say, ‘Mike, don’t call the governor in Washington, you’re wasting your time with him. Don’t call the woman in Michigan,’” Trump said. “If they don’t treat you right, I don’t call.” At the very least, Trump’s disparate treatment of officials who have either been critical of him or aren’t politically useful for him is unseemly. But a Washington Post report last week sounded an alarm that the situation is more serious than that. The Post reported that while staunch Trump ally Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis “promptly” received all of the supplies he asked for from the federal government, states with Democratic governors such as Wisconsin and Illinois (not to mention New York and Michigan) were not having the same luck. It’s not clear that Trump’s political grudges are driving that disparity, but the Post reported some officials are “wondering whether politics is playing a role in the response.” Put it all together and the picture that emerges is one where the federal government is seizing orders of medical supplies from hospitals and states, and then at least in some instances, redistributing in a way that gives the appearance of Trump doing favors for his Republican supporters.  The government denies that this is what’s going on. A FEMA representative told the Los Angeles Times that the agency developed a system of identifying needs based on “high-transmission areas” and “populations,” not politics, but they didn’t share any details about “how these determinations are made or why it is choosing to seize some supply orders and not others.” “Administration officials also will not say what supplies are going to what states,” the Times added. But if everything is really above board, why not be transparent about it? Gardner, meanwhile, took to Twitter to express thanks for Trump sending Colorado ventilators.  Thank you @realDonaldTrump, 100 ventilators and approval of our National Guard assistance is outstanding news for Colorado. Coloradans are standing together as we get through the #COVID19 pandemic, even if we have to stand six feet apart. https://t.co/0d26KtMeEM What he didn’t mention, however, is that the federal government’s interference actually cost his state 400 of them. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Over the past few days, I’ve been reading the major plans for what comes after social distancing. You can read them, too. There’s one from the right-leaning American Enterprise Institute, the left-leaning Center for American Progress, Harvard University’s Safra Center for Ethics, and Nobel Prize-winning economist Paul Romer.  I thought, perhaps naively, that reading them would be a comfort — at least then I’d be able to imagine the path back to normal. But it wasn’t. In different ways, all these plans say the same thing: Even if you can imagine the herculean political, social, and economic changes necessary to manage our way through this crisis effectively, there is no normal for the foreseeable future. Until there’s a vaccine, the United States either needs economically ruinous levels of social distancing, a digital surveillance state of shocking size and scope, or a mass testing apparatus of even more shocking size and intrusiveness.  The AEI, CAP, and Harvard plans aren’t identical, but they’re similar. All of them feature a period of national lockdown — in which extreme social distancing is deployed to “flatten the curve” and health and testing capacity is surged to “raise the line.” That’s phase one. Phase two triggers after a set period (45 days for CAP, three months for Harvard) or, in the AEI plan, after 14 days of falling cases and a series of health supply markers. All of them then imagine a phase two, which relaxes — but does not end — social distancing while implementing testing and surveillance on a mass scale. This is where you must begin imagining the almost unimaginable.  The CAP and Harvard plans both foresee a digital pandemic surveillance state in which virtually every American downloads an app to their phone that geotracks their movements, so if they come into contact with anyone who later is found to have Covid-19, they can be alerted and a period of social quarantine can begin. Similarly, people would scan QR codes when boarding mass transit or entering other high-risk public areas. And GPS tracking could be used to enforce quarantine on those who test positive with the disease, as is being done in Taiwan. To state the obvious: The technological and political obstacles are massive. While similar efforts have borne fruit in Singapore and South Korea, the US is a very different country, with a more mistrustful, individualistic culture. Already, polling shows that 70 percent of Republicans, and 46 percent of Democrats, strongly oppose using cellphone data to enforce quarantine orders.  The CAP plan tries to answer these concerns, but in trying to imagine an answer, it shows the difficulty of the task. It’s worth quoting the CAP proposal at length: The entity that hosts the data must be a trusted, nonprofit organization—not private technology companies or the federal government. The app could be developed for a purely public health nonprofit entity such as the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials (ASTHO)—an organization that represents state health officials—which would host the data. Congress or foundations could provide funding to develop and operate the technology. States licensing the app could provide ongoing operational funding to ASTHO, provided states receive federal funding for this purpose. • Additional protections must include the following: • The amount of data needed and shared must be minimized • This system must be transparent • Data must be collected, secured, and stored within the United States • Data must be automatically deleted after every 45 days • The sharing of data with the federal government, except for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), must be prohibited • The sharing of data with state and local government agencies that are not public health agencies must be prohibited • The sharing of data with third parties and the sale of data must be prohibited • Any data shared publicly must be anonymized As a condition of receiving a COVID-19 test in the future, individuals may be required to download the app, which would include their test result. For others, the app would be voluntary, although the vast majority of people could be expected to download it to see if there are cases in their neighborhood or near their workplace. I’m not here to say that this, or anything else, is impossible. But it is light-years beyond the kind of political leadership and public-private coordination we’ve seen thus far. Who is going to spearhead the effort? President Donald Trump? House Speaker Nancy Pelosi? Bill Gates? Who is trusted enough, in this country in this moment, to shape this? And even if they could pass it, can we build it, and do so quickly? Force adherence to it, and quickly? Are we really going to deny tests to anyone who refuses to download the surveillance app? And what about communities with less digital savvy?  The alternative to mass surveillance is mass testing. Romer’s proposal is to deploy testing on a scale no one else is contemplating — 22 million tests per day — so that the entire country is being tested every 14 days, and anyone who tests positive can be quickly quarantined. He shows, in a series of useful simulations, that even if the test has a high false-negative rate, the retesting is sufficient to keep the virus contained, and thus the country can return to normalcy rapidly. Of the various plans, this one seems likeliest to permit a true and rapid economic recovery. But it is hard to imagine a testing effort of this scale, too. So far, America is struggling to get into the millions of tests per week. This plan requires tens of millions per day. Most experts I’ve spoken to doubt that’s realistic anytime soon, though some believe it’s possible, eventually. So far, we’ve added testing capacity largely by repurposing existing labs and platforms. To add more, we need to build more labs, more machines, more tests. And there are already shortages of reagents, swabs, and health workers.  But even if those constraints could be overcome, how are these 22 million daily tests going to be administered? By whom? How do we enforce compliance? If you refuse to get tested, are you fined? Jailed? Cut off from government benefits? Would the Supreme Court consider a proposal like this constitutional? The AEI proposal is the closest thing to a middle path between these plans. It’s more testing, but nothing approaching Romer’s hopes. It’s more contact tracing, but it doesn’t envision an IT-driven panopticon. But precisely for that reason, what it’s really describing is a yo-yo between extreme lockdown and lighter forms of social distancing, continuing until a vaccine is reached.  This, too, requires some imagination. Will governors who’ve finally, at great effort, reopened parts of their economies really keep throwing them back into lockdown every time ICUs begin to fill? Will Trump have the stomach to push the country back into quarantine after he’s lifted social distancing guidelines? What if unemployment is 17 percent, and his approval rating is at 38 percent?  And even if the political hurdles could be cleared, it’s obvious, reading the AEI proposal, that there’ll be no “V-shaped recovery” of the economy. Scott Gottlieb, the former FDA commissioner who helped craft the plan, says he thinks something like 80 percent of the economy will return — that may sound like a lot, but it’s an economic collapse of Great Depression proportions. I don’t want anyone to mistake this as an argument for surrendering to the disease. As unlikely as these futures may be, I think the do-nothing argument is even less plausible: It imagines that we simply let a highly lethal virus kill perhaps millions of Americans, hospitalize tens of millions more, and crush the health system, while the rest of us go about our daily economic and social business. That is, in my view, far less likely than the construction of a huge digital surveillance state. I care about my privacy, but not nearly so much as I care about my mother.  My point isn’t to criticize these plans when I have nothing better to offer. Indeed, my point isn’t to criticize them at all. It’s simply to note that these aren’t plans for returning to anything even approaching normal. They either envision life under a surveillance and testing state of dystopian (but perhaps necessary!) proportions, or they envision a long period of economic and public health pain, as we wrestle the disease down only to see it roar back, as seems to be happening in Singapore.  What’s even scarier to consider is that the debate between these plans is far beyond the political debate we’re actually having. As of now, the White House has neither chosen nor begun executing on a plan of its own. That’s a terrible abdication of leadership, but reading through the various proposals, you can see why it’s happened. Imagine you’re the president of the United States in an election year. Which of these futures, with all its costs and risks and pain, would you want to try and sell to the American people? One final takeaway from all this: If there is literally anything more we can possibly do to accelerate the development of vaccines or therapeutics, we should do it.  Update: After I published this piece, Apple and Google jointly announced a project to embed voluntary contact tracing functionality in their phones, and make the data interoperable across iOS and Android. Read my colleagues at Recode and the Verge for more on that (and here’s some smart analysis from Casey Newton). And Danielle Allen, the head of Harvard’s Safra Center, wrote to tell me that they’ll have a more detailed plan coming next week, and it will differ in some ways from the papers they’ve released so far.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. “Epidemic diseases are not random events that afflict societies capriciously and without warning,” writes Yale historian Frank Snowden. “On the contrary, every society produces its own specific vulnerabilities. To study them is to understand that society’s structure, its standard of living, and its political priorities.”  Today’s tragedy can be, sometimes, tomorrow’s possibility. According to Snowden, pandemics don’t only reflect a society’s existing vulnerabilities — they present an unprecedented opportunity for transformational change. In his new book, Epidemics and Society, Snowden explores how infectious diseases across time have altered the outcomes of wars, inspired political reform, demolished revolutions, transformed entire societies’ relationships with God, and fundamentally changed the course of human history.  According to Snowden, we face a “fork in the road” as a species. We could either use coronavirus as a justification to retreat into xenophobia, ethnonationalism, and tribalism — as we’ve already seen in many places; or we could use it as an opportunity to build a better, more just world. Epidemic diseases throughout history have prompted both sets of responses, but the history of this moment is not yet written. How we respond to coronavirus will be one of the most important choices of our lifetimes.  I spoke with Snowden by phone. A lightly edited transcript of our conversation follows.  Something you discuss in the book is that epidemic diseases, whether it’s bubonic plague or smallpox or Ebola, do not afflict societies in completely random ways. If the impact of epidemic diseases isn’t random, what factors explain how they impact societies?  The world of microbes is populated with an infinite number of species, all of which are in constant evolution. Each has its own qualities and therefore can find environmental niches to exploit that are quite different. Societies get the diseases that they have created the channels and the pathways for. Epidemics tend to reach our greatest vulnerabilities and exploit them.  Asiatic cholera of the 19th century is the classic disease of industrialization. Society at the time was rampantly, suddenly, and chaotically urbanizing. There is no sanitation. The air is filled with foul odors. There are no sewers or toilets or guaranteed clean water. It’s in that kind of environment that a disease transmitted through the contamination of food and water with human fecal matter is able to flourish. And that’s what typhoid and Asiatic cholera were at the time.  Today, in New York or in Rome or London, we don’t need to fear Asiatic cholera because we’ve had a sanitary revolution. We have sewer systems. We have water that’s pure and safe to drink. We have sanitary customs, we have paved streets, we have whitewashed buildings, we’ve got building codes. So we’re not vulnerable to that kind of disease. But that doesn’t mean that now we’re invincible — that bulwarks of civilization protect us against the natural world.  What are the social conditions that made us vulnerable to coronavirus?   We’ve created a different kind of world — the world of globalization. That’s very different from the age of industrialization, and it creates different vulnerabilities. Globalization encompasses enormous population growth. We’re now approaching 8 billion people as a species, and that is accompanied by an enormous density of population.  We also have a myth of infinite economic growth although the planet has finite resources. And that forms our relationship with the environment. We’re constantly invading and destroying great swaths of animal habitat. That brings us into contact with animals that we didn’t encounter very often in the past. Therefore, we are exposed to the infinite reservoirs of microbes that they carry and there is a spillover of diseases we never encountered before. Avian flu is a spillover from wild fowl. Ebola is a spillover from bats. MERS is the same story. And coronavirus today is once more a spillover via the wet markets in a place like Wuhan [the Chinese city where the coronavirus outbreak originated].  We’ve also created mass air travel — millions of people travel on a daily basis. So a disease that breaks out in Jakarta in the morning can easily begin its course in London or Paris or Mexico City in the evening. Those links make us enormously vulnerable to diseases that can travel on airplanes with us and then begin fresh in our overcrowded, teeming cities. I want to follow up on something you said there. Clearly, globalization has a lot to do with the spread of coronavirus. But I’m wondering if the problem is globalization itself, or if a deeper problem is the gap between the reality of globalization and the myths we still tell ourselves about national borders and nation-states being wholly separate entities.  Right now, we don’t only have a more interconnected world; we have an interconnected world full of nationalist leaders who deny that interconnection. I wonder if that combination of a truly interconnected world and resurgent nationalism is part of what stops us from addressing global problems, like a pandemic, in a coordinated, global way.   I entirely agree. What is happening is not something that is ordained to happen: The ideas in people’s heads make an enormous difference. Just because we have these vulnerabilities in a globalized world doesn’t mean we have to succumb to them. There is a bright side to this story, which is that it is possible to manage this global world that we’ve created in ways that are different from those we have established.  It’s true that the ideas in our heads haven’t yet caught up with the reality in which we live. You mention, for example, the idea of national boundaries. If there’s one thing that this pandemic seems to be teaching, it’s the eerie lack of reality of national borders. A disease transmitted by the air like coronavirus simply has no respect for borders — it has no respect for walls. I’m hoping that the Trumpian wall will not become the metaphor for our age because that will disarm us and make us much more vulnerable to different microbes or a resurgence of this one — all of which is more or less inevitable in our future. The most dangerous thing right now would be the triumph of the idea that the European Union should be dismantled. Coronavirus has shown that what we need is more collective action. The tragedy was not that Europe wasn’t divided into little pieces, but that it didn’t succeed in having a common response. This isn’t a disease that is affecting just part of the global world as we’re seeing now — it’s a disease of humanity. It’s going to involve everyone. And I think we need to have a consciousness that keeps up with the reality that we’re actually facing and proposes solutions that deal with the real problem. Denigrating entire ethnic groups takes us nowhere in terms of dealing with factual biological reality.  I think what you’re getting at is that coronavirus seems to have brought us to a kind of global fork in the road. On the one hand, coronavirus could affirm the nationalist sentiment that we need a more closed world, that we need to build walls, that all of our forays into globalization were wrong. Or we could begin to recognize that a globalized world requires more global cooperation.  On this point, there’s a line from the book that’s been stuck in my head ever since I read it: “One of the horrors of an epidemic of plague was that it broke the common bonds of humanity.” Is this the norm? Do epidemics tend to bring divided communities together under a banner of solidarity, or do they tend to further exacerbate existing divisions and break societies apart?  It’s a terrible worry. I use the analogy of epidemics as mirrors that reflect who we are back upon us. I find that helpful and also scary. It’s helpful because it does allow us to tease out what it is that we’re seeing in that mirror. It’s scary because it means that we see both our darker and our brighter selves.  That does give us hope in one sense: Our destiny is what we are wise enough, collaborative enough, and willing enough to create. We have a choice here. You’re right that we’ve come to a fork in the road with coronavirus. We’re going to have a miserable, deadly period for some months now. But after that, we will have a chance to construct a better world that’s more scientific, more rational, more humane, more international. Or we can adopt pseudo-solutions that will condemn us to repeating this awful experience that we’re now going through.  My hope is that our brighter selves will prevail. My fear is that there are many interested parties working day and night to make certain that we will have a more divided and hateful world. Right now, large sectors of the conservative right in our country reject the scientific explanations for Covid-19 and claim instead that this is something else —  something foreign. That leads to violence and ethnic conflict.  What does it actually look like when our darker selves prevail?  In the era of the bubonic plague, as you mentioned, one sees this tension between pseudo-ideas and ideas that were a way forward. The pseudo-ideas included, once again, divisiveness, xenophobia, witch-hunting, blaming, finding a guilty party — the great “other” that we can attack. In Strasbourg, France, the citizens of Strasbourg rounded up the community of 200,000 Jews, brought them to the Jewish cemetery, and said that it was their religion that was leading them to poison the wells where Christians drank — and that was the source of the bubonic plague. They had either to renounce their religion or be killed on the spot. Half of the Jews held to their religion, and they were burned alive at that very moment, that very day.  This is part of the violence, the divisiveness, the xenophobia that can emerge from a time of epidemic plague. The reason being that these are events that touch the depths of our psyches as human beings. They reach down and pose the questions of, what are we as mortals? What about our death? What about our bonds to our fellow human beings, to our families, our communities, our friends? What authority do we give to the political and sanitary officials who are dealing with this?  All of these things are revealed by plagues and create enormous anxieties; therefore, they bring out these extraordinary responses. Either we can respond with immediate fear and anxiety or we can use our intelligence to see that if we’re going to survive, we’re each dependent on one another and we have to figure scientifically, how does this work? What are its mechanisms? That seems to me the opportunity offered by each pandemic.  The history of epidemic diseases is not all doom and despair because people haven’t always chosen to go down the wrong fork. Although there have been these outbursts of horrors during times of pandemics, it’s the history of pandemic that has left enormous positive [impact]. Modern public health is something that was developed during the centuries of bubonic plague, and we’re still dependent on it today. It’s saving our lives as we speak. The potential for progress is really there. But it’s a choice that we have before us. We’re at a fork in the road. Where will we go? Coronavirus is a great moral drama that’s taking place right before our eyes. And the script has not yet been written. What does it look like when we choose to write that script in a positive way? Could you talk about a society that, when faced with a horrible epidemic, chose their better selves?  A powerful example is the sanitary movement of the 19th century, which was a real attempt to deal with the extraordinary mortality of the age of the Industrial Revolution. At the time, people in London or Manchester or Paris or Naples or New York were living in enormous, unplanned, filthy, overcrowded urban centers. There was the [emergence] of the idea that this didn’t need to result in mass death and disability, that something could be done about it.  Top medical doctors started thinking about correlations between the patients they saw and the social conditions in which they lived. They began with the idea of “social medicine”: that medicine was not just about individuals, [but] also the social factors that caused the illness. This idea was channeled by the sanitary movement. They set up enormous investigation into how people live throughout Britain. Physicians went to every community and wrote back about what the exact conditions were in the places they inhabited. You had a central board of health that put it together and developed an enormous series of ways to reform this chaotic and unplanned society.  Just imagine the scale of this project. It meant retrofitting every place in Britain with sewers, with clean water, with clean houses, regulated houses. For the first time, we see the state insisting on sanitary rules, on building codes, on maximum occupation requirements. It took two-thirds of a century to carry out at enormous cost. And I would argue it saved millions of lives in Britain in the 19th century. People in Britain became much healthier.  And so astonishing was this example, this way of thinking about disease, that it was taken up in France. And then it spreads to Belgium and the Netherlands and United States and Italy. This was an amazing moment to which we owe broad boulevards, urban parks, all kinds of aspects of the world in which we live. I think this was our brighter angels. And it was the reaction to the legacy that was created by typhoid and cholera.  When European societies faced this fork in the road, I’m curious about what factors made the difference between choosing their better or worse selves. Was it leadership from the top? Was it demand from below? What was it that made the difference?  It needed not only cooperation from below but leadership from the top. One of the legacies of these epidemic diseases has been the molding of the modern state. Epidemic diseases required health authorities. They required great taxation. They required legislative authorities. They required administrative census data. They required hospitals. They required a navy to quarantine ships. They required police powers to quarantine people by land.  We see this in the political thought at the time through the writings of people like Thomas Hobbes and John Locke, the founders of modern liberalism. They argued that life was nasty, brutish, and short, as indeed it was during the time of plague, and that you needed to create an authority to make people safe.  The sanitary movement helped sculpt a modern state with enormous new powers that could be used in beneficent ways. Of course, power has its own problems — it can have negative results. But we can’t survive without political power, without states, and without sanitary authorities. They’re part of our survival kit. And I think the coronavirus shows how quickly life could once again become nasty, brutish, and short without them.   That’s interesting because a core part of our national mythos in the United States since the 1980s has been the idea that government is the problem. In the 1990s, Bill Clinton, a Democrat, got up and pronounced that “the era of big government is over.”  I’ve been thinking of those words a lot today in the wake of coronavirus as the death counts continue to rise exponentially, as states bet against one another for health care resources, as we still lack a federally coordinated plan for addressing the epidemic. If anything is going to shatter that anti-government paradigm, maybe it is a global pandemic of this scale.  I think there is a libertarian streak in the US that’s having catastrophic effects on health. The United States had no national plan. It had refused to listen to the scientists who said that a new pandemic was an inevitability in our future. It trimmed the national government’s health budgets. So our coronavirus response has resembled the cacophonous noise that comes from a symphony with no director — in which every instrument player decides to make his own different music. The national government says one thing. Governors in states say another. The CDC says a third thing. Municipal governments have their own sound. School boards intervene in ways that are their own. It’s mayhem and pandemonium.  We tend not to realize just how much we need the state until it abdicates its responsibility to keep us safe. Now, we’ve seen that. This administration’s response has been like going back to the pre-Hobbesian days of the war of all against all.  I think the lack of preparedness is the great tragedy that we’re experiencing today. And that’s not just about having more ventilators, although that’s included. It really is about our minds, our hearts, and our intellects. Change has to begin there. If we try to dismantle the World Health Organization and put walls up, I think we’ll find that when the next disease comes, we could experience an even greater catastrophe than this one.  What should we do? What does the road map after coronavirus look like?  We need a huge rethinking collectively, not by any single person. If anyone presents you with a blueprint saying “I know the answer,” I think we should all run as fast as we can from that person. That’s not what I’m thinking. I’m thinking we need to put our heads together collectively and devise a society that works in a different way: [one] that is prepared, that  rethinks our relationship with climate, with our great cities, and rethinks this myth that we can grow infinitely in our numbers and in our economic systems until there’s only standing room and nothing but smog to breathe.   That’s a mammoth collective project. It’s not doom and gloom, though. I think this actually holds its excitement — it’s inspiring. We can build a different world, a better world, a world where our grandchildren can live better.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The American economy seems to have transformed in a matter of weeks as the coronavirus has brought activities across the country to a grinding halt. Not only did the US fail to anticipate the public health crisis caused by coronavirus, but it appears to be unprepared for the economic consequences of getting the pandemic under control.  Most Americans already know they are in a very different economic reality than they were in February. Restaurants are closed or only doing takeout or delivery. Clothing boutiques are shuttering. Americans across the economy have lost their jobs. Even workers whose jobs might be more stable probably don’t want to look at their 401(k)s.  Government officials have made a conscious decision to lock down parts of the economy and implement strict social distancing guidelines to try to better respond to the pandemic. President Donald Trump initially said he’d like to reopen the economy by Easter to avoid further damage — perhaps thinking it’s better to just keep the economy going and let the chips fall where they may — but people aren’t going to be falling over themselves to go to restaurants if there’s a deadly virus spreading. Trump ultimately backed off, and extended social distancing measures to the end of April. After all, the point of the economy is to serve people, not for people to serve it.  
    Related
   “There seems to be a segment of society that’s lost track of the purpose of markets,” said Aaron Klein, the policy director at the Center on Regulation and Markets at the Brookings Institution. “Humanity created markets to efficiently distribute goods and services to serve humanity; markets did not create humanity to efficiently serve the will of the markets.”  We’re stuck in dual crises for the foreseeable future — one that’s health-related, and one that’s economic. Eventually this will end, but there’s no telling when. It’s a confusing time, including when it comes to the money-related end of things. So here are some answers to questions about the economic crisis that you were perhaps too embarrassed — or too afraid — to ask. An economic crisis is a steep and sudden downturn of the economy. In terms of data, it shows up in a lot of places — GDP growth, unemployment numbers, productivity, and more. Data often lags behind real-time events, but what we already know paints a dire picture: an enormous spike in jobless claims and an economic contraction projection of disturbing proportions.   The US is definitely in an economic crisis right now, albeit a distinct one from crises past, including the one in most recent memory: the financial crisis and Great Recession in the late 2000s. “The prior recession started in the financial markets and affected the real economy; this will start in the real economy and affect the financial markets,” said Klein. The problem right now isn’t subprime mortgages and banks and hedge funds making bets they shouldn’t — it’s that the US in the midst of a global health crisis and is taking extreme economic measures in an effort to protect the public’s well-being. Public officials have ordered shut wide swaths of the economy, including restaurants, travel, and hospitality, and it’s had a severe and immediate effect. Jobless claims have seen an unprecedented spike, with more than 16 million new claims being filed over the last three weeks alone. During the Great Recession, the highest week of losses was about 600,000, and 8.7 million total jobs were lost over the course of many months. Factories across the country have shut down, businesses are shuttered, and not only do people have less money to spend, they have fewer ways to spend it. “Everything this time is happening bigger and faster,” Jason Furman, who served as an economic adviser to President Barack Obama, told Vox’s Li Zhou and Ella Nilsen recently in a piece laying out the differences between the 2008 crash and this one.  The question now is if and when the US will be able to get the virus under control so that the economy can start to open back up. “What we need is for everybody to stay home and not go broke doing it,” said Cecilia Rouse, an economist at Princeton and former member of Obama’s Council of Economic Advisers. “The faster we can get this pandemic under control, the faster we can snap back.” The longer the crisis goes on, the more challenging the recovery becomes, and the longer it will take.  There’s a well-known line among economists that a recession is when your neighbor loses their job, but a depression is when you lose yours, which perhaps gets at the air of difference between the two: A recession feels bad, a depression feels very bad. But the line between recession and depression can be a little fuzzy.  Traditionally, a recession is defined as two consecutive quarters of negative GDP growth, but the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) has a broader definition of a “significant decline in economic activity spread across the economy” that lasts for more than a few months and shows up in places like GDP, income, employment, production, and retail sales. In the US, a group within the NBER is officially charged with “calling” when a recession starts and ends — and it usually takes them some time after a recession begins for them to say it’s happening. A depression, on the other hand, is a more severe and prolonged version of a recession. The Great Depression that lasted from 1929 to the early 1940s included not one but two major economic downturns — one from 1929 to 1933, and another from 1937 to 1938. Output fell sharply. The coronavirus recession could indeed become a depression. The US is in uncharted territory in what’s going on in the economy — Americans have stopped working, stopped producing, and stopped consuming almost at the drop of a hat. The stock market is volatile, and business investment is slowing. Much of the country has been ground to a halt. Whether or not the US slips into a depression depends in large part how well Americans are able to weather the storm while the coronavirus portion of the crisis gets figured out. Officials don’t want the economy to become so broken that it can’t be fixed. “Ultimately, the economy will rebound when the pandemic is under control. The question is, how many businesses will be able to weather the storm, and how many workers will be able to?” Klein said. “The longer the shutdown goes on, the greater effects on the economy, particularly if businesses can’t reopen.” It’s also important to note that, whatever you call it, not everyone will experience the economic fallout in the same ways. For some people, it will be catastrophic. For others, it will be an inconvenience. Older, low-income, and homeless people and those in other vulnerable communities will also likely experience the economic crisis in more harmful ways, regardless of how the downturn is defined formally. The stock market has been all over the place amid the coronavirus crisis. Major indexes plunged as the gravity of the situation began to take hold in February and March, and stocks have become pretty volatile. But does it matter what the stock market does? Well, yes and no.  The stock market right now is signifying underlying turmoil in the economy. It can also be a leading indicator, albeit a noisy one, of where the economy might be headed, and amid coronavirus, its take appears to be ¯\_(ツ)_/¯. As stocks plunged at the takeoff of the crisis in the US, a lot of investors appear to have pulled out their money and parked it in cash, and uncertainty has created an enormous amount of volatility. The stock market will likely start to recover before the economy does — that’s what happened after the financial crisis, when it turned up in March 2009 and the recession ended three months later in June — but we won’t know if or when that will be. What happens in the stock market can have a “wealth effect” as well that is largely behavioral — consumers spend more in a bull market. A small majority of Americans own stocks, but the richest Americans own most of the stocks.  But the average person shouldn’t focus too much on what’s going on in the markets, especially in the short term. There’s a saying from legendary investor Benjamin Graham that the market is a voting machine in the short run but a weighing machine in the long run. A stock’s particular price might be up or down on a given day, but ultimately, the underlying fundamentals of a business are what matters.  “What we know about anything that is bought and sold is that price is dictated by price and demand. What helps determine stock prices over the long run, of course, is earnings, it’s fundamentals, but in the short run, panic can create very significant mispricing,” said Kristina Hooper, chief global market strategist at Invesco.  There have also been questions about whether the US could halt stock market trading altogether, beyond the temporary “circuit breaker” stops that are triggered when stocks drop too much. Greg Daco, an economist at Oxford Economics, told me that theoretically it could — after all, there are stock market holidays — but that wouldn’t necessarily solve the volatility problem. “The question is, what happens when it reopens?” he said. “You close the market, reopen it, and it falls by 30 percent, was it worth it?” The best advice right now on what to do on your investments, per finance experts, might also be the hardest to follow: Do nothing.  “Most people are horrible at making long-term investment decisions generally, and that’s exacerbated when they try to make decisions under emotionally intense circumstances,” said Zach Teutsch, a financial adviser at Values Added Financial. While it may be tempting to look at your 401(k) or stock portfolio right now, it might not paint a pretty picture and could prompt you to make decisions you might later regret. That’s part of what happened in 2008, Hooper said, when average Americans paid too much attention to the stock market, pulled their money out, and then missed out when stocks started to come back. “One of the biggest mistakes in the financial crisis was that the average American did focus on it, and many of them changed their asset allocations as a result,” she said.  Remember, before the current crisis, Americans were in the midst of the longest economic expansion in US history and a multi-year bull market. To be sure, the advice around this changes with age — people who have years before they plan to retire can wait out the recovery, while those close to or in retirement might not be able to. The experts I spoke with said older people have hopefully shifted their investments toward less risky places — more bonds than stocks, for example — with age. (There’s a reason your 401(k) investment plan often has a target retirement date attached to it.)  For younger people, or those with some money to spare, down markets can be a good time to get in. If you can afford to kick up your 401(k) contributions, consider it. Or if you have cash on hand, a lot of stocks might be trading at a discount. “If you needed to buy a new pair of shoes and all the shoes in the world were 40 percent off, you wouldn’t say, oh, no, there’s a terrible shoe crisis, you’d say, terrific, I can get the shoes I need for cheaper?” Teutsch said. “Young people make a fortune on stock market crashes, because they’re adding every couple of weeks in bad markets at lower prices; you just don’t get to see it or appreciate it until years down the line,” said David Bahnsen, a portfolio manager and financial commentator.  It’s important to remember investing has inherent risks, there are no guarantees, things could get much worse before they get better, and the market is next to impossible to time — Warren Buffett once bet the S&P 500 would outperform a basket of hedge funds for a decade. And he won. The first thing to know about unemployment insurance is that it’s a state-federal program that provides cash benefits, but in terms of administration, it goes through the state. In other words, it’s pretty patchy. So to apply, you need to go through your state unemployment agency, and guidelines for who qualifies and what benefits are awarded vary. You can find information about your state’s requirements and processes here.  First, we’ll go through the typical scenario for unemployment insurance, and then through the changes in the pandemic and how the stimulus package fortifies the program. If you have been laid off or fired by an employer and have a “substantial history” of working, then you can apply to collect unemployment insurance benefits on a weekly basis.  Once you start the application process online or by phone, the unemployment insurance office contacts your employer to confirm that your explanation of why the job ended matches up. If the explanations for the separation are in agreement, then the claim generally moves forward quite quickly. If not, then there’s a dispute, and the state makes a judgment of what happened. It is worth noting that people who quit their jobs can also file for unemployment — for example, in cases of sexual harassment — but those workers are likelier to lose in the dispute.  
    Related
   “When there are disputes over what happened, if people are laid off, they collect benefits 70 percent of the time. If there’s a dispute and they quit, they get benefits about 25 percent of the time,” said Wayne Vroman, a labor economist at the Urban Institute. The amount you’re eligible to receive is calculated based on what you were earning at your job, and maximum and minimum amounts vary by state. Many states allow you to collect benefits for a maximum of 26 weeks, but again, that varies. Vroman estimates that the average across the system is about $385 a week. Across 52 weeks, that would add up to about $20,000 under the pre-stimulus system — in other words, it’s not a replacement for a full-time job, plus you can’t use it for a full year anyway. Typically, there are limits on how much you can earn while you’re collecting benefits. In other words, no side gigs or freelancing.  Unemployment insurance is funded through payroll taxes paid by employers, and when there are a lot of claims, states can run out of money to pay benefits out. During the last recession, three dozen states wound up having to borrow from the federal government to cover unemployment insurance. Because so many people are filing for unemployment amid coronavirus, doing so is extra challenging right now, and many state offices are overwhelmed. That may translate to delays for those filing. The late March stimulus package puts unemployment insurance on steroids. It includes a $600 per week increase in unemployment benefits on top of state benefits for four months. It also expands unemployment to people who aren’t usually covered — gig workers, freelancers, contractors, the self-employed, and workers who are furloughed or have reduced hours — and allows for 13 weeks to be tacked on to each state’s maximum.  “If you lose your job, if your hours are cut, and even if it doesn’t feel like you’ve lost your job but you’ve been put on a zero-hour schedule, you can still apply for unemployment benefits even if your employer tells you you can’t,” said Andrew Stettner, a senior fellow at the Century Foundation. Vox’s Dylan Matthews has an explainer on how the stimulus bill changes unemployment insurance.  In the United States, health coverage is tied to employment. Now, large parts of the economy have been shut down in order to respond to a health crisis, resulting in millions of Americans losing their jobs in the middle of said health crisis and, therefore, many of them losing their health insurance. “The joy of picking — or keeping — your health insurance is really predicated on you having a job,” said Mike Konczal, a fellow at the Roosevelt Institute. Linda Blumberg, a health system expert at the Urban Institute, talked Vox through what to do if you are laid off and lose your employer-based insurance. The first step for people who can afford it is to look into the potential for getting COBRA coverage, which basically means you get to hold on to your insurance but pay for it yourself. But COBRA can be expensive and translate to thousands of dollars in premiums. For people whose incomes have fallen significantly, and especially for those who live in Medicaid expansion states, Medicaid is another place to look. You can see if you qualify for Medicaid in your state based on your income here. For children, you can look into CHIP as well.  People who lose their jobs can also enroll in the Affordable Care Act marketplaces for a certain period, because losing your health insurance, as well as having a baby or getting married, is considered a “qualifying event.” And there, you may be eligible for subsidies, too. Blumberg cautioned people should be thorough in looking for options for enrollment, and they should presume their loss of income is going to persist when inputting information into the system. “If for some reason they get their job back or their hours come back up, they can then report that at the time and have the subsidy reduced,” she said.  Even if you’re not eligible for a subsidy, it’s an especially critical time to have health insurance, given the coronavirus outbreak. Blumberg warned against nongovernment, non-marketplace plans and “short-term, limited-duration” plans allowed under the Trump administration. “Those other policies, it’s very difficult, often, to figure out what’s excluded from them,” she said. “Be very cautious of something that looks too good to be true.” For those who are uninsured already, it’s worth noting that some states have reopened their marketplaces in light of the crisis, so you may be able to get insurance now. “Debt is better than dead,” Blumberg said. Vox’s Dylan Scott has an explainer on health insurance amid coronavirus and the different mechanisms for coverage. He also notes that the CDC said in a statement to Vox that the agency believes it has the legal authority to cover Covid-19 testing and treatment, in collaboration with other federal and local agencies. In a separate statement, a CDC spokesperson told Vox that there are “provisions that allocate funding for testing and treatment of the uninsured, which will continue to be announced” and noted that federally qualified health centers are an important resource for those who lack insurance. Beyond unemployment and health insurance, there are other ways out there to help people make ends meet.  For example, there are multiple options for food assistance, including SNAP benefits (more commonly known as food stamps) and specific services for pregnant or postpartum women and children and seniors. In the case of food stamps, they’re managed by the states, and you can find a directory here. Food stamps, like other assistance programs, are pegged to your income.  “It’s possible that you have, even with unemployment insurance, an income that’s low enough that you would be eligible for SNAP,” Vroman said.  You can also find an outline of government benefits here.  Stettner advised that people should start signing up for benefits and assistance programs as soon as they can. “Start the process, because it can take some time. Don’t wait around to the last minute to reach out for help,” he said. He added it’s also worth reaching out to utility companies in the case of hardships to see if they’ll work with you on a plan to pay your bills. (The same may apply for rent payments or mortgages, too.) Unfortunately, a lot of the safety net in the US has been whittled down over the years. “It’s for the most needy people in our society, so we don’t have a lot of room for people just getting by,” Rouse said. On March 27, the president signed a $2.2 trillion stimulus package, the CARES Act, to help stabilize and boost the American economy in the time of coronavirus. Vox’s Li Zhou and Ella Nilsen have a full explainer of what’s in the bill, and here’s a brief overview: The other plank of the stimulus, which has gotten perhaps the most attention is the direct payments to be sent to Americans across the country — in other words, those checks from the government you’ve probably been hearing about. (Vox’s Dylan Matthews has an explainer on the stimulus checks.)  Single adults who make up to $75,000 annually will get a one-time $1,200 check, and married couples who make up to $150,000 will receive $2,400. The government will also distribute $500 per child. The payments decrease as incomes go up and phase out by $99,000 for singles and $198,000 for couples. The calculations will be made using 2019 taxes for those who have filed (the deadline is now July 15) and 2018 taxes for those who have not. There are several calculators online you can use to figure out how much you’ll receive. For those who don’t file taxes because they earned so little they weren’t required to, collecting the cash will be more complex. The IRS says people will need to file a “simple tax return” with basic information to collect money, and low-income taxpayers, older people, Social Security recipients, some veterans, and individuals who otherwise don’t need to file a tax return will not owe tax. Note that people in households with members who are unauthorized immigrants may be ineligible for the direct payments. Beyond the stimulus bill, Congress has passed two other coronavirus-related pieces of legislation, and the Federal Reserve has taken steps to help stabilize markets and the economy. Democrats are pushing for a fourth coronavirus bill, but thus far, it’s not clear how much buy-in there is from Republicans.  As for what else the government could be doing, the answer is plenty, if there’s political will. Americans are facing a health and economic crisis of staggering proportions, and the greater risk is doing too little than in doing too much. Vox’s Matt Yglesias recently laid out some possibilities: The US needs to take the analogy of wartime mobilization that’s been used by many leaders much more seriously and deliver trillions more in tax cuts and spending increases to stimulate demand. Much of that spending should be aimed at mobilizing workers and industry to provide the goods and services the US needs to continue coping with a virus that, even if successfully contained, is not going to vanish soon. To cope with the twin crises of economics and public health, the US will need substantial investment in the production of personal protective equipment for health care workers, but may also need production of masks and gloves for the public. It will need a huge infusion of funds to state and local governments so they can continue to provide — even expand — needed services. It will need medical research in spades, and we’ll need income support for households and businesses as they struggle to adapt to a new world of doing things in less efficient, more socially distant ways. And to support it all, the US needs a creative and flexible Federal Reserve willing to adopt a wartime mentality to finance. “Does anybody regret how much debt we went into to win World War II?” said Betsey Stevenson, an economist at the University of Michigan and former Obama administration official. “People rarely complain about how much Congress is spending to fight a war, and they need to be thinking about that right now as we fight this pandemic.” Not every person — or every sector — is being impacted equally by the coronavirus crisis.  “This recession is going to be, for some people, more devastating than the financial crisis, for some less,” Klein said. “This one is going to start further down on the income spectrum.” Restaurants, bars, stores, and nonessential businesses have been forced to close across much of the country. Airlines have seen an enormous decline in business, as has the travel and hospitality industry across the board. Schools have been shut down and live entertainment brought to a stop.  The stimulus bill is meant to bring some relief to both small businesses and major corporations, which both got bailout funds as part of the $2.2 trillion package. But, again, it really depends how long this lasts to see how hard the economy to be hit.  Ultimately, businesses and industries translate to people, as in, workers, and the workers who will be hardest hit by layoffs and shutdowns are those who can’t afford it. According to estimates from the US Private Sector Job Quality Index, more than 37 million jobs in the US are vulnerable to layoffs in the near term, 35 million of which are considered low-income. There will likely also be disparities by race and ethnicity.  “We know that blacks, Latinx, and native people, in terms of race and ethnicity, they have lower levels of reserves, and we also know that their employment is more precarious than that of white people,” said Darrick Hamilton, the executive director of the Kirwan Institute for the Study of Race and Ethnicity at Ohio State University. If you have extra cash on hand right now and aren’t concerned about parting ways with it, there are plenty of things to do with it to try to help — order delivery from local restaurants and grocery stores, or buy gift certificates for local businesses that you can use at a later date. Amazon is one company not worried about its business right now, so maybe get toilet paper from the market down the street instead. Tip the delivery person generously. Instead of ordering through a delivery app, try calling the restaurant instead. Lower-wage service workers are going to be the ones hurt the most the fastest. “A lot of small businesses that tend to work on fairly small margins to begin with are going to be very hard hit,” Rouse said.  If you employ people, such as a child care provider or cleaning service, you can always keep paying them, even if you ask them not to come.  There are plenty of charities willing to take your money, including GiveDirectly, which is providing cash assistance to families. You can also contact local food banks and other social service organizations to figure out how you can help. Another grim reality is that there are plenty of GoFundMe accounts set up to provide economic and medical aid.  But the fact of the matter is, there is only so much that private individuals can do.  “Fundamentally, this needs to be a government solution. Individual acts of charity or trying to keep the economy afloat are not sufficient at this moment,” Konczal said. “The recession is ultimately a collective problem, and the government will be the one who determines what happens to small business, self-employed people, and so on down the line.”  At the moment, the likeliest scenario is that the economy gets better when the coronavirus crisis gets better, and unfortunately, nobody knows when that will be. As Dartmouth College economist Bruce Sacerdote put it, “It’s all about getting the damn virus under control.” There has been some debate about whether the “cure” — as in the economic shutdown — is worse than the disease that is coronavirus. And some people have suggested government officials open the economy back up and start to ease restrictions on social distancing even before the health plank of this is under control. But is it really worth sacrificing tens of thousands of people so that the Dow Jones Industrial Average will go back up? And is it really likely that with a deadly virus spreading, people are going to be eager to go eat at the diner down the street? Billionaire Bill Gates recently weighed in: “It’s very tough to say to people, ‘Hey, keep going to restaurants, go buy new houses, ignore that pile of bodies over in the corner. We want you to keep spending because there’s maybe a politician who thinks GDP growth is all that counts.’” Vox’s Ezra Klein also recently did a deep dive: You can suppress the virus now and deal with a terrible economy six months from now, or you can wait two more months to suppress the virus, find yourself forced into yet more extreme quarantine measures because the virus is pervasive and the death toll overwhelming, and find yourself in an even more horrendous economy on the other side. So for now Americans are in a waiting game with the virus, and once that’s under control, the recovery will depend on the mitigation measures the US has taken and will take. “The debate is if we end up in a V-shape or a U-shape recovery, and anyone who pretends to have the answer to that is wrong,” Bahnsen said. As to whether this will bring about positive change in the economy, it’s hard to tell. On the one hand, policies and government actions that would have seemed almost unimaginable just weeks or months ago — a check going out to nearly every American household, expanding unemployment insurance — are now a reality. And in such a scenario where so many Americans are losing health coverage in the time they need it most, it has to make some at least think about the value of Medicare-for-all, or at the very least, a public health insurance option. The Great Depression resulted in a dramatic expansion of the social safety net. “We’re considering this use of public power to address our calamity in ways that the public imagination didn’t consider in the past. The sobering reality is that it’s not enough,” Hamilton said. “You can’t tell people that this stuff is impossible, because it happened.” This could also foster a discussion about how Americans treat and think about the workers deemed “essential” during times of crisis, which includes not only doctors and nurses but also home health care workers, grocery store clerks, and service staff. On the other hand, there’s always a tendency to revert to the mean, and recessions and economic crises don’t usually make Americans more generous. “In general, recessions make people very zero-sum and very hesitant to want to collectively provide security. We saw that in the Great Recession,” Konczal said. “We should not understand this as an obviously political moment.” Many Americans in recent weeks have begun working remotely, if they haven’t been furloughed or laid off; schools have canceled classes for weeks; and restaurants, retail stores, bars, gyms, and other gathering places in dozens of states have shuttered. Major events were called off with a domino-like effect, including Coachella and South by Southwest, March Madness and virtually all national sporting events, and many religious services across the country. Now at least 42 states have stay-at-home directives. These closures are all attempts to force social distancing, a crucially important public health intervention that can help stop transmission of the coronavirus. With Covid-19, “many people in the US will at some point, either this year or next, get exposed to this virus,” the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s immunization czar announced this month. Social distancing, health authorities argue, can dramatically slow the rate at which the infection spreads, helping to ease the burden on the health care system. Best practices require maintaining at least a six-foot distance between yourself and others. The closures nationally are largely preventive — in some places, no one from work or school may have even been sick — though increasingly, these decisions are being made in response to the rapidly ballooning number of cases of Covid-19; the risk that contact with large groups of people will exacerbate transmission of the virus; and the growing understanding that the disease can be transmitted by those who are asymptomatic or  appear to be relatively healthy. (At least one study estimated that about 25 percent of coronavirus transmissions may have occurred in pre-symptomatic stages — meaning it can be spread by people who don’t yet know they have it.) In the United States, these efforts have taken on particular urgency: As of April 9, the US has the highest number of confirmed cases of the illness. To that end, the US government has warned against all gatherings of more than 10 people. But even with so many public places shuttered for now, simple acts in our daily lives — even a run in the park — raise questions about how social distancing works: How should social distancing affect your workouts? Your weekly manicure? Play dates for your kids? Are those risky for an ostensibly healthy person like yourself? What do you — as a responsible, socially conscious human being — owe to your fellow men and women, particularly those who are sick, immunocompromised, and older? Are you breaking the social contract by going to the grocery store? Or, by not going, are you overreacting and hurting the economy? Vox spoke with six experts in public health, medicine, psychology, and bioethics for answers. (Please remember that as the Covid-19 landscape transforms week by week, so too will the advice; this story has been updated to reflect the latest closures as of April 9.) Vox’s Kelsey Piper makes a strong argument for choosing to stay home as much as possible, inconvenient as it may seem, to help your fellow human. “If you are young and healthy, you ought to take precautions because doing so can end up saving someone’s life,” she writes.  Leah Lagos, a New York City-based psychologist and author of the upcoming Heart, Breath, Mind: Train Your Heart to Conquer Stress and Achieve Success, agrees. “Now is the time to do something for your fellow community members,” she says. Staying home as much as possible, even if you believe you aren’t infected, is the type of altruistic decision that, when performed en masse, has the potential to slow the infection rate, Lagos added. It’s a term known as “flattening the curve,” and the way it works can be seen below:  Considering — and prioritizing — the welfare of strangers is difficult, Lagos acknowledges, but it helps to think of them instead as someone else’s parent, grandparent, or child. “It can be an interesting experiment in compassion for people we don’t know.” “A lot of us might be relatively healthy and think we might be able to withstand the rigors of an infection,” adds Jonathan Kimmelman, director of the Biomedical Ethics Unit at McGill University in Montreal, “but there’s the concern about spreading it to vulnerable individuals, as well as the pressure this outbreak will place on our health care system.” Kimmelman invokes the idea of “social solidarity,” saying that “we have an ethical obligation to curtail activities, practice social distancing, and substitute activities with safer alternatives,” like teleconferencing instead of in-person work meetings or, even if you live in a city where bars are still open, changing a date from a wine bar to a walk outside (or just FaceTime). But should you even be going on dates, period? If the messages are confusing, understand that “there are different levels of social distancing” in effect around the world, and that local health departments’ recommendations currently vary depending on known cases, says Syra Madad, an NYC-based pathogens specialist who was featured in Netflix’s docuseries Pandemic: How to Prevent an Outbreak.  Still, Madad notes, “It is better to operate under the pretense that there is transmission in your community already. There’s going to be disruption to daily life, but we want people to feel empowered by this. The decisions you make will ultimately affect the trajectory of this outbreak.”  Kate Vergara, a public health and infectious disease specialist based in Chicago and New York City, has spent time fighting polio in Ethiopia and helping Ebola survivors in Sierra Leone (without contracting either disease). In order to even begin to approach the ethics of social distancing, she says, we must have a firm grip on how the virus is spreading. “Covid-19 is not airborne,” she says. “It is transmitted through droplets — being coughed on or touching something that someone coughed on, for example, and then touching your face and allowing that pathogen to get into your system through your eyes, nose, or mouth.”  It’s important to practice good hygiene, like hand-washing — which protects not only you but also others. When considering the ethics of spending time out and about, Vergara suggests reframing your view of hand-washing in the following way: “Wash your hands before you go out to protect others, and wash them again after the activity to protect yourself.”  That goes for visiting the ATM, the grocery store, and the like.  The CDC has also advised people in certain public settings (like stores selling essential goods) to wear a cloth mask. The CDC recommends several measures to help prevent the spread of Covid-19:  Guidance may change. Stay informed, and stay safe, with Vox’s coronavirus coverage hub. Between the relentless news alerts, social media memes, and gossipy texts, it’s easy to feel overwhelmed, anxious, and scared. We need self-care more than ever, says LaMar Hasbrouck, a public health physician and former CDC medical epidemiologist. “It’s important during these times to hold fast to any sense of normalcy that you can.” But try to find prudent ways to do so. Hasbrouck now picks off-peak hours to exercise to minimize contact with others; other options include walking, jogging, or biking outdoors, while making sure to maintain distance from others. The more ventilated an area, the lower the risk of transmission, plus, “If you cough, nobody is around, and the droplets just fall and hit the ground,” he says. Better yet: breaking a sweat at home with help from an app or online video. Grocery shopping will need to happen, but instead of going at noon on a Saturday when the place is sure to be packed, try going really early on a weekday morning. If it’s still possible, order online. Wash your hands after handling any deliveries, just to be safe.  Hasbrouck encourages those who have access to services such as Postmates, Grubhub, Lyft, and Instacart to use them. “It’s a good way to social distance,” he says, noting that two main factors when it comes to Covid-19 transmission are closeness of contact and duration. “The handoff is five seconds, you go inside and wash your hands. Or just have them leave it at your doorstep.” (Instacart, Uber Eats, and other delivery services are offering contactless delivery.)  
    Related
   This poses some ethical questions, however: Having milk and bread delivered is convenient for you, minimizing your exposure to the virus. But what about the person doing your grocery shopping or picking up your Thai food? Or the Uber driver ferrying you to your significant other’s apartment? Is it right to ask them to assume the risk of being out and about? For now, many services continue, but some are questioning the ethics of ride-hailing in particular, both because of the impetus to stay home and the risk to drivers. If you are sick or feeling unwell, companies are urging you not to ride. If you do need to use such a service, remember that contaminated hands pose a risk to drivers and riders, so be ultra-diligent about hand hygiene, washing or sanitizing your hands before getting in the car and not touching your face at all. Cracking a window is a smart move for both you and the driver, as it promotes airflow.  If restaurants in your area reopen in coming weeks, or if they remain open, here are a few things to remember: “You mainly need to be mindful about the surfaces you touch: menus, the table, condiments, things that other patrons might have used,” says Benjamin Chapman, a professor and food safety extension specialist at North Carolina State University.  Chapman says that while he might not know who touched that soy sauce bottle or pepper shaker before him, “I do know I can break the pathway of transmission by using hand sanitizer or washing my hands.” With social distancing in mind, opt for establishments where it’s easy to keep 6 to 8 feet between yourself and other diners and feel free to be “a public health nerd” like Chapman and ask if they’re using Environmental Protection Agency-approved sanitizing products, which they should be.  In Ireland, public health officials are encouraging a “no parties, no playdates, no playground” policy, per the Irish Times. Muireann Ní Chrónín, a consultant respiratory pediatrician at Cork University Hospital, told the paper: “In most epidemics, young children are the transmitters.” With Covid-19, older people are most at risk, but children can spread the disease, and at least a small risk of severe illness is present for all age groups. In the US, school closures are smart, Vergara says. “It’s a responsible practice for schools to shut down. That’s several hundred kids interacting in close quarters, and kids aren’t known for washing their hands very well.” But that leaves millions of working parents frantic about career responsibilities, and unsure of whether it’s appropriate to schedule play dates or try to split child care duties with friends.    Lagos worries that play dates during school closures are essentially “quasi-quarantines, defeating the purpose of social distancing.” Kimmelman concurs, and though he says no one knows the exact right answer, “we don’t know how things are going to unfold, and from my standpoint, the risks of underreaction are so much more catastrophic than the risks of overreaction.”  Alyssa F. Westring and Stewart D. Friedman, co-authors of Parents Who Lead, writing in the Harvard Business Review, recommended finding inventive ways for children to play together virtually. “While it may not be feasible to trade-off childcare responsibilities (depending on quarantine restrictions),” they wrote, “consider other ways in which you can make things easier for one another — whether it’s sharing creative activities to keep the kids entertained or taking turns grocery shopping. … Be open to new ways of doing things.”  The CDC has issued recommendations for travelers arriving from dozens of countries with widespread cases to stay home for 14 days. The White House has also encouraged anyone who has been in New York in recent days and left to self-quarantine for 14 days because of the rapidly growing number of cases there.  But if you have a fever or receive new information — that someone you know was exposed — you’re also going to want to “radically change your assessment,” Hasbrouck says. That likely means self-quarantining, because that’s “the ethical decision and you don’t want to expose others. It’s a constant risk assessment, and it’s more of an art than a science. It’s about protecting yourself but also being socially responsible.” “Look at the trajectory of what’s happening in Italy. We’re 11 days behind Italy,” where a national lockdown that began March 10 has curtailed all travel and shuttered nearly all shops, schools, museums, movie theaters, and bars, says Madad.  Some states and cities are observing less stringent measures than others, and a federal mandatory quarantine isn’t likely,  but we can undertake distancing measures ourselves. “One of the things we’ve learned from the H1N1 pandemic is that if you educate people, they will listen. You have to give them the facts, and speak with one voice.” Leslie Goldman has a master’s degree in public health and is a health writer based in Chicago. She is frequent contributor of feature stories and essays to Prevention, Women’s Health, O: The Oprah Magazine, Real Simple Parents, and more. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.      The people of Puerto Rico are no strangers to crisis, nor are they unfamiliar with a chaotic response from government. And so far, residents say, the local political controversies that have arisen in the face of the coronavirus pandemic are reminiscent of officials’ response to Hurricane Maria and other natural disasters that have devastated the island in recent years. As of April 8, Puerto Rico had seen more than 600 cases and over 20 deaths from Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus. The low numbers can partially be contributed to the aggressive social distancing measures the government adopted after the island confirmed its first case on March 13 (a 68-year-old Italian woman who came to the island on a cruise). The island has been on lockdown since March 15, and people aren’t allowed to leave their homes from 7 pm to 5 am. It’s one of the strictest measures imposed in the US, and violators are punished by either a $5,000 fine or a six-month jail term. Enforcement has also been stern: hundreds of people have been cited so far, according to the Associated Press.  But experts also expect that a lack of testing has created the illusion of lower case numbers. The island has one of the lowest testing per capita rates in the US, with only Oklahoma below it, according to the Covid Tracking Project. Although it has a population of 3.2 million, Puerto Rico had only run 4,539 tests as of Tuesday.  In response, administrators paid two companies, Apex General Contractors and 313 LLC, $38 million for a million Covid-19 tests — only to find out that the tests were unusable because they weren’t approved by the Food and Drug Administration. They’re trying to pursue a refund of their 50 percent deposit of $19 million, but the outcome remains unclear. To further fuel criticism, there have also been allegations that the two companies were donors to the governor’s New Progressive Party (PNP), the Miami Herald reports.  “When I say I don’t trust the government, in essence, I don’t trust the people that right now are in the positions of power and are making these decisions,” said Oscar Ojeda, a researcher and activist in Puerto Rico.  That’s not the only scandal the government is fighting: The island is now on its third health secretary in three weeks, and officials are discovering stockpiles of unopened medical equipment that was originally meant for Hurricane Maria.  
    Related
   For Puerto Ricans, these scandals are disappointing but not surprising, given the government’s poor track record with disaster response, Ojeda said. However, the trauma of Hurricane Maria has helped Puerto Ricans organize faster against the virus. Even before the lockdown, he said, most of the population had social distanced voluntarily. Meanwhile, doctors are increasing telemedicine efforts, and nonprofits have been stepping up by gathering and delivering critical medical supplies to hospitals.  But Ojeda said he’s frustrated that the people of Puerto Rico are taking on responsibilities that belong to the government.  “How much is enough resiliency?” he asked. “How much are we going to have to take control over the government’s responsibility to ensure a robust quality of life for the citizens? How much responsibility should we actually have to take up upon our shoulders?”  Puerto Rico is still recovering from not only Hurricane Maria in 2017 but also a series of earthquakes that shook the island in January. Hurricane Maria had a $43 billion impact on Puerto Rico’s economy — a devastating blow for an island that has already racked up more than $70 billion in debt. Then the earthquakes cost the island another $3.1 billion in property damages, as well as lost wages, business, and tourism from power outages. People had to rebuild their lives from the bottom up.  These disasters, coupled with inadequate aid from the federal government due to its territorial status, have left the island with a population that is older and poorer — both characteristics that make its population more vulnerable to a Covid-19 outbreak.  Immediately after Hurricane Maria, at least 123,000 people left the island, many of them working-age adults looking for jobs in the mainland US. That left many older people behind, and the population share of those beyond the age of 65 increased, going from 14 percent in 2008 to 21 percent in 2018, according to the Pew Research Center. This same group has been identified by the Centers for Disease Prevention and Control as high risk for Covid-19. Puerto Rico’s status as a US territory, coupled with a long history of ineffective economic policies, corruption, and natural disasters, has also made its population poor: 44.9 percent of the population lives below the poverty line, a number that is much higher than the national average of 13.1 percent. About half of the island’s population relies on Medicaid, and  640,000 people receive food stamps. That means that many can’t afford to seek the proper medical attention to monitor their health and detect the virus in a timely manner.  The high poverty level also affects people’s basic quality of life during quarantine, said Javier Nieves, an activist on the island. The shutdown is particularly painful for many of those who barely scrape by on a regular day and now no longer have an income.  “It’s pretty frustrating and really painful. A lot of people are going to die because of all this irresponsibility,” Nieves said. “People live check by check. People live on WIC and food stamps.”  The local government passed a $787 million aid plan in March that includes $500 to self-employed people and a 90-day moratorium on mortgage, car, and personal loan payments. It’s one of the most generous stimulus plans released at a local level, but Nieves said more radical measures — such as a halt on bills and rents — need to be implemented to provide a proper social safety net for Puerto Rico’s vulnerable populations (Puerto Ricans are also eligible for federal unemployment benefits through the recently passed CARES Act).  Then there’s the more deeply rooted issue of Puerto Rico’s poor health care system, which only got worse after Hurricane Maria. Thankfully, Dr. Wendy Matos, a professor at the University of Puerto Rico’s medical school, said, the hospitals haven’t been overwhelmed yet — but that could change when the island reaches its anticipated peak in early May. And if a major outbreak does happen, the island’s health care systems are poorly prepared: For a population of 3.2 million, there are only about 10,500 medical specialists and 500 ventilators, although experts predict they will need at least 3,000 if the virus spreads.  The issue becomes more dire in rural areas like Vieques, a neighboring island that still hasn’t been able to open its only hospital since Hurricane Maria, according to Mark Martin, who founded the community group Vieques Love. Its substitute health center, built to fill the void of the hospital, isn’t equipped to treat Covid-19 patients. “Vieques is treated as a rural area, so its health system is built to stabilize and then ship you over to the main island where they have real hospitals,” Martin said. The system failed during the hurricane, yet the government has done little to provide relief.  The government “isn’t learning from Maria,” he said. “They really should be boosting the local health center to a higher classification — if not a hospital, a higher level of treatment.” The island’s vulnerability to Covid-19 is precisely why Gov. Wanda Vázquez imposed some of the strictest social distancing measures in the US. Most businesses, other than grocery stores, banks, and pharmacies, are closed. And even these stores are inaccessible between the hours of 7 pm and 5 am, when Puerto Ricans aren’t allowed to leave their houses. Despite other valid criticism of the government, it’s important to give credit where credit’s due, Matos said: The curfew and lockdown has helped the island dodge a more catastrophic scenario.  “I am a health educator and my background is in public health, but I never imagined that the virus was going to be so viral, so contagious,” she said. “I think that people are doing well and that the government took the right steps at the right moment, which was to lock down.”  Unfortunately, government scandals have raised skepticism among Puerto Ricans, Matos said. People are especially angered by the sheer mismanagement of testing kits: Because the government mistakenly ordered rapid testing kits that weren’t approved by the FDA, it is at risk of losing its $19 million deposit — an unfortunate loss for an island that is already in $74 billion of debt.  Matos added that the lack of tests has contributed to the low number of confirmed cases, as many patients go undetected. The criteria for administering a test is incredibly strict, so it is difficult to detect community spread of Covid-19.  Then there’s the frequent overturn in key cabinet positions, adding to the instability within the government. The island is on its third secretary of health in the past three weeks: The first, Rafael Rodríguez-Mercado, resigned after the island botched its response to early cases by mishandling samples, which led to delayed test results; the second, Dr. Concepción Quiñones de Longo, held her position for two weeks before resigning because she was unhappy with how the department was run. The latest, Dr. Lorenzo Gonzalez, has been doing a better job than his predecessors at handling the virus, Matos said, and is slowly starting to gain the trust of the people. Then there is the discovery of stashes of personal protective gear donated during Hurricane Maria. On Saturday, the health secretary announced that officials found a warehouse with $4 million worth of supplies, although most of it had expired. He added that an additional cache of usable face masks, gowns, and gloves was found in Vieques’s abandoned hospital.  It’s ironic that the mismanagement of Hurricane Maria donations turned out to be a boon for health professionals fighting Covid-19 — but it doesn’t excuse the government’s past negligence, nor does it instill any confidence in the people that similar mistakes won’t be made again. For local activists who were long aware of this negligence, the narrative of the discovered supplies being a “blessing in disguise” is frustrating, Martin said.  “It’s insulting that the health center now says we discovered this thing that we didn’t know, that these people didn’t tell us about, and we’re going to use them for good,” he said. “So I think that they played a role that is not giving us our tranquility ... what [they’re bringing] is controversy.”  The Puerto Rican government has a poor track record when it comes to supporting its people in a timely manner during a crisis. It took some families a year to get their electricity back after Hurricane Maria. People were still living in tents a month after January’s earthquakes. By now, Puerto Ricans are used to feeling abandoned, Martin said.  Puerto Ricans “waited for FEMA, they waited for the state government during Maria, and basically they never really came until people had gotten used to trauma and had figured out ways to cope or die,” he said. “There’s a lot of mistrust regarding what the government is going to do.”  The past three years have taught Puerto Ricans to be more self-sufficient so that they don’t have to rely on the government, Matos said. Although they may not have been prepared for an outbreak like the Covid-19 pandemic to hit, they already knew how to gather and distribute resources effectively, she said.  “We were ready in terms of ‘What do I need to do?’” she said. “Our survival mechanisms were up and running.”  The key lesson Martin learned after Hurricane Maria was to build a stockpile of supplies as quickly as possible. It’s why his organization has swiftly set up donations and purchased supplies for doctors and nurses in Vieques. His group bought a $26,000 ventilator, $10,000 worth of personal protective gear, a disinfecting machine, and some nontoxic disinfectant for common areas. They’ve also brought six doctors from the main island to Vieques to train local doctors, nurses, and EMTs on how to combat Covid-19.   Similar efforts to protect the community have been made by nonprofits on the main island. Accion Social de PR, a community organization that supports low-income families, is partnering with the Afya Foundation and San Juan Marriott Resort & Stellaris Casino to deliver medical supplies to the homes of sick and older people. And groups like Makers Against COVID-19, the Rogue United, and mechanical engineering students from the University of Puerto Rico have teamed up to 3D-print face shields for health care workers.  At the same time, Martin said, disaster preparation should be spearheaded by the government, not the people. Although officials have helped build a biohazard unit for potential patients and provided some protective gear, aid shouldn’t stop there if they want to rebuild trust with the people of Puerto Rico.  “We would like to see a much more direct accountability of the people who should be supplying [these necessities], because sometimes, we’re so used to not getting them that we forget that this is like a mandate that somebody should be sending the stuff,” he said. “I think in the midst of chaos, accountability gets lost.”  There are no good numbers.  Last week, US unemployment claims reached 6.6 million. The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in the United States has now exceeded 432,000, and deaths are nearing 15,000 as of April 9. Nearly 2,000 people died in the past 24 hours. Right now, the United States doesn’t seem to have a clear long-term plan for either the public health or economic catastrophes. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has issued new guidelines for essential workers so they can return to work after they’ve been exposed to the virus, as long as they’re asymptomatic. It’s a start, but officials are still urging the rest of the public to continue staying at home, and practicing social distancing measures. The economic fallout of the coronavirus, of course, is not limited to the United States. The International Monetary Fund warned Thursday that the world is likely to see the “worst economic fallout since the Great Depression.” And lower-income countries might feel the effects of the pandemic even more deeply. According to a report from Oxfam, half a billion people could be pushed into poverty worldwide because of the coronavirus. Here’s what you need to know today. The unemployment figures are staggering. This week, another 6.6 million jobless claims were filed, and the previous week’s record (of 6.6 million) was revised up to 6.9 million. Combined with the 3.3 million claims prior to that, Americans have filed a total of 16.8 million unemployment claims in just three weeks. It is another Great Recession, manifesting in a matter of weeks. Congress and the White House are negotiating another “interim” stimulus package that would include billions for small businesses and, if Democrats get their way, increased support for the food stamps program, hospitals, and state and local governments, whose budgets are about to be decimated by both the pandemic response and the economic crisis.  That would go on top of the $2 trillion stimulus package already passed by Congress. But even that might not be enough given the scale of the economic emergency the US is facing. On Thursday, Kristalina Georgieva, managing director of the IMF, said the coronavirus pandemic could create the “worst economic fallout since the Great Depression.” The IMF warned that only a “partial recovery” is likely next year, even if countries can get the pandemic under control and businesses and supply chains restart.  But that might still be an optimistic scenario. Either way, the worst economic crisis in a generation will likely not be short-lived. And as bad as this will be for major economies like the United States, lower-income countries are going to be even more vulnerable to these economic shocks. The aid organization Oxfam is estimating that about half a billion people could be pushed into poverty because of the coronavirus pandemic, somewhere between 6 and 8 percent of the world’s population.  The organization is calling on countries to come up a plan to mitigate this disaster, including forgiving developing countries’ debt and offering increased overseas aid packages — an effort that is going to be extraordinarily challenging as major donor countries focus on invest money at home to control the pandemic and provide relief for their own citizens.  The CDC has updated its guidelines for essential workers who might have been exposed to the coronavirus. The new recommendations say that health care workers, grocery store employees, food service workers, and other people on the front lines who have been within 6 feet of someone who has tested positive for Covid-19 can still return to work if they do not show symptoms of the coronavirus and are not feeling sick.  The CDC continues to recommend that those employees take their temperature before work, and asks employers to take workers’ temperature and monitor symptoms before people are allowed to return to work. The new guidelines also say employees should wear protective gear, such as masks, try to practice social distancing in the workplace as much as possible (like not gathering in large groups in break rooms and cafeterias), and avoid sharing equipment.   Previously, the CDC recommended that anyone exposed to the coronavirus should self-quarantine for 14 days, but these new guidelines are intended to ease pressure on strained workforces.  The US response to the coronavirus has at times been chaotic, with states and the federal government competing for vital supplies, from protective gear to ventilators.  But in recent days, states have been trying to better coordinate — sending supplies to where they’re most needed, or turning down support so it can be directed to the states and hospital systems that are the most strained right now.  California’s Gov. Gavin Newsom, for instance, shipped out 500 ventilators to a bunch of states, including New York, New Jersey, and Illinois. The shipments also included a nice note. CA's 500 ventilators will begin to ship out today:100->NY100->NJ100->IL50->MD50->DC50->DE50->NVCommitted to the health of every Californian. Practicing our duty as Americans to take care of one another. I know other states would do the same. pic.twitter.com/5y5hquISew Messages on a shipment of ventilators from California.Thank you to the people of California and Gov. Newsom.We are so moved by the outpouring of support & solidarity   pic.twitter.com/WZYnCUYMf6 Received this message on a shipment of ventilators from Governor @GavinNewsom and the people of California. Have faith – we will beat this if we all work together. pic.twitter.com/uagRbfrmOW In Washington, Gov. Jay Inslee basically returned a field hospital to the federal government, as he no longer predicts the state’s hospitals will be overwhelmed by coronavirus patients. The field hospital, with 250 beds, had been set up in CenturyLink Field in Seattle (where the Seahawks play), but Inslee asked that it be “deployed to another state facing a more significant need.”  States: They can be united sometimes.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The novel coronavirus pandemic is exposing major cracks in the systems that protect Americans living with disabilities, particularly intellectual and developmental disabilities. And if they do fall ill, some states’ policies could restrict their ability to get lifesaving treatment.  For those living in residential facilities and group homes, or even those able to live independently with the help of visiting nurses, the pandemic poses a significant risk. Some people living with disabilities require around-the-clock personal care, the kind of care that’s virtually impossible to give during a pandemic that necessitates social distancing. Already, positive coronavirus cases have been found at group home facilities in New Hampshire, Missouri, and Maine, among others — and several people have died.  Making matters worse, in some states, access to lifesaving treatment for Covid-19, like ventilators, could be restricted, including for people who need ventilators on a daily basis (for example, people with some neuromuscular disorders) in Kansas, or, in Alabama, those with what the state has termed “severe or profound mental retardation,” including children.  In response, many Americans with disabilities and their allies are fighting back. In Alabama, disability advocates filed a federal complaint with the US Department of Health and Human Services against ventilator and health care restrictions, with similar complaints also being lodged in Kansas, Tennessee, and Washington. They argue that restrictions on lifesaving care for coronavirus are clear violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act and treat people with disabilities as though they are their diagnosis.  Treatment restrictions on disabled people ignore scientific evidence, said Shira Wakschlag, director of legal advocacy for The Arc, an organization focused on people with intellectual and developmental disabilities. “You’re basically making an assumption about the individual’s quality of life [if] someone has an intellectual disability, regardless of the severity,” Wakschlag said. “[That] does not necessarily have any bearing on whether they can respond to medical treatment.”  But some are concerned that people with intellectual and developmental disabilities who may have just found jobs or community will lose hope because of the pandemic and its requirements. “There are many who looked forward every morning to get up and to be able to go out and to be a part of something. Working, feeling that they’re part of a community, there’s something there,” Ricardo Thornton, a former resident of the since-shuttered Forest Haven Asylum in Washington, DC, told me. “And with what we have going on right now, we’re more isolated.”  Roughly 61 million Americans are living with a disability of some kind, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) — about 26 percent of the population. And in 2016, 7.37 million of those Americans were living with an intellectual or developmental disability. While about 70 percent of those with an intellectual or developmental disability were able to live at home with the help of family and caregivers, about 681,000 are living in nonresidential settings, from supported-living apartments to group homes and, in 37 states, state institutions that can house dozens to hundreds of residents. In Texas, for example, roughly 3,500 people lived in state institutions as of fiscal year 2015.  But most people with intellectual or developmental disabilities who don’t live at home reside in smaller settings, commonly in group homes that may offer space for three to five people with full-time support from staff. Many of these group homes have contracts with state governments, which determine who gets placed where and what services they receive. (It’s worth noting that there is a great deal of debate among people with disabilities and their advocates about the types of residential facilities encouraged by state and federal government.) Those facilities are incredibly vulnerable to Covid-19, a disease that spreads easily and can be particularly dangerous for people with preexisting conditions — including those with intellectual and developmental disabilities who might also have specific health problems. (For example, research indicates people with Down syndrome are more likely to have heart defects and digestive problems.) But the crisis facing group homes and residential facilities goes far deeper. People living in group homes and residential facilities need full-time support, staff available 24 hours a day to help clients with basic everyday activities, from cooking and getting ready for the day to personal care. Hiring the right staff was hard enough before Covid-19, but maintaining staff-to-resident ratios at a safe level — typically determined by the state — is becoming a major problem nationwide.  “In order for a resident of a group home or other residential service to have that full life, they need dedicated, compassionate staff who can support them, guide and mentor them, and help them to achieve the personal goals that each has for their own lives,” said Jean Phelps, CEO of LifeLinks CLASS, an organization that provides support to people living with intellectual and developmental disabilities in Chelmsford, Massachusetts.  Before Covid-19, Phillips told me, it was hard enough to recruit staff to help residents, given the low wages and that many people don’t appropriately value the work. With day programs and work opportunities for people with intellectual and developmental disabilities shut down during the pandemic, some agencies were having issues maintaining safe staffing levels with residents being at home more often.  That experience mirrors those of group homes and residential facilities across the country. In Arizona, for example, Aires LLC, one of the state’s largest group home providers, has struggled with maintaining both staff and supplies. As the Arizona Republic reported: Instead, gloves are so scarce that Aires might run out of large and extra-large gloves in two weeks. That means some employees might have to change adult diapers without protection.  Staff at group homes earn minimum wage. Cleaning supplies are so hard to find that when Shaw was able to purchase floral-scented bleach from Amazon, she drove from Phoenix to Tucson to meet a group home staffer from Benson who needed it. Aires’ pandemic plan also didn’t account for personal protective equipment. Each group home has one kit with a disposable mask with a face shield, gloves, a paper gown and shoe covers. No more. She expects hospitals not to have capacity to accept the number of group home residents who could get sick. So that means employees will have to take care of people at home.  “The shortage of personal protective equipment is becoming a critical problem for group homes and facilities since it is much more difficult for persons with certain intellectual disabilities to keep physical separation,” said David Hutt, deputy executive director of legal services for the National Disability Rights Network, an advocacy group originally established by Congress. He added that as hospitals will take priority for personal protective equipment in the case of a shortage, “there is an even greater chance Covid-19 will spread within [residential facilities].” But concerns exist outside the residential setting. Some people living with intellectual and developmental disabilities have live-in aides or staff who visit several times a week to help with daily needs.  Thornton met his wife, Donna, at the infamous Forest Haven institution; they’ve been married for 35 years and were even the subjects of a 2003 CBS television movie. Thornton, who has an intellectual disability, told me that he and Donna have their own home in the Petworth neighborhood of Washington, DC, and they receive check-ins once or twice a week to make sure they have what they need.  But he hasn’t gotten to speak about the coronavirus with the staff who support him and his wife. “Everyone is scattered and staff are with people who need more support,” he said.  And he’s worried about making sure he and his wife could get help if they needed it. “My wife has allergies and she coughs a lot because of that and I worry that I won’t know if she is sick with more than just allergies,” he said. “I would want to make sure someone could assist her. I worry that we wouldn’t be able to get help because other people would not want to catch the virus.”   Those concerns ring true for disability advocates like Wakschlag, who told me her work was currently focused on reminding states that federal disability rights laws still apply “even in the event of [a] ventilator shortage.”  Federal law prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability in federally funded health programs or activities. Still, in several states, guidance on ventilator usage during a public health emergency clearly states that some people with certain medical conditions, including intellectual and developmental disabilities, may not receive ventilator support.  The Alabama Department of Public Health’s Emergency Operations Plan notes that “persons with significant neurological impairments can enjoy productive happy lives,” but also says “persons with severe or profound mental retardation, moderate to severe dementia, or catastrophic neurological complications such as persistent vegetative state are unlikely candidates for ventilator support.” (The state has since said that its regulations were being “misunderstood.”) Other states’ Covid-19 policies would remove ventilators from those who use them on a daily basis, like some people with neuromuscular disorders, and who “fail to meet” the criteria needed to keep them — generally signs of “estimated survivability.” That means that in some states, like New York, doctors could remove ventilators people are using for non-coronavirus reasons and give them to Covid-19 patients.  To disability advocates like Wakschlag, these policies seem to conflate needing support in the “activities of daily living” with the ability to respond to Covid-19 treatment.  “That’s basically saying anyone who has a relatively significant disability, whether cognitive or physical or otherwise, who requires a direct support professional or someone to assist them in taking a shower or getting to work or something like that, that because of those things that they require in their daily life — which have nothing to do with their ability to respond to Covid-19 treatments — they would not be considered as good candidates for treatment.”   For ventilator users, Wakschlag said, states are “essentially telling them you can’t come to the hospital without risking your life.” In response to concerns from people with disabilities and their allies, the federal Department of Health and Human Services issued a bulletin on March 28 confirming that existing disability rights laws are still in effect, even during the coronavirus pandemic.  The Office for Civil Rights enforces Section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act which prohibit discrimination on the basis of disability in HHS funded health programs or activities. These laws, like other civil rights statutes OCR enforces, remain in effect. As such, persons with disabilities should not be denied medical care on the basis of stereotypes, assessments of quality of life, or judgments about a person’s relative “worth” based on the presence or absence of disabilities. Decisions by covered entities concerning whether an individual is a candidate for treatment should be based on an individualized assessment of the patient based on the best available objective medical evidence. But for people living with intellectual disabilities, even the everyday requirements of the coronavirus pandemic — self-isolation and avoiding close contact with others, for example — are extremely challenging. “For some [in group home settings], the change in the routine of life has been a struggle, finding it hard to understand why they can’t go to a day program or work, or out in the community, understanding what social distancing means and learning that a visit with family members is not possible now,” Jean told me. Even just getting through self-isolation is difficult, reminding some of time spent in institutions where leaving was never an option. “When I look back over that path [of being institutionalized] and look where we’re at now with the quarantine, I’m thinking that we’re being punished again,” Thornton told me. “For what reason? We don’t have no clue.” Moving to a virtual workspace is also challenging for many people with intellectual disabilities, said Alison Whyte, who serves as executive director of the DC Developmental Disabilities Council (Thornton serves as vice chair). “A lot of people with intellectual disabilities have never been adequately supported to use technology and to access it,” Whyte said. “So moving everything to a virtual space like we’ve been doing leaves a lot of people out and that’s been a big problem.” There are even more basic issues, like what people living with disabilities are being told about the pandemic in the first place. Of people he’s spoken to, Thornton said, “Some people know about the virus, some have no clue what the virus is.” He added that when it came to information about the pandemic, the disabled community is “probably going to be the last to receive it.”  Carol Grigsby, chair of the DC Council on Developmental Disabilities, agreed. “It was very hard for anybody to get the officials to listen or take questions about people with disabilities,” she said. “That is starting to get a little bit better. But at the broader level of the city, you still don’t hear very much about the disabled population.”  I contacted the DC Office of Disability Rights; in response, DC Government Office of Disability Rights director Mathew McCollough said, “Protecting the health, safety, and well-being of all District residents is Mayor Muriel Bowser’s top priority. In order to support our disability community, we’ve put forward a number of resources to flatten the curve and ensure residents with disabilities have what they need to adhere to the District’s stay-at-home order during the COVID-19 public health emergency.” But while the pandemic has made stark the cracks in the systems that are intended to support all people living with disabilities, Thornton wanted to make it clear to me that he and others living with intellectual and developmental disabilities can take part in the response to the pandemic as well.  “We would love to be more included in some of the discussion. We have a disability, we are competent, and we can accomplish a lot of things,” he said. “We want to be a part of making a difference in this problem. I think everyone has made a difference and I think we are still sitting on the back burner waiting to make a difference. So we want to be included.”  Correction, April 9: An earlier version of this piece incorrectly attributed a quote from Carol Grigbsy to Alison Whyte. It has been updated with the correct attribution. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. What Silicon Valley billionaires decide to do with their money and power from now on in the Covid-19 crisis matters. It could affect the amount of suffering the US experiences in a recession and the amount of time before things return to normal. It might even have an impact on the number of people who will die from the coronavirus. So this moment is a test for the nation’s billionaires, who tend to point to their philanthropy as a riposte against calls for higher taxes. If ever there were a moment for the nation’s wealthiest to part with considerable amounts of their net worth to solve a social problem, it is now. But despite the frequency of the word “million” in press releases, observers say some of the public commitments to charity so far have been relatively small. For instance, two heavily tech-backed philanthropies, the Silicon Valley Community Foundation and Tipping Point, have both unveiled $30 million fundraising goals for Covid-19-related giving, amounts that have struck outsiders as surprisingly modest. David Callahan, a prominent journalist on the subject, deemed the billionaire class’s total giving to be “lackluster.” “If anyone can afford to give more in response to the pandemic, it’s the richest of the rich, with far greater assets than private foundations,” Callahan wrote in his newsletter Inside Philanthropy over the weekend. “In recent years, though, giving by billionaire donors has amounted to only a tiny sliver of their wealth and many billionaires barely give at all. There are no signs yet that this crisis will change that.” Though billionaires’ foundations and donor-advised funds face calls to drastically increase or accelerate giving at this moment, philanthropy veterans say it can take time — sometimes too much time — for lumbering foundations to come up with a coherent strategy in a crisis. There is a lot still to be desired, but these 11 Silicon Valley billionaires — mostly men, and all white, as billionaires often are — are among the people who could make the biggest financial impact if they choose to do so. They have the money, the corporate power, the political relationships, and the celebrity to shape the country’s response to the pandemic. Watch these folks closely. Jack Dorsey came out of nowhere on Tuesday when he said he’d move $1 billion of his equity in Square to a limited liability corporation (LLC) set up to fund Covid-19 relief, among other things. This instantly established Dorsey as one the most important philanthropists in the country right now. The Twitter founder stopped short of offering an exact figure for how much he plans to give for fighting coronavirus and its consequences, but he said he will detail each of his grants in this spreadsheet. Even if he gives just 10 percent of the $1 billion pledged for the Covid-19 response, Dorsey would become the world’s biggest individual donor on this matter. It will be especially revealing to watch Dorsey, given his meager public charitable record to date. A proponent of universal basic income, Dorsey might center his money on efforts to give Americans cash directly, or maybe he’ll back food insecurity, as his first grant went to a new food fund. The founder of Microsoft has emerged as, by far, the most visible tech leader during the coronavirus crisis after committing $100 million. More important than that sum has been Gates’s willingness to use his voice and celebrity to offer an alternative to the White House. “In a vacuum, then, people like Bill [resonate more] if we don’t have that clarity of voice from our political leaders,” said Jeff Raikes, who ran the Gates Foundation for a decade and remains a close collaborator of the Microsoft co-founder. Offering sober, apolitical analysis, Gates has been on a ceaseless media tour, preaching a stay-the-course message when it comes to social distancing and full steam ahead when it comes to coronavirus treatment and vaccine development. Though after he suggested last week that he was spending “billions” on the construction of multiple factories for the production of potential coronavirus vaccines, the Gates Foundation seemed to backtrack, telling Recode on Tuesday that it was merely “exploring” this idea. “The foundation is exploring using its catalytic funding to get the process moving, recognizing that any large-scale projects will require multilateral and/or government funding,” the foundation said in a statement. While Gates has been burnishing his legacy as the country’s leading philanthropist for a while now, the coronavirus crisis has served as a reminder of just how revered Gates has become — which is a far cry from the Gates of the 1990s. By the end of all of this, it’s possible no tech billionaire will have had a bigger impact on the world’s response to coronavirus than Ellison, Gates’s longtime rival. Ellison’s political influence could have altered the course of history. The founder of Oracle has fostered an unusually close relationship with the Trump administration, including hosting a fundraiser for the president this February that raised $7 million for his campaign. A month later, Ellison was pitching Trump on an unproven drug to treat the coronavirus — hydroxychloroquine — and then Trump began pitching that to the nation before television cameras in the White House briefing room. Putting this bug in Trump’s ear is a textbook example of how a billionaire’s political influence can far outstrip the influence of any charitable work. (Nevertheless, an official at Ellison’s charitable foundation declined to comment on any work on coronavirus.) Benioff has been among the most visible Silicon Valley leaders in trying to solve the crisis — if not with his wallet then with his platform at Salesforce. Not all of the people on this list currently run companies, which removes a lever from how they can help. The Salesforce founder has helped organize deliveries of personal protective equipment for the Bay Area, New York, India, and France. Benioff and Salesforce have sourced about 50 million pieces of equipment — such as face masks, gowns, face shields — so far.  Landed NYC! Congrats to the salesforce PPE team for landing in NYC tonight this National Cargo 747 FULL of PPE incl goggles, face shields, & protective suits donated to New York State & @NYgovcuomo. Special thank you to partners @AlibabaGroup @alibaba_cloud & CEO Daniel Zhang. pic.twitter.com/h63r1qkLwJ And Benioff has also been among the most visible tech leaders when it comes to using his megaphone. He has called on other CEOs to sign a commitment to not do major layoffs for the next 90 days. And he has encouraged officials in other cities to institute lockdowns. Powell Jobs, whose Emerson Collective LLC does not typically disclose details of its grants, is giving a few million dollars to America’s Food Fund, a group focused on hunger that Dorsey has backed. She teamed up with Leonardo DiCaprio for the donation, which amounted to $5 million in total — Powell Jobs didn’t specifically share how much she committed herself. She has been tweeting supportive things about the need for “a collective sense of humanity to spread faster than the virus” but has been very light on details. A spokesperson didn’t return a request for comment on any other Covid-related donations. Given that she has pledged to spend almost all of her money at some point, now would seem like a prime opportunity for Powell Jobs to make a dent in that fortune. Google’s two founders, who oversee $100 billion between them, have long been criticized for being basically AWOL in the world of serious philanthropy. Page’s charitable foundation is among the country’s most prolific users of donor-advised funds, vehicles that allow a donor to avoid disclosing information about their giving. So it should be no surprise that representatives of Page’s and Brin’s charitable foundations didn’t return repeated requests for comment. Neither foundation even has a website. The pair represents Silicon Valley’s untapped potential — or what billionaires could do if they changed their posture. Bezos had until recently avoided making major charitable gifts, but over the last two years, as he became the richest person in the world and a tabloid star to boot, Bezos has pledged his three largest commitments to date. That included one of the single-largest charitable gifts of the entire Covid-19 response: Bezos last week said he was donating $100 million of his money to Feeding America, one of the country’s largest charities that operates 200 food banks around the country. But for all his generosity, Bezos’s legacy during the Covid-19 crisis may be defined primarily by how he handles his day job. The Amazon founder and CEO has found himself under fire for how his company is treating its lowest-level workers, criticism that has come from some of the people who matter most: his employees. The net worth of Ballmer has quietly skyrocketed over the last two years, making him now the sixth-richest person in the world. Ballmer has put $25 million into Covid-19 efforts, much of which is focused on areas where he and his family have personal connections: Seattle, Los Angeles, and Detroit. The Ballmers have tried to be realistic about the limited role that they feel the nonprofit sector can play. “Philanthropic dollars can never take the place of government funding, but during this crisis grantmakers can fund emergency needs and provide potential bridge funding before the public dollars flow,” Connie Ballmer told Recode. Ballmer said that she and her husband would be considering possible advocacy efforts to “shore up funding for children and families which may be trimmed during the recovery.” That could mean some political fights ahead. Computer mogul Michael Dell has put $100 million toward coronavirus philanthropy, he announced last week. Of that sum, $20 million is going to the Gates Foundation for its treatment discovery work, and the other $80 million is still to be handed out but will go toward increasing medical capacity, among other things. The country’s 18th-richest person, Dell’s commitment is among the philanthropy world’s largest pools of cash earmarked for the response. Dell, who lives in Texas, has receded from the public limelight, but he serves as a reminder that there are many billionaires who aren’t top of mind but who still control enormous amounts of money and influence. Some billionaires have been playing a behind-the-scenes role in organizing other tech funders to try and finance new scientific research. Schmidt’s aides last month organized a call with about 150 other philanthropists, venture capitalists, and tech figures to explore possible research projects, Recode previously reported. Schmidt is among the country’s most politically connected billionaires, so it makes sense that one Schmidt Futures official has said his team is focusing on public-private partnerships, too. An aide to Schmidt to declined to share what else he is working on. One of Silicon Valley’s most thoughtful philanthropists, Moskovitz is a leader in a movement called effective altruism, which seeks to donate money to causes that are proven to make the greatest statistical impact. One of the Democratic Party’s biggest donors, there has yet to be a significant million-dollar donation to Covid-19 work from him, although he has long been among the few billionaires focused on preparing for a global pandemic. In just the last few weeks, Moskovitz gave another $300,000 for pandemic preparedness work. But more symbolically, Moskovitz is a good person to follow if you’re curious about the thinking of the youngest generation and the newest tech wealth. “Philanthropy is taking on a greater portion of the responsibility for response than anyone expected,” Moskovitz told Recode, “And unfortunately I think it’s clear to anyone closely following the situation today that philanthropy simply can’t solve this crisis on its own.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  We know the US economy is bad right now. Millions of people have lost their jobs, and millions more will. Estimates for how much unemployment is expected to spike and GDP will fall are staggering. Production and spending across much of the country have been brought to an abrupt halt. It’s natural to want to see a light at the end of the tunnel, obviously in terms of the health crisis caused by coronavirus but also for the economy. And there will be one — eventually.  “The very best-case scenario is we rapidly bounce back and we get close to something where we were before. Personally, I think that’s highly unlikely. The shock from the virus is going to trigger a broader economy-wide recession,” said Jesse Edgerton, an economist at JPMorgan. “That’s a really harsh reality.”  
    Related
   The question of when and how the economy gets better largely hinges on our ability to get the virus itself under control. Despite calls from some Republican lawmakers to get back to business before that happens and even some speculation about reopening the economy early from the president, it’s not a realistic scenario — people likely aren’t going to be falling over themselves to go out to restaurants and pack into movie theaters as a deadly virus spreads, or as they or their loved ones get sick. At some point — and we don’t know exactly when — the economy will bounce back, at least partially. When it does, that new normal will be different. Many Americans may be worse off than they were before, some people may still be afraid to resume their lives as they once lived them, and many businesses may have permanently closed. “There will likely be some permanent damage inflicted on the economy,” says Greg Daco, chief US economist at Oxford Economics. “What this shock is doing is exacerbating preexisting inequality issues across the country. The individuals who have been hit the hardest are the individuals who were in the most precarious position to start with.” Economists say it could be anywhere from 2021 to 2031 before the economy returns to something like the pre-coronavirus “normal.” But it may never be entirely the same. “We’ve never seen anything like this before, so we’re speculating along with everyone else,” Edgerton said.  The first prerequisite for economic recovery will be a public health solution: widespread testing, tracing of possible infections, antibody testing for immunity, adequate supplies for the health care system, and so on. The coronavirus outbreak will need to be firmly under control before the economy can resume anything approaching normalcy, and we just don’t know yet when the public health breakthrough will happen. Consumers need confidence that participating in the economy won’t get them or their loved ones sick before they will revert to their typical economic activity. 
    Related
   “The longer these issues linger in the form of people not having confidence in returning to their daily activities,” Daco said, “the more severe these dislocations will be.” But once that has been achieved, the problems and solutions we are dealing with will become more recognizably economic. Jason Furman, a former top economist for President Barack Obama who is now at Harvard, told Vox the economic fallout and recovery will likely have three stages: The timeline for the second and third steps is difficult to know. The recovery is likely to look robust at first; Furman suggested we could see some of the most impressive job gains (a million or more in a month) and GDP growth numbers ever. Parts of the economy should be able to snap back to something approximating their pre-crisis state. And such a quick recovery could be self-reinforcing, at least up to a point. “If the economy starts surging back, then some businesses will suddenly face insufficient capacity. Those businesses will have to double down on hiring, ordering supplies and investment in new equipment, capital, etc.,” Karl Smith, vice president of federal tax and economic policy at the Tax Foundation, says. “That then provides an extra boost of demand for the rest of the economy that produces a secondary wave of investment.” While it’s not possible to rule out a rapid and complete return to normalcy — a V-shaped recovery, in the economists’ lingo — most experts we spoke to consider it unlikely. Too much structural damage has been done, jobs and businesses lost that will never come back. Supply chains have been broken and need to be rebuilt. Americans are more likely to find themselves in something like the 2011 or 2012 environment after the Great Recession: The economy is no longer the biggest story in the world, but the unemployment rate will be high and wages will still be depressed. It’s helpful to remember how the economic recovery began last time around in June 2009, when the national unemployment rate was at 9.5 percent. A year later in 2010, it was stuck at 9.4 percent. In 2011, it was 8.2 percent. Unemployment didn’t fall below 5 percent until early 2016. And in this crisis, the unemployment rate is expected to have an even higher peak. “The shock from the virus ... is going to be enough to tip off at least a normal recession in the rest of the economy beyond these direct effects of the sectors that we have had to shut down. ... We should expect the next nine months or a year to look like a recession, to continue to see high levels of unemployment and depressed levels of output,” Edgerton said. He predicted that “it will be at least a few years before we feel as good as we did in January.” How long this lasts, and what the recovery looks like, depends on actions while the health crisis is still underway. The government has passed a $2.2 trillion stimulus package to try to prop up the economy in the meantime, and more federal spending will be needed. But transitioning from stimulus provisions to a normal economy can be tricky.  Smith pointed out the enhanced unemployment aid will be a boon to consumer demand in the short term while depressing labor supply, but as soon as it’s cut off, demand could drop because people have less money to spend and not everyone will get a new job immediately. (One way to avoid that: a phase-out of some kind.) “It really depends, to my mind, on just how much damage is done during the time that the economy is shut down in the way it is now,” said former Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen in a recent interview with CNBC.  The more workers are laid off, the more households that run down their savings, the more people who fall behind on their bills, the longer the slog of recovery.  The recovery can take many shapes if you think of it as a line graph: a V, a U or, worst of all, an L (sharp sudden drop and long gradual climb). Yellen said, “The more damage of that sort is done, the more likely we are to see a U, and there are worse letters, too, like L, and I hope we don’t see something like that.” Just as we saw after prior economic crises, not everybody will experience the same recovery. For the wealthy and higher-income people, those who didn’t lose their jobs and whose financial well-being was more marginally affected, they may bounce back to normal quickly once they go back to work full time and the stock market starts to improve. “There will be some individuals who have V-shaped recovery,” Claudia Sahm, who worked a the Federal Reserve through the 2008 recession and is now director of macroeconomic policy at the Washington Center for Equitable Growth, says. “The people who came into this with a good financial position … they’re gonna be fine.” But the job market for low-wage workers is probably going to look a lot worse, even as the broader economy starts to pull out of the coronavirus recession. At the beginning of this year, the unemployment rate was down around 3 percent and wages were ticking up. That’s basic supply and demand: There weren’t a lot of workers out there looking for a job, so firms had to raise wages to be competitive. But that new reality, which took years to reach after the Great Recession, has been dismantled. We already know that low-wage service sector jobs were the most vulnerable to being cut because of the Covid-19 pandemic. And when the public health crisis is over and life starts to return to normal, unemployment could be 15 or even 20 percent. There are going to be a lot of workers looking to fill those open slots, especially as the emergency unemployment benefits in the stimulus bill start to expire. “Wages are going to come out of the recovery worse than they were,” Sahm says. “Everything is going to be worse for workers who went into the recession in the most fragile position, and there are a lot of them.” The horizon for workers may shake out differently depending on geography. University of California Berkeley economist Danny Yagan found that after the Great Recession, workers who lived in places that were hard hit by the recession were less likely to be employed at all in 2015, even if the local unemployment rate had recovered. It appears that years later, some people in the most affected areas had just given up looking for work altogether. The economic crisis may exacerbate racial income inequality as well. In 2015, a report from the ACLU estimated that by 2031, wealth for white households would be 31 percent less than it would have been had the Great Recession never happened. For black households, it would be down nearly 40 percent. And the coronavirus crisis is already hitting black communities especially hard. Early numbers suggest black people are at higher risk for contracting and dying of coronavirus, and a smaller proportion of black and Hispanic workers are able to work from home compared to Asian Americans and whites.  “We know that blacks, Latinx, and native people, in terms of race and ethnicity, they have lower levels of reserves, and we also know that their employment is more precarious than that of white people,” Darrick Hamilton, the executive director of the Kirwan Institute for the Study of Race and Ethnicity at Ohio State University, recently told Vox. Maybe the hardest truth to accept, however, is that some things may never go back to the way they were. The travel and hospitality industries could be in for a long depression of their own, depending on how quick people are to trust the safety of international travel or venturing far from their homes. This is where the public health response comes back into play: The sooner people feel confident about testing and infection tracing, confident enough to book a flight and a hotel room in some far-flung destination, the sooner those industries will be back to normal.  “Where I do see the potential for change, and I don’t know if it’s permanent or long-lasting, is travel,” Daco says. “There may be an environment of caution going forward in terms of travel. You’ll likely see a normalization in local services first, before you see a normalization in travel-related activity. People are still going to be cautious when it comes to boarding a plane and going on a vacation. The same may be true for business travel.” The same goes for bars and restaurants, at least in the short term — it might be some time before people are comfortable crowding into such establishments, and many places may not survive the crisis. As much as you may be trying to order delivery to keep your local favorites afloat, you cannot order enough pad Thai to pay their rent. But, presumably, at some point, people will start going out to eat again like they once did. It may take some time for live events to enjoy the audiences they once did, too, though Furman said he expects that at some point, the live entertainment industry will look pretty much the same as it did before the crisis. And broadly speaking, we may see greater market concentration in sectors where many small businesses were lost. Congress has tried to prop up small businesses through loans approved in the stimulus package, but there are already reports of problems with the actual administration of those benefits. The more small businesses that close because of the initial economic shock or a problem accessing federal benefits, or both, the more the markets they leave behind will be concentrated among a handful of dominant players.  It’s certainly worth asking if Americans want the economy to go back to exactly the same way it was. The coronavirus crisis has exposed and exacerbated deep flaws in the US system, including the economy. Corporations that just got a massive tax cut may now not have many resources to weather the downturn. Why were large businesses able to spend much of that tax windfall on stock buybacks and executive compensation? Why haven’t workers been paid enough to build up savings to get by when they lose their jobs through no fault of their own? Where is the social safety net? “In the United States, economic inequality has been on the steep incline for a long time, and there were many people already on the verge before this happened, systems already failing,” said Jamila Michener, an assistant professor of government at Cornell University. “It just highlights all the cracks and the flaws and faults that already existed.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  According to a new analysis by the consulting firm Health Management Associates (HMA), the Covid-19 crisis could lead to between 12 million and 35 million people losing employer-sponsored health coverage due to job losses.  Not all of them will tumble into the ranks of the uninsured. Some will be caught by Medicaid, by Obamacare, or by other safety net programs. Some will find new jobs, with new insurance. But millions will fall through the cracks, particularly in states that have refused to expand Medicaid. In a scenario where unemployment hits 25 percent — calamitous, but plausible — HMA forecasts that as many as 11 million people could find themselves uninsured. That wipes out about half of Obamacare’s coverage gains, practically overnight. Here, as elsewhere, Covid-19 is worsening a policy problem that long predates the virus. Tying health insurance to employment is now, and always has been, a disaster. It gives bosses too much power over workers, reduces entrepreneurship, saddles businesses with health costs they can’t control and insurance problems they don’t understand, makes the tax structure more regressive, reduces wages, bloats administrative spending, and drives up costs throughout the system.  It has also, as Paul Starr writes in Remedy and Reaction: The Peculiar American Struggle Over Health Care Reform, created a “policy trap” that has stymied health reformers over and over again: About 160 million Americans get insurance through their employers, and for all the system’s flaws, they are mostly pretty happy with that insurance, which makes them resistant to disruptive change.  But disruptive change is here, whether anyone wants it or not. It won’t just be felt in the rising ranks of the uninsured, in the millions of people who lose the insurance provided by their workplace and have to scramble, desperately, for an alternative. It will also be felt by those who keep their job-based insurance, only to see it degrade as their employer rushes to cut costs.  According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, average premiums for employer-based insurance have risen 54 percent over the past decade — far outpacing wages or inflation. Cost-sharing has increased, too: Average annual deductibles have doubled in the past decade. Employers have been shunting health costs onto employees in both good times and bad, and these are the worst times. Many of those who keep their employer-based insurance will see their premiums and deductibles rise, their networks narrow. This is a crisis. But it is also, perhaps, an opportunity to solve the policy trap and finally move beyond employer-based insurance.  The Democratic primary was defined by the debate over Bernie Sanders’s Medicare-for-all plan, which, in its expansive and uncompromising ambition, rolled a number of health reform debates into one. But one of its best features, substantively, was that it ended employer-based insurance forever.  The problem is that canceling 160 million insurance plans is likely to be a political catastrophe. When polled, it routinely turned people against Medicare-for-all. Most members of Congress — including some co-sponsors of Sanders’s bill — blanched at that level of disruption. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi dismissed it, as did the Senate Democrats who will lead the next health care push. The logic was straightforward: If the problem you’re trying to solve is that people hate losing the insurance their employer gives them, forcibly taking it away from them isn’t likely to go over well.  Moreover, the tax increases necessary to move the entirety of the employer-based system onto the federal budget would be eye-popping. That’s what killed the statewide single-payer push in Sanders’s home state of Vermont, and Sanders never said how he’d solve it nationally.  But if the political weakness of Sanders’s plan is that it upends too much of the current system, the substantive weakness of Biden’s plan is that it does too little to transform the current system.  Biden’s plan leaves the current system more or less intact, but adds a subsidized, Medicare-based public option available to individuals and small businesses. Under the Biden proposal, the employer-based system remains, but if you lose your job, or simply don’t like or can’t afford the insurance offered by your employer, you have another option. The plan would also serve low-income Americans in states that refused to expand Medicaid, giving them an option they desperately need.  But the Biden team made a series of policy choices to limit the impact their public plan would have on employer-based health insurance. Large employers are not allowed to buy into the new public option. Individuals can’t use the money their employer is spending on private health insurance to buy into the public option. What they’ve built isn’t a glide path to Medicare-for-all, or even to a new hybrid system. Instead, they’ve created a backstop to reinforce the current system, with all its flaws. And over the next year, the coronavirus is going to make those flaws gruesomely apparent.  The Biden team’s fear is that opening the public option to all employers would destabilize the employer-based system — companies with sicker, older workforces would rush into the public system, driving up its costs, or perhaps they would nudge their older, sicker employees to enter into it so they could offload their spending onto taxpayers. These concerns are reasonable, but they’re also manageable. Whether you choose to solve them reflects whether you think the American health care system is fundamentally broken or just needs to be patched up.  Biden’s plan would require far less in new taxes than Sanders’s plan — the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget estimated the 10-year cost of Biden’s proposal at $2.25 trillion while Sanders’s bill clocked in at $30.6 trillion — but even pre-coronavirus, CRFB estimated that it would still leave 10 million to 15 million people uninsured. Post-coronavirus, it will leave millions more uninsured, and it will have little to offer those who keep their employer-based plan but find themselves paying more and more for less and less.  With Sanders’s exit from the race, Biden is a lock to win the Democratic nomination. But his win will leave many progressives disappointed. Biden needs a way to reach out to them. A good place to start would be a better health care plan — one that’s truly universal and that ends employer control over health insurance.  I think the disunity might be driven by real cleavages such as the fact that millions of people are currently getting kicked off their private health insurance in the middle of a public health crisis and Joe Biden stubbornly opposes a policy to untether insurance from employment Biden isn’t going to embrace Sanders’s Medicare-for-all plan. But he can do better than his current health care proposal, and he should. I can even suggest a place for him to start. Back in July, the Center for American Progress released its “Medicare Extra” proposal. As I wrote at the time, the plan was, and is, an intriguing synthesis of left and moderate ideas on health reform. It’s universal, it uses Medicare’s pricing power to hold down costs, it rebuilds the health system around public insurance — and it gives everyone, everywhere, a true choice between public and private options, no matter what their employer is offering. In all those ways, it goes much further than Bidencare. At the same time, Medicare Extra retains private insurance options, allows employers to continue offering insurance to employees if they think they can provide something better than the public option, and it holds the total price tag to somewhere in the $2.8 trillion to $4.5 trillion range. Which is to say, it’s not nearly as disruptive as Sanders’s Medicare-for-all bill, and it only requires about a tenth of the tax increases.  Here’s how it works: There are plenty of details and decisions in this plan worth debating. But something like Medicare Extra offers a middle ground that this moment demands. It eases the disruption of reform without reinforcing the dysfunctions of the status quo; it makes employer-provided health insurance one option people can freely choose, if they prefer it, rather than making it the only option most people have; and it creates a system that, while not single-payer, is far more integrated than anything we have now: a public system with private options, rather than a private system with fractured public options.  So far, Biden has done a good job releasing plans and making statements about how he would manage the coronavirus crisis. What he hasn’t done is reveal a vision for rebuilding in its aftermath. He’s offering a candidacy to feel relieved about, rather than inspired by. But coronavirus, and the damage it will unleash on an already broken health care system, demands more than that.  Finding a synthesis in the health reform debate, one that respects the moderate’s fear of disruption, the leftist critique of the status quo, and the post-coronavirus reality that now surrounds us, would be a good place to start.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. As most of the country remains in lockdown to curb the spread of coronavirus, nearly 150 immigrants are fearing for their safety as they fight for their release from a North Dartmouth, Massachusetts, detention facility. From the few hours of television news they can watch each day, the detainees have learned that social distancing, along with proper sanitation, is the only way that they can protect themselves from infection. But that’s all but impossible at the Bristol County Correctional Center, where the detainees are held together in tight quarters without the protective equipment or sanitation resources necessary to protect themselves, they argue in a class action lawsuit. They are among the 38,000 immigrants in detention across more than 130 private and state-run detention facilities nationwide. As of April 7, 19 detainees across 11 different facilities had tested positive for the virus — none of them in Bristol, though advocates say it’s only a matter of time before it hits or testing rates improve.  Only after outcry from immigrant advocates did US Immigration and Customs Enforcement recently institute national policies encouraging social distancing in its facilities and provide soap, hand sanitizer, cleaning supplies, and personal protective equipment. The agency also announced Tuesday that it would start releasing detainees who are medically vulnerable to Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus; it has released 60 so far and has identified another 600 who would qualify.  But that’s only a fraction of the detainees nationwide. Unless the agency starts releasing detainees by the thousands, that means most will remain in confinement, despite the fact that they largely have no criminal history. There is, therefore, a national advocacy push for the administration to alter its enforcement priorities to release all detainees, or at least those who haven’t committed serious crimes; while immigrant advocates campaign for their release even in the best of times, their message has become even more urgent amid the outbreak.  In the meantime, those at Bristol remain in conditions that they fear could facilitate the spread of the virus, which can be carried by those who don’t exhibit symptoms. For the more than 30 detainees with underlying medical conditions that make them vulnerable to complications from Covid-19, it’s an especially scary situation. So far, only 18 detainees have been ordered released as part of the lawsuit, and not all of them qualify as high-risk.  “We suffer from being separated from our families and loved ones,” 47 detainees wrote in a March 20 declaration. “To add on top of this, we are now living in fear.” As of April 9, there are over 16,700 coronavirus cases throughout Massachusetts, including in the Bristol facility: A health care provider in the facility has tested positive, according to county officials, and the detainees claim that two correctional officers showed up for work with symptoms of the virus, including high fever. Nevertheless, Bristol County Sheriff Thomas Hodgson has argued that freeing the detainees would only put them and the public at greater risk. He claims there isn’t an adequate social safety net right now to facilitate detainees’ return to society and they would receive better health care in custody than they would in the outside world.  “I’m deeply troubled by elected officials suggesting that we release inmates because of Coronavirus,” he tweeted. “This would present a huge public safety and public health risk to the community and the inmates themselves.” The detainees maintain that they can’t protect themselves from the virus inside Bristol. While the facility is operating at just below its normal capacity, Bristol is housing far too many detainees to be able to enforce social distancing. ICE has nevertheless continued to place new detainees at Bristol — and at least on one occasion, without even administering an initial medical checkup, potentially exposing the rest of the detainees to the virus. The detainees’ living quarters are largely an open plan with no real privacy: Their bunk beds are spaced just three feet apart and the dining tables just inches, far from the minimum six feet of distance recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. They share a small, poorly ventilated room where they watch movies, access the computer, and hold religious services. Correctional officers have started telling detainees to take their food trays back to their beds to eat, but even then, they’re still in close proximity.   Detainees who exhibit symptoms of the virus have been put into solitary confinement without adequate medical care, Vanesa Suarez, a deportation defense organizer at the Connecticut Bail Fund, said. While corrections officers and health professionals wear face masks and gloves in the solitary confinement area, where they might come into contact with people who could be infected, they don’t wear the same protective equipment in other areas of the building and could potentially expose other detainees.  The detainees also have little resources to practice good hygiene. At the outset of the lawsuit, which was filed in mid-March, multiple showers and urinals were out of order. Detainees tasked with cleaning their quarters don’t have access to bleach or other disinfectants — just diluted soap. The facility has started wiping down hard surfaces where the virus can survive for days and providing hand sanitizer, but that’s little comfort when the disease can so easily spread through respiratory droplets, which are expelled through coughing, sneezing, and even breathing.  What’s more, correctional officers haven’t seemed to appreciate the severity of the threat of the virus, telling detainees that it is “nothing more than the flu” and communicating little information about how they can help prevent its spread. Some detainees have organized a work strike in protest of the conditions. The lead organizer was temporarily placed in solitary confinement, where he was unable to communicate with the lawyers working on the detainees’ lawsuit. (His lawyers claim his placement in solitary was retaliatory, though the county disputes it.) Others remain afraid to speak out, Suarez said.  “Everyone is very much afraid of being punished for speaking out, but they’re also very aware that their silence will lead to their deaths,” she said. “Speaking out has always been a fear that those in incarceration have, and for people who also have a pending immigration case, it’s so terrifying how much they’re putting at risk.” These immigrants aren’t in detention because they’ve been charged with a crime; rather, they’re accused of civil immigration violations, such as overstaying a visa or residing in the US without authorization, and they have been detained while they wait for the outcome of their deportation cases. Some may well be allowed to remain in the US eventually, depending on what an immigration judge decides.  The federal government has significant discretion to determine who it subjects to this kind of civil detention. Toward the end of Barack Obama’s presidency, he prioritized only those immigrants who had a record of committing serious crimes, releasing others into the interior of the US. Under that system, most of the immigrants in detention at Bristol would have been released: Among the 147 detainees, at least 111 of them have never been convicted of a violent crime, and 56 have never been convicted of a crime at all, according to Lawyers for Civil Rights, the legal aid group representing the detainees in court.  But President Donald Trump, by contrast, has sought to detain any unauthorized immigrants anywhere in the US — even amid the pandemic. Lawmakers and advocates have been calling for their release, especially for detainees who are older or have underlying health conditions that make them more susceptible to the virus, including those with compromised immune systems, diabetes, and heart disease.  “Although ICE has released a small number of detainees suffering from autoimmune disorders in places where detainees have tested positive, more must be done,” Democratic Reps. Jerrold Nadler and Zoe Lofgren wrote in an April 7 letter. “ICE should release certain detainees—those who pose no threat to public safety or national security—on their own recognizance or into alternatives to detention.”  The American Civil Liberties Union and the Northwest Immigrant Rights Project have already sued ICE to seek the release of vulnerable detainees at one detention center in Tacoma, Washington, just outside Seattle, the epicenter of the US’s first outbreak of Covid-19. But the detainees in Bristol are going even further, calling for the release of all detainees in a first-of-its-kind class-action lawsuit. Unlike in other cases, the judge has ordered the humanitarian release of immigrants who don’t have medical risk factors.  “We don’t have control over a lot of things right now, but we do have control over who we choose to protect,” Suarez said. “What we’re asking for is that we do protect the lives of those who are incarcerated. Everyone deserves the opportunity to survive this.”  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.            On March 31, about 300 tenants received an email from their apartment management company. The email listed resources for tenants struggling financially during the coronavirus pandemic, but the sign-off message was clear: The rent is still due.  But whichever employee of Saturn Management, the Los Angeles property management company, sent the message to the 300 or so tenants across their various properties forgot to hide the email addresses of the recipients. Almost immediately, tenants started responding, replying-all.  “A few people chimed in saying they were down for a rent strike, and more and more people started chiming in,” Alex Mercier, a 26-year-old in Los Angeles who recently lost his job due to the coronavirus crisis, told me.  The email thread moved to a Slack channel, where people have been talking, organizing, and discussing ever since. Mercier said they’re still trying to figure out the best course of action. A rent strike for May is among the options, but they don’t want to do anything haphazardly, or anything that might jeopardize anyone’s housing situation.  
    Related
   Saturn Management declined to comment on the record but provided Vox with the follow-up email the company sent out this Monday, which apologized and acknowledged “that our most recent email from March 31st caused some confusion, stress, and anger for many of you.” The email said that “safeguarding your health and well-being” was the company’s first priority and encouraged tenants to reach out with concerns.   But the management company’s initial email had already created a bond among a community of people who’d just lost their jobs, people who worried they’d be next, and people who were just stressed about an uncertain future. “We are a literal microcosm of things that are potentially to come,” Mercier said. “Because, what, 10 million in the country have applied for unemployment in the last two weeks? This is going to continue to grow, those numbers are going to continue to grow, the need will continue to grow, people’s situations — the dire seriousness of their situations — will be amplified. “It’s important to know we’re all in this together,” he said. “It’s important that people understand what’s possible, what we can do together, if we have the numbers — when we have the numbers.” As Mercier said, about 10 million unemployment claims were filed in the US in just the past two weeks, and that’s expected to rise as the economy remains shut down because of the coronavirus. And at a time when all Americans are being urged to stay at home, if not explicitly ordered to do so, having adequate shelter is literally a public health priority.  Many states and cities have put into place temporary eviction moratoriums — meaning landlords can’t forcibly remove people from their homes for lack of payment during this time — and de facto moratoriums exist in other states and localities because courts are closed.  But that is a temporary solution to keep people in their homes. It doesn’t solve the problem of where the money will come from to pay the rent. The Wall Street Journal reported that, according to real estate firms that analyzed data for 13.4 million renters, about a third of renters didn’t pay rent in April.   How to solve this problem more permanently is much less clear, given the complexities of the US for-profit housing system, an ecosystem that includes not just renters but also landlords small and very, very big, as well as banks and lenders.  Rent strikes, like the one Mercier and his fellow tenants are considering, are more of a tactic than an end goal. They’re meant to put pressure on landlords to make concessions for struggling tenants, and to force landlords to join in the pressure on lawmakers to get more relief to renters. (The federal government’s stimulus package includes some relief for people with federally backed mortgages.)  A rent freeze is another option, one that would at least prevent landlords from raising rent during the crisis. And some are pushing for governments to cancel rent altogether, at least until the immediate public health crisis around the coronavirus is resolved.  But both experts and advocates say the pandemic hasn’t created a housing crisis. It is merely exposing, and exacerbating, the problems that already existed.  “I think this moment highlights the precarity of people generally, and how important housing is to all of us,” Vincent Reina, assistant professor of urban economics and planning at the University of Pennsylvania, said. “And I think it highlights the limited safety nets we have in place.” But because of the coronavirus, this crisis is now unfolding all at once.  Nicole, 33, worked in fine jewelry production. When the coronavirus pandemic hit, she saw 99 percent of her business dry up. She had to let her one employee go. She’s trying to figure out what to do next, but even if she can get unemployment assistance, she’s uncertain how long she’ll be able to meet her expenses on it.  Besides her rent, she has credit card bills, loans, utilities, food, car payments. “So that’s not going to leave me with much to hold me over then, right?” she said. Her landlord, she said, declined to give her a break on the rent; she’d asked for a discount for two months until she and her roommate — a student, who also can’t afford to stay in their Los Angeles apartment if she’s not attending classes — figured out their situation. Nicole says she brings groceries to her elderly parents. Her mom has cancer and is therefore particularly vulnerable, and the idea of finding another roommate in the middle of a public health crisis terrifies her.  They have a plan: A friend of her roommate’s from Chicago has agreed to take over her roommate’s spot in May, though who knows if that will still make sense a month from now.  But the full rent is still due.  Versions of this story are playing out in cities across the United States. The country has now experienced the same amount of job losses it did during the Great Recession — but in the span of just two weeks. That strain will continue as cities and states and the businesses within them stay shut down or scale back, leading to pay cuts, furloughs, or layoffs. 
    Related
   As bills pile up for food, health care, and utilities, the rent (or mortgage) can sometimes be the hardest expense to pay, especially in cities like New York or Los Angeles where the cost of living is already high.  This crisis, though, is not unfamiliar to many Americans. Of the country’s approximately 43 million renters, more than 40 percent are already considered “rent burdened,” spending more than 35 percent of their income on housing and utilities, according to US Census data.  Cea Weaver, a campaign coordinator with Housing Justice for All, a coalition of New York State advocacy groups pushing to cancel rent and immediately rehouse homeless people in vacant housing, told me that, weeks ago, it was already apparent people were one major life event away — like a parent getting sick, a car breaking down, a job loss, or a medical emergency — from not being able to afford housing.  “What’s happening now is that that life event is happening to everybody at once,” Weaver said. “And it’s happening across the country.” The increased economic pressure people are facing is also colliding with the critical public health imperative that everyone stay home. This is already a catastrophe for homeless people or people in unstable housing. Now, in a matter of weeks, the country’s best tool to try to slow the spread of the coronavirus — sheltering in place — has also become the thing that many people suddenly can’t afford to maintain.  “Eviction equals death,” Julian Smith-Newman, a member of the Los Angeles Tenants Union, a member-funded housing advocacy group, said. “That’s never been more obvious than at this moment and in the public health crisis that we’re living in.” And the informal safety nets that can sometimes help people through difficult stretches are not necessarily available right now. It’s a lot harder to stay on a friend’s couch temporarily, or move in with older parents, because of how the virus spreads, and who is vulnerable. Moving is still happening (many states have designated movers and storage facilities as essential services), but even downsizing apartments or finding an extra roommate to split the bills with becomes far more precarious during a global pandemic. James Stockard, an expert in affordable housing at Harvard University, said that people losing their housing now would be disastrous. “More people would be in the streets or doubling up with their relatives,” he told me. “Every other solution to your housing, if you don’t have shelter in your own apartment, is going to bring you into closer contact with other people. And so it’s going to make the pandemic worse.” Lawmakers and state officials do seem to recognize that keeping people housed is critical, which is why many states and localities have adopted eviction moratoriums, either instituted by lawmakers or put into place by the courts, which are shut down in many places. The federal government has also issued a 120-day eviction moratorium for tenants in federally subsidized housing (or with federally subsidized mortgages).  These eviction moratoriums vary in length and strength between states and localities, and in many cases do not mean that tenants can’t be evicted after these moratoriums expire. Some places are trying to strengthen those protections: New York state, for example, is trying to outlaw evictions for nonpayment for anyone unable to afford to pay their rent during the moratorium’s 90-day period, plus six months after.  But none of these measures really stop the rent from being due eventually. And for people who’ve lost their jobs or had their incomes cut, it will be even harder to catch up. That will be amplified the longer this economic crisis goes on. “Once that moratorium is lifted,” Jesse Connor, an organizer for Autonomous Tenants Union in Chicago’s Albany Park neighborhood, told me, “it’s just going to drop on people.  “For renters, if there’s no wavier on payment, it’s all just going to land on people, and we’re going to have a huge eviction crisis once this is over and we get through this crisis,” he added. Connor said people are weighing tough decisions — for example, whether they should try to get a job in a grocery store, even if they or someone they take care of is immunocompromised, making them more at risk of the coronavirus.  Eviction moratoriums, though, provide at least some protection against the immediate public health crisis. Mary Cunningham, vice president for metropolitan housing and communities policy at the Urban Institute, said a national moratorium that covers all renters might be more effective than the patchwork of states and localities.  But she also noted that they’re still not a solution to millions of Americans being unable to afford rent this month or the month after. “They are pauses or postponements; they’re not forgiveness.” Residential renters aren’t the only ones who are struggling right now. Commercial tenants — small and big — who are not essential businesses also might not be able to make their rent payments.  But it doesn’t really stop there, not the way the US housing system is structured. Landlords may start to feel the fallout, too, specifically those who rely on that rental income to pay mortgages or utility bills. Landlords may have more resources — they own a valuable asset in real estate, after all. And the CARES Act, the $2 trillion coronavirus stimulus package passed by Congress late last month, offers landlords forbearance on federally backed mortgages during the crisis.  But forbearance is also just a postponement of payment, and many can’t kick the can down the road too far, Cunningham said. “So with landlords being unable to pay their mortgages, then you have lenders essentially not being able to pay out their investors in mortgage-backed securities, so the whole entire housing system is connected.” That could have broader implications for the economy, as anyone who lived through the 2008 financial crisis might remember. And while many advocates say this shows exactly why the US for-profit housing system is so broken, that system also likely isn’t going to change before the next rent payment is due.  Which is why, at least for the short term, policy experts say governments need to provide more robust assistance to keep people economically stable and in their homes in the first place. Some experts suggested that housing subsidies or really just more cash would ease the financial burden, so renters don’t have to choose between paying rent and buying food.  The $2 trillion stimulus package helps, including by increasing unemployment benefits and by offering many American households one-time cash assistance, which for households making $75,000 or less per year comes out to $1,200, with additional money for kids.  But that might not be enough now, and definitely not enough a few months from now, given the unprecedented economic crisis. Cunningham said she thought Congress missed an opportunity to fully give people what they need to get through the crisis. “A $1,200 stimulus check, particularly in high-cost areas where the pandemic is most concentrated like New York City, San Francisco, Seattle, is not enough to pay the rent,” she said.  
    Related
   Beyond more generous cash payments, assistance could come in other forms, including direct housing assistance like emergency vouchers or grants awarded to tenants. Chicago, for example, is offering people who are unemployed because of the coronavirus grants of $1,000 to go toward rent or mortgage. The grants will be awarded via a lottery system, to be given to 2,000 Chicagoans. The problem with a system like this, though, is that it’s not universal, and it’s limited in scope.  And then there are the calls to cancel or forgive rent payments altogether for a period of time. Those calls are growing louder and louder, from tenants, from activists, and even from some lawmakers. A bill introduced in the New York state legislature would forgive rental payments for 90 days for both residential and commercial tenants. And Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-VT) has called for both a rent and mortgage freeze in Congress’s next stimulus package.  But a rent cancellation, and a rent cancellation only, is much harder to do because of what it might mean for landlords.  “Forgiving rent for those who don’t need relief will make the crisis worse. And doing so without providing a clear path of relief for small property owners will destabilize housing for millions of renters,” said Jay Martin, executive director of the Community Housing Improvement Program (CHIP), which represents the owners and operators of more than 400,000 units of rent-stabilized housing in New York City. “This is why giving direct relief to renters in need through vouchers is the best way to weather this pandemic.” Many housing advocates recognize that any freeze on rent payments would also need to extend to mortgages. The Autonomous Tenants Union has a petition calling for the freeze of rent, mortgage, and utility payments (along with other demands, including housing for the homeless). RentStrike2020, a national organization, is calling for a two-month pause on rent, mortgage, and utility bill collection everywhere, with the threat of a rent strike.  The LA Tenants Union is also trying to organize en masse for a rent forgiveness program, starting by giving tenants letters to give to their landlords informing them they will not pay for the month. The group is demanding, among other goals, a two-month rent forgiveness program, to be extended if the crisis continues.  Again, this wouldn’t be a deferral of payment, it would be an erasure. This sounds good in theory, but it might be harder to execute in practice. Even if rents are forgiven, not all landlords have federally backed mortgages, which means it’s not guaranteed private lenders would get on board. And a lot of those mortgages are bundled and sold as investments, and, as CityLab pointed out, many of those investors are things like pension funds.  Which means the money is likely going to have to come from somewhere — whether directly into renters’ pockets to help get them from month to month, or somewhere on the back end to bail out the rent and mortgages that won’t get paid.  But advocates who are pushing for these rent freezes made clear that they think the entire system is broken — that housing is a human right and that, if anything, the coronavirus crisis is merely making that even clearer. As endless as this coronavirus crisis may seem right now, it will eventually end. But the flaws in America’s housing system will still be there.  “We were in a national crisis before the Covid pandemic,” Reina said, “and there’s no reason to believe that this pandemic, and short-term fixes associated with it, will solve the problem that existed beforehand.” This is partly why housing advocates across the country are taking such a strong stance.  “Actually returning to normalcy does not look good to anyone,” Smith-Newman of the LA Tenants Union told me. “That’s an interesting shift that I think is happening. People are now asking, ‘How then do we achieve this thing that we’ve always been saying: that housing is a human right?’” For Smith-Newman, the answer is the mass socialization of housing, which would include such steps as the government taking over vacant properties to house homeless people.  Other experts agree that there is definitely a bigger role for the government or nonprofits to play that would ease some of the pressure on our housing system.  “In the long run, what we need is more housing that is not in the hands of for-profit owners and developers because those individuals — not evil people at all, just normal, regular capitalists — don’t leave money on the table,” Stockard, the Harvard professor said. “Whereas nonprofits and public agencies who own housing stock have a value system which is closer to that of a resident than to that of an investor.” Stockard said this is a longer-term goal, not something that could fix the emergency we’re in now, but one that might ease the pressure of the next crisis.  Yet experts also said there are options that don’t necessarily involve the wholesale remaking of the system but that could help remedy housing insecurity both during and after the coronavirus crisis. For instance, the government could invest more into programs that offer housing vouchers, such as Section 8 (where the government pays a portion of a tenant’s rent, based on income).  Right now, the waitlists for programs like Section 8 are extraordinarily, almost absurdly, long, and they’re limited. But beefing up protections and expanding access to these initiatives would help keep people in the houses or apartments they already have, and prevent people from reaching the point of crisis, such as facing eviction or homelessness. The easiest way to do that is to keep people in the houses or apartments they already have.  Which is why rent strikes like the one percolating in Los Angeles and in other places across the country may make a difference, whether or not they achieve the immediate goals of rent forgiveness. Tenants are organizing, and exposing just how unprepared our housing system is for this crisis, and the next.  “I think it’s important that the message relayed is that we can do anything, we can restructure and build any society we want,” Mercier said. “We are working together and agree that we need to protect those that are most vulnerable.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   Trump administration officials — including President Donald Trump himself — have increasingly begun to recognize the fact that black Americans are dying of Covid-19 at a greater rate than Americans of other ethnicities. But in attempting to explain why, the president and top officials are taking a narrow view of the problem — and one that ignores the many ways the Trump administration has helped make black Americans uniquely vulnerable to the coronavirus.  “We’re seeing tremendous evidence that African Americans are affected at a far greater percentage number than other citizens of our country,” Trump said at his daily coronavirus press conference Tuesday. “But why is it that the African American community is so much, numerous times more than everybody else? We want to find the reason to it.” Three administration officials — director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Dr. Anthony Fauci, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Ben Carson, and Surgeon General Jerome Adams — gave the same hypothesis for why this is Tuesday: That the health of black Americans is worse than the health of other Americans. “One of the things we know, in the African American community, there is a higher incidence of hypertension, a higher incidence of diabetes, asthma, and many of the underlying conditions that we associate with a higher mortality rate,” Carson told Fox News’ Dana Perino’s Tuesday. “It is one of the reasons that we really need to concentrate seriously on this particular population when it comes to health in general. Because it will exacerbate anything that comes along, including something like this virus.”  Fauci gave the same assessment during the press conference, and added, “We’re very concerned about that. It’s very sad. It’s nothing we can do about it right now except to try and give them the best possible care to avoid those complications.” In the immediate future, this is true. But there are things the Trump administration could do now — and could have done during its first three years in power — to broadly improve health outcomes for black Americans, and to reduce their risk of dying due to the virus.  As Fabiola Cineas has explained for Vox, black people in the US are dying due to the coronavirus at higher rates than others: As of Tuesday, black people made up 33 percent of cases in Michigan and 40 percent of deaths, despite being just 14 percent of the state’s population. In Milwaukee County, Wisconsin, where blacks represent 26 percent of the population, they made up almost half of the county’s 945 cases and 81 percent of its 27 deaths, according to a ProPublica report. In Illinois, black people made up 42 percent of fatalities but make up only 14.6 percent of the state’s population. In Chicago, the data is even graver: Black people represented 68 percent of the city’s fatalities and more than 50 percent of cases but only make up 30 percent of the city’s total population. In the South, the numbers are also grim. In Louisiana, black people accounted for more than 70 percent of deaths in a state population that is about 33 percent black. About 33 percent of the state’s 512 deaths as of Tuesday morning have occurred in Orleans Parish, where black people make up more than 60 percent of the population and where 29 percent of people live in poverty, according to 2018 census data. Louisiana’s first teen death — also one of the first teen deaths in the nation — was that of 17-year-old New Orleans resident Jaquan Anderson, an aspiring NFL player, according to local reports. There are a few things the Trump administration could do right now to try to reduce these numbers.  The president has been hesitant to centralize the US’s coronavirus response, instead arguing that each state must look out for itself, and call upon the federal government only as a last resort. But taking a more active role in managing resource allocation and in data collection would allow the federal government to have a better and more granular understanding of how various populations are affected — and say, whether black Americans across economic groups are dying at higher rates, or those in select strata — and would allow it to send resources like masks and ventilators to states that have populations at greater risk of death. States have already begun doing this themselves to some degree — Oregon sent New York equipment on Saturday, for instance — but the administration taking charge would allow for  this redistribution of resources to be done more efficiently.  Such a strategy would also help ensure personal protective equipment is available to all of those who need it — certainly those in the healthcare sector, but also other essential workers, like employees of grocery stores. At least four grocery store workers have died due to Covid-19, and at least three of those workers were black.  Trump has spoken at a number of his press conference about his warm relationship with industry leaders, including those in the grocery sector, and could — if he has not already — work to leverage those relationships into advocating for greater protections for those workers like those some stores, including Walmart and Kroger, have begun to institute.  And while Trump does not have control over these companies, he could ensure greater protections for White House staff; for instance, a number of images have shown White House custodial workers cleaning the Brady Briefing Room where most of the president’s coronavirus daily press briefings are held. All of the photos show workers — most of whom appear black — doing the work with limited PPE; with gloves, but no smocks or masks.  Policy-wise, the president could take a number of actions as well. He could endorse congressional efforts to ensure essential workers receive hazard pay — essential workers receiving higher wages while well could help making the choice easier of whether to work while feeling ill, potentially sickening others, or stay home. And he could also help expand access to healthcare — reopening the Obamacare exchange, dropping its support for Medicaid work requirements, and reversing plans to allow Medicaid spending caps. Broadly, there are systematic problems underlying the issues Fauci and Carson identified Tuesday, something Adams — who is black — has spoken to.  “I’ve shared myself personally that I have high blood pressure,” Adams said Tuesday. “I have heart disease and spent a week in the ICU due to a heart condition, that I actually have asthma and I’m prediabetic, and so I represent that legacy of growing up poor and black in America.” Trump often blames the federal government’s inability to provide states with badly needed resources on past presidents, saying he inherited a “broken system.” That is not true, but it is true he inherited the broken system of the legacy Adams is speaking of here, and has in many ways made it worse.  The administration has rolled back dozens of environmental regulations meant to ensure air and water quality remain conducive to good public health, and has recently proposed changes that would relax environmental review requirements for building things like pipelines while telling polluters not to worry about violations of emissions standards during the pandemic. And as Vox’s Matthew Yglesias has explained, these rules could be a factor in high black deaths in the US: It is well known among people who study air pollution that African American neighborhoods are much more likely to have high levels of contamination — the result of a multifaceted historical process. The link between air pollution and Covid-19 fatality could be a partial explanation for why African Americans seem to be dying at a disproportionate rate. It could also partially explain why things got so bad in Italy, which has about double the concentration of air pollution in the United States. This is also of note given Fauci and Carson cite asthma as an underlying condition that makes Covid-19 worse. Although scientists are still working to understand why black Americans are disproportionately affected by asthma, experts have noted environmental concerns, such as exposure to pollutants and allergens found in parts of cities typically inhabited by black Americans can trigger and aggravate asthma symptoms. Essentially, having access to clean air reduces asthma risk — and the administration could have done far more to reduce that risk. Similarly, administration policies in housing have done little to help reduce asthma risk — a Department of Housing and Urban Development proposal rolled out in January would relax an Obama-era rule that required local governments to track and correct instances of bias in housing. Critics argue this rule would make it more difficult for black Americans to access fair housing and to leave areas with conditions that exacerbate conditions like asthma. And this is far from the first proposal housing advocates have argued disenfranchises black Americans and limits where they can live.  
    Related
   Policies such as these create greater Covid-19 risk, Cineas writes, because they make social distancing more difficult, as they restrict the ability of black Americans to find, rent, and buy places to live, leading to more multigenerational households. And, they increase both poverty and economic stress — home values in black neighborhoods remain lower than in neighborhoods that are predominantly white, making it difficult to leverage property to change one’s economic status, whether through renting, selling, or taking loans.  Much research has been done on the negative health effects of economic stress — and the Trump administration has arguably contributed to societal stress among black Americans as well, ending policies meant to ensure black Americans feel safer outside of their homes, from the Justice Department refusing to pursue new oversight of police departments accused of racial bias to the Department of Education discarding rules meant to ensure black students are not disciplined more harshly than white students. Stress is an important thing to reduce because it is a factor in hypertension, another of the conditions Fauci and Carson noted is more common in black Americans and that can increase chances of morbidity with Covid-19. Other things that can cause the illness — as with diabetes — include a person’s diet, weight, and ability to exercise, and the ability to eat well and exercise can be limited by where that person lives.  Tuesday, Trump promised to do further study on how the coronavirus affects black Americans, and said more data will be available. But he would be wise to listen to something Fauci said that is something of a prescription for how his administration — and future ones — can better protect black Americans and other minorities from disproportionately falling victim to public health crises.  “Health disparities have always existed for the African American community,” Fauci added. “But here again with the crisis, now it’s shining a bright light on how unacceptable that is, because yet again, when you have a situation like the coronavirus, they are suffering disproportionately. ... So when all this is over and as we’ve said it will end, we will get over coronavirus, but there will still be health disparities which we really do need to address in the African American community.” And eliminating those disparities will require addressing what Fauci called “some of the real weaknesses and foibles in our society.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The American health care workforce is being squeezed from two sides: by the coronavirus itself and a shortage of protective gear but also by the economic crisis, which is driving physician practices and now some hospitals to furlough or lay off staff at the very moment they are most needed. My colleagues and I sounded the alarm about the first problem in this piece a couple of weeks ago. But the second is only beginning to fully reveal itself. Altarum, a nonprofit research and consulting firm, reported last Friday that 43,000 health care workers had been laid off in the first month of the Covid-19 outbreak. That is a historical aberration: Health care has usually been cushioned from deep job cuts during economic crises, as this chart shows:  As you can see, there is nothing in the past 30 years that compares to the long red line on the right, representing those 43,000 lost jobs. Most of the initial losses were in ambulatory services, according to Altarum: physician offices, dental practices, and other practitioners. Hospital staffing stayed mostly flat through the first month of the crisis. But that is beginning to change already, with a slew of hospitals announcing furloughs or layoffs in recent days. Here is a collection of news reports I found, just by spending some time searching Google News: I’m sure there are many more stories like these. But you get the idea. Hospitals have typically said in these announcements that they are starting with nonmedical staff for furloughs and reduced hours, which is no solace to those workers but softens the impact on our medical capacity. But it’s not clear how long medical systems can avoid cutting doctors and nurses as well, and some of them clearly cannot. I heard from a nurse in Texas, who asked that neither she nor her hospital be named for fear of professional repercussions, who has been furloughed because of the ongoing economic crisis. She said how constrained she felt by the news. If she wanted to help with the coronavirus response by taking a job with a travel nursing service offering temporary postings in Covid-19 hot spots, for example, she would lose her old job and her health insurance. ”It really is frustrating to hear that you’re a hero but also we don’t value you enough to prepare or pay you,” she said. “I would be happy to temporarily relocate, work in a hot spot, and make the same wages as I normally would. I can’t afford to work for free, exactly, but it’s frustrating if I can’t work at all.” Hospitals have taken huge revenue losses as they postpone elective surgeries and other routine care so they can make more staff and space available for the Covid-19 response. Some hospitals expect to lose half their income, and the top industry trade groups have warned that hundreds of hospitals could close after this crisis. Congress pumped $100 billion into US hospitals as part of its first stimulus package, and Democratic leaders are already calling for another $100 billion in the next stimulus bill they hope Congress will pass. But that may still not be enough, in the end. When one in four rural hospitals were already vulnerable to closure before the coronavirus struck, the current pandemic is almost certainly going to leave some hospitals with no choice but to close, no matter how much money the federal government provides. “Even with all of that, there are going to be hospitals that close because of this,” Susan Dentzer, senior policy fellow at Duke University’s Margolis Center for Health Policy, told me recently. Although today the need for increased health care capacity — for workers and facilities — is more apparent than ever, a grim future may await. And the fewer nurses and doctors we can keep employed in the meantime, the more difficult it will be to get the coronavirus under control in the first place. Correction: This storyoriginally stated Mercy Health would be temporarily laying off 700 workers at St. Rita’s Medical Center in Lima, Ohio. Mercy is furloughing 700 people across the entire hospital system. This story appears in VoxCare, a newsletter from Vox on the latest twists and turns in America’s health care debate. Sign up to get VoxCare in your inbox along with more health care stats and news.  Get our newsletter in your inbox once a week. Are you interested in more discussions around health care policy? Join our Facebook community for conversation and updates. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  Joe Biden said that the economic challenge presented by the coronavirus pandemic will be “the biggest challenge in modern history,” in an interview Tuesday evening with CNN’s Chris Cuomo. Biden’s comments came in response to a question from Cuomo about what kind of economy the former vice president would face if he wins the White House in November’s general election. “I think it’s going to, it may not dwarf, but eclipse what [Franklin Delano Roosevelt] faced,” he said. “We have an opportunity, Chris, to do so many things now to change some of the structural things that are wrong, some of the structural things we couldn’t get anyone’s attention on.” The comments were somewhat of a departure for Biden, who has positioned his campaign as a way to return to normal after the Trump years. He was not the candidate of “big structural change,” a message more likely to be found coming from his former primary rival, Sen. Bernie Sanders, who announced Wednesday he was suspending his campaign. But the pandemic and the resulting economic collapse have become an opportunity for the Biden campaign to reset its messaging. The combination of the pandemic and a free-falling economy has exposed several policy shortfalls that some Democrats have been speaking to for years. In the two weeks before March 28, about 10 million people in the US filed initial claims for unemployment, the most since the statistic started being tracked in 1967. “The Band-Aid’s been ripped off,” Biden said. He highlighted potential reforms to the voting system, environmental reforms, and ensuring that people who need money to survive the economic fallout from the pandemic receive it.  He stopped short, however, of endorsing any new policy positions. Biden has opposed the types of big structural changes presented by Sanders, including Medicare-for-all and several key economic solutions. For Sanders’s part, he has used the pandemic to put forward a broad economic agenda, including a universal basic income of $2,000 per month until the economic crisis is over. Still, it’s a shift to see Biden talking about structural change in his campaign. What’s become increasingly clear over the past several weeks is that returning to normal may not be possible, and Democrats may end up needing someone more than a normalcy candidate this fall. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. President Donald Trump keeps saying the quiet part loud when it comes to his opposition to mail-in voting. Amid the coronavirus pandemic, sending in ballots by mail has become a more enticing option for obvious reasons — it means people can safely cast their vote from home and not risk getting sick traveling to and from traveling polling places. But in Trump’s mind, mail-in voting has a major downside. Because it’s so easy, it increases voter turnout. And increased turnout typically helps Democrats. (There’s little evidence that mail-in voting disproportionately helps Democrats, but that hasn’t stopped Trump and other Republicans from opposing it on a partisan basis.) On Wednesday morning, Trump came very close to admitting this. In response to something he saw on Fox & Friends, Trump tweeted that “Republicans should fight very hard when it comes to state wide mail-in voting,” adding that “for whatever reason, [it] doesn’t work out well for Republicans.” Republicans should fight very hard when it comes to state wide mail-in voting. Democrats are clamoring for it. Tremendous potential for voter fraud, and for whatever reason,  doesn’t work out well for Republicans. @foxandfriends That tweet marked the second time in just over a week that Trump basically gave up the game. During a Fox & Friends appearance on March 30, he explained his opposition to a Democratic proposal to include funding for mail-in voting in coronavirus stimulus legislation by saying, “they have things, levels of voting, that if you ever agreed to it, you’d never have a Republican elected in this country again.” Trump’s claim is false. Several states where Republicans have a lot of success, including deep-red Utah, have already moved toward systems where mail-in voting is easy and uncontroversial. Trump, however, has a longstanding animus toward any form of voting that doesn’t require presenting some form of identification at a polling place. And he’s not alone. During a recent interview, Georgia House Speaker David Ralston, a Republican, said the quiet part even louder than Trump has. “Vote by mail in my view is not acceptable,” Ralston said. “This will be extremely devastating to Republicans and conservatives in Georgia. ... This will certainly drive up turnout.” Mail-in voting has become a major topic of conversation this week because of Tuesday’s election in Wisconsin. Amid the pandemic, Democrats pushed for the election to be delayed. A federal judge ordered the deadline for receiving mail-in ballots to be extended, but that ruling was ultimately stymied by the Supreme Court’s Republican majority, who ordered on Monday that the election go on as scheduled and that absentee ballots be postmarked by April 7 in order to be counted.  What ensued were dystopian scenes of long lines of mask-wearing people queuing to vote at the few polling places that remained open in cities like Milwaukee — hardly the type of images you want to see during a pandemic where people are being advised to stay home. Photo of the day, of voters in Milwaukee https://t.co/iSYFnCxxXy pic.twitter.com/R7U0KWnr0z Trump, however, was unbothered by it. When the topics of Wisconsin’s election and mail-in voting came up during Tuesday’s White House coronavirus task force briefing, he responded with a pack of lies. First, he falsely claimed Wisconsin Democrats only pushed to have the election delayed after he endorsed a Republican candidate for a state Supreme Court seat.  Then, alluding to the federal judge’s decision that would’ve extended mail-in voting by a week, Trump said, “mail ballots — they cheat, okay? People cheat. Mail ballots are a very dangerous thing for this country, because they’re cheaters.” “You get thousands and thousands of people sitting in somebody’s living room, signing ballots all over the place. No,” Trump added later. “I think that mail-in voting is a terrible thing. I think if you vote, you should go vote.” "You get thousands and thousands of people sitting in somebody's living room, signing ballots all over the place. No. I think that mail-in voting is a terrible thing" -- Trump totally makes stuff up on Tuesday to discredit mail-in voting pic.twitter.com/bsUjFxPwIP Suffice it to say that Trump’s story about “thousands and thousands of people sitting in somebody’s living room” and committing election fraud via mail-in ballots is made up. Ironically, the closest approximation to something like that happening took place in North Carolina in 2018, when Republican Mark Harris benefited from a well-funded and sophisticated plot to tamper with absentee ballots. A new election was ultimately called and that congressional seat is currently occupied by Republican Rep. Dan Bishop. The North Carolina race was the exception to the rule. Like any mode of voting, mail-in voting isn’t impervious to fraud, but done correctly, it comes pretty darn close. A 2019 article written by Spenser Mestel for the Pacific Standard details the impressive measures Oregon has taken to safeguard mail-in ballots. In Oregon, both the absentee envelope and ballot have a barcode unique to each voter, and in the larger counties, like Marion, a machine scans for any discrepancies between the two, or any duplicate barcodes. Then, a team of election workers trained in forensic handwriting analyzes the ballot signatures to verify the identification of the voter, who has two weeks to prove her identity should the signature be contested. During this process, “everything that is happening is on camera at all times,” says Tayleranne Gillespie, the communications director for the Oregon Secretary of State. “No one’s ever by themselves counting ballots. It’s always done in bipartisan teams.” But facing an increasingly perilous reelection fight, Trump not only can use every vote he can get, but also every vote that the eventual Democratic nominee doesn’t get. Especially during a pandemic that may extend into the fall, discouraging mail-in voting is one means toward that end — even if the consequence is that Americans are forced into a choice between voting and risking contracting a deadly virus. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  Health care in the United States has never been easy, but with the coronavirus pandemic, a visit to the doctor’s office is just plain risky. That’s why this crisis has become a moment for telehealth, which connects patients to doctors through the internet. Although telehealth has been around for a few years, recent updates to regulations and a surge in demand has made it the easiest way to get many different types of medical care. And, because you don’t have to leave your house to see a doctor, telehealth is also the safest option right now. Though it’s been a popular platform for therapy for some time, telehealth is an option for many kinds of health care. Urgent care centers are encouraging patients to use their telemedicine options instead of coming in. Some hospitals are making use of virtual platforms to screen and triage patients who might have Covid-19, while others are using the technology just to free up space and personnel. Telehealth visits across the board were up 50 percent in March, by one measure, and are on track to hit 1 billion by the end of the year.  “Our challenge has always been that we haven’t had wide-scale adoption because there just hasn’t been wide-scale awareness,” Hill Ferguson, the CEO of the telemedicine provider Doctor on Demand, told Recode. “In the last month, we’ve had everyone from the president of the United States down to local governors to CEOs of health care companies all saying use telemedicine as a first line of defense.”  Still, the idea of talking to a doctor through a computer or a smartphone is undoubtedly intimidating for many. There are new services to learn about, privacy concerns to deal with, and insurance issues to figure out. But with rapid changes, telehealth has never been simpler. Telemedicine is typically as straightforward as a patient chatting with a doctor over a video call. Because these consultations require a layer of privacy and security, there are regulations in place for patients’ protection, but those are changing in the face of the Covid-19 crisis.  The Department of Health and Human Services has announced that video platforms, like FaceTime and Skype, are temporarily acceptable for health care providers to use. Zoom has also been given temporary approval, although the platform is currently struggling with some security issues. You also might use a service that’s specifically designed for telehealth consultations, like VSee, Doxy, thera-Link, and Amazon Chime. Officials say that public-facing platforms like Facebook Live and TikTok should be avoided.  
    Related
   If you have a regular doctor, it’s possible they already have a telehealth system in place, so check in before looking for another provider. But if you don’t have a primary care physician or need urgent care, you should check out telemedicine platforms, like Doctor on Demand, Teladoc, and Amwell. (If you have insurance, check the insurer’s website, as insurance may only cover or offer discounts for certain platforms.) With any of these telehealth platforms, you should look for HIPAA and HITECH compliance, as well as end-to-end encryption. HIPAA refers to the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, and this regulation broadly requires restrictions on who can access your personal health information, including when it’s processed digitally, among other privacy assurances. (You can find a list of platforms that claim to be HIPAA-compliant here.) HITECH refers to the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act, which builds on HIPAA’s privacy protections while governing and encouraging the use of electronic medical records. Many hospitals are encouraging patients to use virtual urgent care for a consultation before heading to a clinic. This is especially important for patients who think they have Covid-19 but aren’t sick enough to require hospitalization. Virtual consultations allow doctors to triage patients without the risk of spreading the virus, and patients can get quick treatment for their symptoms. (Currently, there’s no proven treatment for the virus itself.) “Doctors’ offices are going to be a very high-risk site for Covid transmission because people that come there will be sick, and doctors themselves are going to be important vectors of Covid transmission,” explains Michael Barnett, a professor at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. “We know that health care professionals are getting infected at very high rates, and people can shed the virus when they’re asymptomatic.” Even if you feel healthy enough to visit your doctor in person for a checkup, you should reconsider. Many routine health care needs can be addressed using telemedicine tools, and staying home is still the best way to do your part in the fight against the pandemic. If you have private health insurance, you should check to see whether your insurer has made adjustments to their policies for reimbursement for telehealth. For instance, Aetna and Blue Cross Blue Shield are waiving copays for telemedicine for many members until June. But, as always, be prepared to read the fine print. Insurance companies have historically been slow to offer telehealth options. “Insurers, in general, are not trying to add lots of new things that their patients can do to keep health care costs down,” Barnett explains. “Providers do just fine in the status quo of deeper service medicine and having people come in person.”  In the face of the coronavirus outbreak, however, government health care programs are opening up more to telehealth solutions. For instance, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) is now reimbursing Medicare patients for telehealth services across the country. The government had previously limited telehealth to particular circumstances, like patients in rural areas, and those patients would typically still need to travel to a medical facility to consult with a doctor at another location. CMS is also encouraging states operating Medicaid programs to expand telehealth services. All that said, even those without any health care coverage should be able to access telehealth services. Some community health clinics have already transitioned to telehealth services, and the Department of Health and Human Services has sent $100 million to more than a thousand health centers in part to promote telehealth. The telehealth platform Roman is also offering free Covid-19 risk assessments. For affordable mental health care services, you might consider the nonprofit Open Path Psychotherapy Collective, which offers counseling for between $30 and $60 a session. There are also low-cost text-a-therapist services like TalkSpace and BetterHelp, though they’re not a replacement for speaking to a therapist in real time. You can learn more about finding a therapist in this Vox guide.  Telemedicine is particularly suited to certain types of medical care, including general consultations with doctors, mental health care, follow-up appointments, and even some specialties, like dermatology. It’s also fairly routine for doctors to write prescriptions after a telemedicine visit, and the government is lifting some restrictions for prescribing controlled substances via telemedicine curing the Covid-19 crisis. On the other hand, certain tasks like vaccinations and taking samples need to be done physically.  “There are definitely gray areas where telemedicine is not great, but there’s still a big chunk of medicine that could quite easily be taken out of the office and very conveniently delivered in some other medium,” Barnett says. “For physicians, a good 50 to 80 percent of what we do — depending on what you practice — really doesn’t need to happen in person.” If you have the right equipment, a surprising number of health measurements can also be done remotely. As the Center for Connected Health Policy, a nonprofit that promotes telehealth, points out, there is a wide array of medical devices out there than can help you do anything from check your blood pressure to measure your blood oxygen levels. Some wearables, like the Apple Watch, can even produce electrocardiograms. In a telehealth scenario, these tools can provide your doctor with valuable information about your health.   Telemedicine often requires broadband that’s strong enough to host a stable video call, in addition to a device with the proper hardware. But according to a 2019 Pew study, 44 percent of Americans who make less than $30,000 a year don’t have access to home broadband, and 29 percent don’t have access to a smartphone. Rural areas, as well as some city communities, are particularly vulnerable to this digital divide. While they’ve traditionally helped low-income people and rural Americans access the internet, libraries and community centers have been shut down to comply with social distancing requirements.  There may be some signs of hope, however. The FCC has also loosened rules governing the Lifeline Program — which entitles some low-income Americans to discounted telephone and internet services — and has said no one will be kicked out of the benefit until the summer. If you already have a smartphone, your provider may have expanded the amount of data available on your mobile plan in response to the Covid-19 crisis. And you may not need a phone that’s video-capable. CMS has now announced that providers can “evaluate beneficiaries who have audio phones only,” according to a statement from the agency, in addition to expanding 80 other telehealth services.  Whether the coronavirus pandemic will make telehealth mainstream remains to be seen. It’s also worth keeping in mind that the Covid-19 response has caused other types of health care to be put on hold, including treatment for cancer and gender-affirming procedures. We’ll eventually need to find a way to safely return to delivering many forms of in-person care.  Still, many people are using telehealth technology for the first time, and creating their initial impressions of telemedicine.  “For the first time ever, we’ve had massive levels of consumer awareness,” Ferguson, the Doctor on Demand chief executive, told Recode, adding that there may be even more significant changes in store for brick-and-mortar clinics and private practices. “They’re trying things for the first time and they’re realizing, ‘Wow, I can actually do a lot more to treat my patients over video than I ever thought.’”  Many of the adjustments for telehealth, including the suspension of copays and certain regulations, are temporary. But it may be hard for insurers and the government to pull back once patients become more used to using digital health services. After all, even when this pandemic is long gone, who wouldn’t want the convenience of reaching a doctor from anywhere? We might all be healthier for it.  Open Sourced is made possible by Omidyar Network. All Open Sourced content is editorially independent and produced by our journalists. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Every week, Thomas McAndrew, a researcher at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, has been running weekly surveys of experts about the coronavirus pandemic. He sends the survey out to 18 experts in epidemiology and infectious disease modeling and asks them several questions about the course of the pandemic, including how many confirmed cases they think there’ll be by a certain date, and how many deaths we’ll see by the end of 2020. So far, it has been a useful exercise — mostly for demonstrating that experts aren’t particularly good predictors. That’s not a knock on experts: Predicting the future is really, really hard. That it is so hard is actually highly consequential. Getting predictions right would be supremely useful to the human race.  When it comes to Covid-19, if the US had a crystal ball, and knew exactly what was ahead, it could better tailor its relief plans and responses. The last few weeks have been so painful and terrifying in part because most people were repeatedly taken by surprise; if the country knew what was coming, even if it was painful, Americans could brace for it.  
    Related
   There’s no crystal ball. But there are people trying to make these predictions anyway. Some people are unusually good at predictions, and aggregating crowd predictions can produce even better ones (more on those below). Similarly, reputation-based prediction markets and betting markets are often pretty good at predictions (except where laws prevent them from having a liquid market).  Now, one thing I should make clear is what exactly predictions attempt to do and how they’re distinct from the models being put forward by scientists. One high-profile example of such a model is the Imperial College paper that forecast 40 million deaths worldwide should the world do nothing in the face of the pandemic. Models put forward a range of possibilities given a certain set of assumptions — if we pursue x policy, that could lead to 100,000-200,000 deaths; if we pursue y policy, that could lead to 1 million-plus deaths. That’s what the Imperial College model did: It made an assumption (the world won’t act to stop the pandemic) and it estimated the number of deaths based on that assumption. A prediction essentially takes the next step. With a prediction, you’re making your best guess about which assumptions will actually play out in reality. You’re basically hazarding a guess that say, is pursuing a specific policy course, and because of that, you estimate there’ll be 100,000-200,000 deaths. The exact course of this pandemic is incredibly difficult to predict. And while forecasters and betting markets do pretty well under ordinary circumstances, they haven’t been tested on a large scale against extraordinary ones like this before.  As someone who cares a lot about how to make predictions we can actually use for policy, I’m watching these sources of coronavirus predictions closely: hoping that one of them, or maybe several of them, will emerge as a good place to look to understand our future. McAndrew first started sending his surveys out between February 18-20. Almost immediately, it became clear that predicting the course of the pandemic wouldn’t be easy, even for those who were closely following it.  In a March 16-17 survey, experts estimated that by March 29, there would be about 20,000 cases in the US, and that the true number was 80 percent likely to fall between 10,500 and 81,500 cases. In reality, Johns Hopkins University’s coronavirus tracker reported that there were 142,178 cases on March 29.  Subsequent surveys have shown that the experts do better with shorter time horizons. In the most recent survey, administered March 30-31, respondents estimated that there would be on average 386,500 cases in the US by April 5, with a range of 280,500-581,500 cases. Monday was actually April 6 (the report had a typo), but the Johns Hopkins data for both April 5 (336,384) and April 6 (366,239) weren’t that far off. But the fact that there’s so much error in predicting just a few weeks into the future makes it hard to have confidence in the longer-term predictions in the survey, like expected deaths in the US this year. (As of the most recent survey, experts estimated 262,500 deaths in the country in 2020.) That’s frustrating, because McAndrew is asking a lot of questions that I’d really love to have reliable answers to. For example, the survey asks what percentage of current cases in the US have been detected. Are most most sick people being tested, or only a tiny fraction of them? It also asks when hospitalizations will peak in the US, and how to predict the course of the outbreak in New York.  The surveys are especially notable because of who’s participating. “Participants are modeling experts and researchers who have spent a substantial amount of time in their professional career designing, building, and/or interpreting models to explain and understand infectious disease dynamics and/or the associated policy implications in human populations,” McAndrew wrote in his March 18 survey report.  But that hasn’t been enough for them to consistently predict the spread of the virus. Indeed, expertise may not necessarily be an asset. “Being an expert is not necessarily helpful,” Carnegie Mellon researcher Roni Rosenfeld told my colleague Sigal Samuel. “What is helpful is paying attention to detail and being very conscientious about it.” That’s a view shared by other predictions researchers, too. Why is it so hard to predict the spread and impact of the coronavirus? Well, it requires getting so many different, difficult predictions right. First, you have to estimate some features of the virus — how contagious is it? How much transmission is from close contact and how much is from contaminated surfaces or brief interactions? How much transmission is from people who are asymptomatic? How much does wider use of face masks help?  Next, you have to estimate large-scale political and economic questions that are without precedent. How strongly will governments respond? Will they lock down, and when? Will the lockdowns be sustained for as long as it takes to quash the virus? When they’re lifted, will there be a resurgence, and how will a population wearied by months of lockdowns respond to the resurgence?  And then there are scientific questions: Will a vaccine be developed? What about a good course of treatment with drugs? That’s a very long list of questions to predict.  McAndrew’s survey isn’t the only exercise of its kind. There’s a whole world of forecasting out there fixated on a particular question: How can we get better at predicting the future? And that world has turned its attention to coronavirus. Philip Tetlock is a psychologist at the University of Pennsylvania who studies how to get better at predicting things. In a 2005 book called Expert Political Judgment, he published the results from asking experts questions about current events and political and economic trends. The experts did really poorly: Their performance was worse than random guessing, and knowing more about geopolitics didn’t make them better at predicting it (in fact, it made them worse).  Tetlock then tested a large cohort of smart non-experts on a series of current events questions in an extensive research effort called the Good Judgment Project. Some of them performed much, much better than others. Tetlock called the top 2 percent “superforecasters”. They weren’t domain experts, but they did remarkably well at predicting future events across many different fields — much better than the experts typically did. 
    Related
   The Good Judgment Project has continued to this day, with an open predictions platform where anyone can weigh in on current events. Most of us aren’t superforecasters, so you might expect that the open platform would perform much worse than Tetlock’s original highly selected superforecasters — but on the right sort of questions, the prediction platform does quite well.  Their coronavirus outbreak page shows how their predictions have been holding up so far. In early February, for example, the forecasters collectively correctly predicted that between five and 11 states would have confirmed cases by the end of February, and that California would hit 25 confirmed cases in March.  They anticipated that as of mid-February the US was likely in for the long haul, that the public health emergency declaration from the World Health Organization would remain in place through May, and that the CDC’s travel warning about China would persist through June.  There are 27 questions now open, many of them with dozens of predictions registered. More questions, some with more than a thousand forecasts, have already been resolved. The most-answered question, posted in late January, asks, “How many total cases of Wuhan coronavirus (2019-nCoV) will have been reported by the World Health Organization (WHO) as of 20 March 2020?”  By early February, most forecasters on the site were guessing between 100,000 and 200,000. On March 17, it surpassed 200,000 cases. So they were wrong, technically — but they were a lot closer than most people were in early February. This reasonably good track record is enough to make the Good Judgment Project site oddly compelling; I flipped through it for hours, looking for answers about how many people could die by this summer, when the NBA will next play a game (not any time soon, most predictors think), and whether the S&P 500 will recover by this summer (predictors are split; predicting the market is much harder than predicting current events, because lots of people are already predicting the market by betting money on it).  Another similarly compelling prediction site is Metaculus. The setup is similar: Anyone can log in and add their own judgment to the fray. Their weekly predictions of new case numbers are consistently closer to the mark than the results from expert surveys, though the two groups have asked different questions, which makes direct cross-comparisons impossible.  Since anyone can submit a question, the questions range from the mission-critical — when will a vaccine be widely available — to the morbid — will all major US presidential candidates survive? Reading through them, I want to believe that this prediction strategy works: that we’ve found a way to aggregate our expertise and cast some clarity on our situation. But for most of the predictions it’s too early to tell.  Should sites like this one feature more prominently in our planning and response? I think so. Even if they’re subject to many limitations, as long as they’re subject to different limitations than experts or the pandemic models that have gotten widespread attention, they can be a valuable addition to our overall state of knowledge.  They are also a good idea to participate in individually. The coronavirus pandemic is fast-moving, and predictions about what will happen next are falsified repeatedly, often within a matter of days. Registering a prediction helps improve aggregate prediction accuracy, through the power of crowds; it also helps increase awareness of the strengths and limitations of our own predictive ability.  Tetlock noticed that there were systematic differences between his superforecasters and everyone else, but those differences weren’t magic, and were in fact quite straightforward. Superforecasters made predictions more often. They made predictions specific enough they’d notice when they were falsified. They changed their mind frequently, a little at a time, instead of in dramatic swings. Registering forecasts is a great way to practice all of those things, and to become someone who is taken a little bit less by surprise. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Air pollution from very small particles kills millions of people around the world each year and has been rising in the Trump era, leading to an annual increase of nearly 10,000 deaths in the US. Some of this has been due to wildfires, but some of it is related to ongoing deregulatory efforts by the Trump administration. President Trump has a number of initiatives in the works — from narrowing the range of science regulators are allowed to consider to making cars less fuel efficient — that are designed to exacerbate the problem. And while a growing body of literature links particulate pollution to a wide range of cognitive impairments, what we know about how air pollution kills people is largely through cardiovascular and respiratory distress.  Since these health problems are also thought to increase the risk that a coronavirus infection will lead to a fatal case of Covid-19, a team of researchers at Harvard’s T.H. Chan School of Public Health investigated whether places with more air pollution also see a greater lethality of Covid-19 cases. Their preliminary finding, based on data through April 4, is that yes, air pollution makes Covid-19 much more deadly. If that finding holds up as more data comes in, it could help us understand why death rates vary so widely among countries, and explain the stark racial disparities in Covid-19 lethality that appear to be emerging in the United States. Danielle Braun, Francesca Dominici, Rachel Nethery, Ben Sabath, and Xiao Wu used a pretty standard research design looking at long-term air pollution levels as recorded in about 3,000 American counties that cover approximately 98 percent of the population.  They then looked at county-level Covid-19 deaths, adjusting for hospital beds available, smoking and obesity rates, and standard demographic factors. All else being equal, they found that an increase of one microgram of fine particulates per cubic meter is associated with a 15 percent increase in the Covid-19 death rate. That’s about 20 times the statistical association between fine particulate exposure and increases in the normal all-cause mortality rate, reflecting the commonsense view that coming down with Covid-19 greatly elevates the importance of your baseline respiratory and cardiovascular health. It is well known among people who study air pollution that African American neighborhoods are much more likely to have high levels of contamination — the result of a multifaceted historical process. The link between air pollution and Covid-19 fatality could be a partial explanation for why African Americans seem to be dying at a disproportionate rate. It could also partially explain why things got so bad in Italy, which has about double the concentration of air pollution in the United States. In policy terms, we cannot cope with the pandemic by going back in time to reduce background levels of air pollution. But we can use the data to spot and help the most vulnerable.  But right now, this is the type of study — based on statistical analysis rather than a controlled experiment — the Trump administration wants to exclude from regulatory analysis. It is also moving to suspend enforcement of clean air rules, allegedly as part of the response to the public health emergency. But this is exactly backwards. As the study’s authors write, their work “underscores the importance of continuing to enforce existing air pollution regulations to protect human health both during and after the Covid-19 crisis.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. After months of muddled messaging from different factions of the public health world, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released straightforward guidance in the middle of the coronavirus pandemic: Everyone in the US should wear a cloth mask or face covering while in certain public settings. The recommendation marks a shift from the federal government. Less than six weeks ago, Surgeon General Jerome Adams tweeted that members of the general public should “STOP BUYING MASKS!” He added that masks “are NOT effective in preventing general public from catching #Coronavirus, but if healthcare providers can’t get them to care for sick patients, it puts them and our communities at risk!” The CDC is still advising against the general public wearing traditional medical masks, such as surgical variants and N95 respirators, to preserve them for health care workers. The shift in messaging on cloth masks, the agency said, came in light of evidence that people with few or no symptoms of Covid-19 can still transmit the virus.  
    Related
   The upshot: Masks can help stop the spread of coronavirus not just by protecting the wearer, but by preventing the wearer — who could be an asymptomatic spreader — from breathing and spitting their germs everywhere. Some studies in households and colleges “show a benefit of masks,” Raina MacIntyre, head of the Biosecurity Research Program at the University of New South Wales in Sydney, Australia, told me, “so it would be plausible that they would also protect in lower-intensity transmission settings such as in the general community.” But masks do not make you invincible. They can’t replace good hygiene — Wash your hands! Don’t touch your face! — and social distancing, both of which have been key to stemming the coronavirus even in Asian countries where widespread mask use was already common. Epidemiological models also suggest coronavirus cases will rise if social distancing measures are relaxed, potentially causing hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of deaths in the US alone. That’s true whether people are gathering wearing masks or not. Still, the CDC’s about-face has left many people with plenty of questions: What does it mean to use a mask correctly? When should they be used and washed? Do you need them for all public situations? Can they really keep you safe? If you can’t find a mask, how can you make one? And why aren’t there more medical masks to begin with? Here’s a guide to some of the most common questions. According to the CDC, you should wear a mask in public, particularly while in “settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain (e.g., grocery stores and pharmacies)” and “especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.”  Think of circumstances where it’s going to be harder to keep at least 6 feet away from other people, especially in closed, poorly ventilated places. It’s in those kinds of situations that coronavirus-containing droplets are more likely to spread by air or surfaces.  There are some exceptions to the mask guidance, the CDC stated: “Cloth face coverings should not be placed on young children under age 2, anyone who has trouble breathing, or is unconscious, incapacitated or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.” 
    Related
   And be warned: If you use a mask incorrectly, or start acting recklessly because you’re wearing a mask, it could actually hurt you more than it helps.  If you fidget with your mask, and especially if you touch your face in the process, you can infect yourself with virus-containing droplets your mask caught. If you reuse a mask without cleaning it, you can breathe in or otherwise expose yourself to droplets the mask captured last time. If you generally ease up on good hygiene or social distancing because you’re wearing a mask, you’re putting yourself — and your community — at greater risk. The CDC offers some tips for how to properly use a mask. Above all, don’t touch the mask and then touch other parts of your face, especially your eyes, mouth, and nose. The entire point of this fabric is to shield you from outside germs. So you don’t want to touch the part of the mask doing the shielding and then the parts of your face that are vulnerable to infection. You should also wash your hands before and after taking off a mask — before to avoid getting anything on your face and mask, and after to get rid of anything that was on your mask. Remove the mask with the loops, not by touching the front. If possible, throw away disposable masks after using them. And if you can’t throw a mask away, make sure to thoroughly disinfect it with ultraviolet light sterilizers — not something most people have around — or, if using a cloth product, throw it in the wash or clean it with soap and water. For some people, it might make sense to have multiple masks around if you have to go out multiple times on a particular day. The important thing, though, is to throw a recently used mask in the laundry or in the wash as soon as possible and avoid touching it at all until it’s clean. Do not keep dirty masks around your house, where people can easily touch them and potentially infect themselves. The CDC recommends a cloth mask or face covering, whether a professionally made mask or a homemade variant. The CDC explicitly advises against the general public using a surgical mask, which is the standard mask you’ve probably seen doctors and nurses wear. It also advises against the public using N95 respirators, which are more complex, expensive masks meant to fit more tightly on the face.  Surgical masks and N95 respirators, the agency noted, “are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.” As it stands, there is a serious shortage of PPE, including masks, for health care workers. There are reports of doctors, nurses, and other health care workers using bandanas and scarves for masks and trash bags for gowns. Hospitals are considering do-not-resuscitate orders for dying Covid-19 patients out of fear that such intensive, close-up procedures could get doctors and nurses without PPE infected with the virus. The CDC, acknowledging the shortage, previously recommended homemade masks for health care workers when no other options are available. “I am worried that telling people to wear masks will strain already weak supplies that are needed by doctors and nurses,” Jennifer Nuzzo, an epidemiologist at Johns Hopkins University, told me. “If we are able to fix that supply chain, I’d feel less worried about this. But some of the shortages initially were due to members of public and medical staff raiding medical offices’ and hospitals’ supplies for home use.” Private companies and public officials are racing to fix the PPE shortage. But until it’s fixed, it’s critical that the existing supplies of surgical masks and N95 respirators are left for health care workers who are literally saving people from this pandemic. The CDC’s guidance — and the best argument for wearing a mask, according to the experts I spoke with — is primarily to stop the wearer from infecting other people. That’s especially important for Covid-19, since at least some spread happens when people are asymptomatic, when they have few symptoms, or before they develop symptoms. Universal mask use could stop these asymptomatic carriers, many of whom might not even know they’re sick, from inadvertently infecting other people. Masks also can offer some protection from others by putting a physical barrier between them and your mouth and nose. But we don’t know how much, because it’s unclear how much the virus spreads through airborne droplets or aerosols. Masks can’t replace all the other approaches needed to fight the coronavirus, like washing your hands, not touching your face, and social distancing. Still, when paired with all these other tactics — and when used correctly — masks offer an extra layer of protection. The quality of the research on this topic is weak, with a lot of small, underpowered studies. But the studies that do exist generally favor more people wearing masks. A 2008 systematic review, published in BMJ, found medical masks halted the spread of respiratory viruses from likely infected patients. In particular, studies on the 2003 outbreak of SARS — a cousin to the coronavirus that causes Covid-19 — found that masks alone were 68 percent effective at preventing the virus. By comparison, washing hands more than 10 times a day was 55 percent effective. A combination of measures such as hand-washing, masks, gloves, and gowns was 91 percent effective. A 2015 review, also published in BMJ, looked at mask use among people in community settings, specifically households and colleges. Some studies produced unclear results, but the findings overall indicated that wearing a mask protected people from infections compared to not wearing a mask, especially when paired with hand-washing. A big issue was adherence; people were often bad at actually wearing masks, which, unsurprisingly, diminished their effectiveness. But if masks were used early and consistently, the authors concluded, they seemed to work. A more recent study published in Nature Medicine found that surgical masks appear to block droplets and aerosols containing some viruses, including the flu and coronavirus. Other studies have produced similar results, typically finding at least some protective value from masks as long as they’re used consistently and properly. The results vary depending on the mask. N95 respirators are, in theory, the best possible masks. But they require a bit of skill and fitting to use — to the point that a 2016 review in CMAJ couldn’t find a difference among health care workers using N95 respirators versus surgical masks for respiratory infection, likely due to poor fitting. That’s another reason these masks should be reserved for the professionals. Cloth masks, meanwhile, are much less effective than surgical masks or N95 respirators, as a 2015 study in BMJ found. And they can be extra risky, since they can trap and hold virus-containing droplets that wearers can then breathe in. But they still, in general, offer more protection than no mask at all, several studies concluded. There’s no good research on how wearing a mask could affect people’s behaviors, but the experience of some Asian countries suggests it’s possible to adopt social distancing, good hygiene, and masks in the midst of an outbreak. Taiwan and South Korea, for example, have done a better job containing Covid-19 than the US while embracing masks and all the other evidence-based measures. To emphasize: Yes, masks can help. But they’re not an excuse to ease up on social distancing, good hygiene, and all the other things public health officials are recommending right now. Do all of those things too. Probably not — but if used properly, wearing a mask probably can’t hurt, and might help encourage others to wear one too. The CDC specifies that it’s recommending cloth face coverings where social distancing isn’t possible. A solitary walk or run outside is typically not going to fall into one of those categories. In general, masks become more helpful as the risk of infection increases. If you’re having closer, more prolonged contact with potentially sick people, using a mask is more likely to protect you. And if you’re potentially sick and having closer, more prolonged contact with others, a mask is more likely to protect them from your germs as well. “Are people having those prolonged, close-contact interactions with people?” Saskia Popescu, an epidemiologist focused on hospital preparedness, told me. “Because that’s what’s more considered high-risk. … It’s that face-to-face for a significant chunk of time.” That’s why the CDC had already recommended masks for people who know they’re sick or interacting with someone who’s sick. People who frequently interact with others as part of their jobs, like a first responder or a grocery store clerk, are more likely to get good use out of masks too. That especially includes health care workers, who spend more time with sick people than anyone else — which is why they need masks and other PPE more. Certain populations also may want to especially consider masks in less risky environments, such as people who are older or have underlying health issues, like a compromised immune system, that put them at greater risk if they’re infected. Besides the health benefits, there’s also a potential social value to wearing a mask everywhere: It could push more people to do so as well. If more people are out in public wearing face coverings, that could help remove the stigma that only sick people wear masks. So if you go out with a mask in more situations, it could not only help you and those around you, but it might help instill a healthier norm for the rest of society too.  There are a lot of options! But keep in mind guidance, from the CDC, about a proper mask: It should fit snugly but comfortably around the face, be secured around the ears with ties or loops, include multiple layers of fabric, allow for breathing without restriction, and be readily washable without damage. If you have the time and can sew, the CDC recommends a face covering that can be made with two 10-inch by 6-inch rectangles of cotton fabric, two 6-inch pieces of elastic or rubber bands, string, cloth strips, or hair ties, a needle and thread or bobby pin, scissors, and a sewing machine. Here’s the agency’s four-step tutorial: There are also some alternatives on YouTube. Here is a good one: If you’re like me and the idea of sewing anything sounds like a total nightmare, the CDC offers a non-sewing option. It just requires a T-shirt and a pair of scissors. Here’s the three-step tutorial: If you’re even more like me and that mask is still too much, the surgeon general posted a 45-second video guide on Twitter for an even easier mask that can be made solely with a T-shirt or just about any other cloth fabric and two rubber bands: #DYK? @CDCgov's recommendation on wearing a cloth face covering may help protect the most vulnerable from #COVID19. Here's how you can make one today, in just a few easy steps: pic.twitter.com/eFuE7Brw0J Chances are the less skill-intensive, less time-consuming masks will be, at the very least, less comfortable, and maybe harder to wear for long. But if you’re in a pinch, or if you’re unable to do more complicated tailoring, the easier alternatives offer more protection than nothing. The simple answer is that supply hasn’t kept up with demand. Prior to the coronavirus outbreak, China made half the world’s face masks. When the outbreak took off there, China started to use its supply and hoard what remained. This problem has only spread since, as more and more countries hoard whatever medical supplies they can get — with some, like Germany, even banning most PPE exports. So as demand increased due to Covid-19 — not just from health care workers but from a general public increasingly scared of infection — there was less supply to go around. On a deeper level, though, the shortage in masks and other PPE reflects America’s — and, really, the rest of the world’s — poor preparedness for a pandemic. The mask and broader PPE shortage, in fact, was well-known to the US government before the Covid-19 outbreak, yet the US did not prepare. “When we have done exercises in the past for pandemic preparedness, supply chain issues were a well-documented challenge,” Popescu said. “This is something we’ve known about — maybe not to this extent, but this isn’t a shocker. It’s more surprising that we let it get this bad.” One of those simulations held by the federal government, as the New York Times reported, covered a pandemic that looked a lot like the one we’re facing now: a respiratory virus that started in China and made its way to the US and the rest of the world. Among the many problems, the Times found, were “deficiencies ‘in personal protective equipment use.’” The exercise found that the US didn’t have the means to quickly produce more PPE. When states turned to the federal government for help in the exercise, there was “confusion” and “bureaucratic chaos” as requests and submissions hit multiple agencies at once. This was far from the only simulation to produce these results, experts told me. Jeremy Konyndyk, senior policy fellow at the Center for Global Development, argued a previous outbreak should have acted as a warning for the world: the 2014-2016 Ebola outbreak. While working in President Barack Obama’s administration at the time, Konyndyk quickly realized that the US — and much of the world — was simply not ready for a major disease outbreak. “I came away from that experience just completely horrified at how unready we would be for something more dangerous than Ebola,” he said, noting Ebola was, thankfully, relatively hard to transmit. Indeed, experts and advocates argue that the US generally underfunds disease outbreak preparedness and public health programs more broadly. It’s these concerns that led the Obama administration, after the Ebola outbreak, to attempt to scale up preparedness by establishing a White House office dedicated solely to the issue and producing a 69-page playbook in case of an outbreak. But President Donald Trump’s administration neglected and rolled back these efforts, eventually disbanding the White House office. We’ve seen the results in the botched rollout of coronavirus testing, but PPE offers another example. America could have shored up its supplies of PPE in its strategic stockpile. It could have ensured that there would be surge capacity to boost production in case of emergency. And it should have been doing this all before the coronavirus pandemic. But it didn’t, even after it became clearer, around January and February, that the coronavirus was a looming threat. By early March, federal officials acknowledged the Strategic National Stockpile had just 1 percent of the medical masks the country needed in a full-blown pandemic. “The US … was not prepared,” Jen Kates, director of global health and HIV policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation, told me. “A good preparedness plan would have helped address this and had things in place to allow for that increased need to be met.” So the US is playing catch-up with different public and private interventions to boost PPE production. Until that’s fixed, we simply don’t have enough medical masks to go around. Because health care workers need them more, since they’re constantly in contact with those who are sick — in a way not many other people, if any, in the general public are. And even if you take a totally selfish perspective on this, there are good reasons to want health care workers to get these medical masks first. As coronavirus has spread, experts have talked up “flattening the curve.” The idea is to spread out the number of coronavirus cases — through social distancing, testing, contact tracing, and other protective measures — to avoid overwhelming the health care system. Here’s what that looks like in chart form: The PPE shortage could make it harder to flatten the curve of new cases if doctors and nurses get sick. But the line representing health care system capacity also isn’t a constant. If we develop more capacity, it can handle more cases at once. If capacity falls — if doctors and nurses get sick because of a lack of protective equipment, or refuse to work without conditions that can ensure their safety — even a flatter curve will be hard for the system to handle. That’s why experts, even those who acknowledge that the public would benefit from using masks, say that doctors and nurses should get priority: This isn’t just about keeping people on the front lines safe; it’s about keeping all of us safe. To put it in selfish terms: If you do get sick with the coronavirus or anything else during this pandemic, and you want to make sure that there are doctors and nurses available to treat you, you should let them get the masks they need first. It’s true that we might all be better off wearing surgical masks in an ideal world. But that’s not the world we live in right now. For all our sakes, we should act accordingly. Officially, the CDC has said it changed its stance with the changing evidence. As it became clearer that asymptomatic transmission was happening with the coronavirus, the CDC argued, the benefits of everyone wearing a mask increased, since they could help stop transmission from people who don’t even know they’re sick. Unofficially, the answer is a little more complicated. In my discussions with public health officials and experts before the CDC changed its guidance, it seemed many people were afraid of saying anything that could exacerbate the PPE shortage for health care workers or get members of the general public to think — incorrectly — that they could ease social distancing measures if they just wear a mask. “I fear that if we tell everyone they should go out and buy masks, it will not only contribute to the PPE shortage,” Jaimie Meyer, an infectious disease expert at Yale University, told me, “but it will give a false sense of a ‘quick fix’ for protection, whereas people still need to be practicing social distancing strategies that are much more effective, though perhaps socially, psychologically, [and] logistically challenging.” 
    Related
   Part of the issue is the CDC also operates on a different evidence level than a lot of the public. The agency tends to follow the best reviews of the scientific evidence with very rigorous standards for what’s a good study and what’s not. So what may sound like good enough evidence and reasoning to you and me may not be good enough for the CDC. Since the scientific evidence for public mask use isn’t great — even if it’s generally positive — the CDC, as an agency filled with scientists, was just more skeptical of taking a leap than many laypeople were. Regardless of the reasoning, the CDC’s messaging backfired. As health care workers clamored for masks, it became increasingly harder to tell the public that masks wouldn’t benefit everyone else. By obfuscating and failing to fully explain the issue, officials likely sowed distrust toward their guidance. And the public rushed to buy masks anyway. The dire shortage of masks and other PPE has led to several options for donations: At this point in the pandemic, health care workers and facilities all over the country will gladly accept the help they can take. Some places, like New York and Louisiana, are dealing with much worse coronavirus outbreaks right now and really need the supplies today. But it’s also worth being realistic about just how far donations can go. Given the research, cloth masks are simply not suitable replacements for actual medical masks. With medical masks, N95 respirators are widely regarded as more effective than conventional surgical masks when properly fitted. So even with donations, it’s on the federal government to set up more production and coordination of supply lines to make sure places in need get PPE. It’s on private producers to step up and do what they can. (Some car, clothing, and pillow companies, among others, have already done so.) And it’s on us — to make sure that the existing supplies of masks and other PPE are made available to health care workers. Americans can accomplish that, in part, with donations, but we can also do that by not buying surgical masks or N95 respirators until the shortage is fixed, and instead relying on cloth and homemade coverings. So, yes, health experts recommend wearing a mask in public. Just don’t take one from health care workers. And keep doing all the other things public health officials recommend, like social distancing and washing your hands, as we deal with this pandemic. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. On February 23, White House trade adviser Peter Navarro addressed a memo to President Donald Trump warning that as many as 2 million Americans could die from the coronavirus. Trump wants you to believe it was never brought to his attention. That memo and another similarly dire memo Navarro authored in January were published on Monday by Axios. Asked about them during the latest White House coronavirus task force briefing, Trump played dumb. “I didn’t see ’em, but I heard some memos talking about pandemic [sic],” Trump said on Tuesday. “I didn’t see ’em, I didn’t look for ’em either. But that was about the same time as I felt that we should do it, that was about the same time that we closed it down.” Asked about whether it was a good idea to urge people to go vote today in Wisconsin amid a deadly pandemic, Trump dodges the question and mentions that he won Wisconsin in 2016. pic.twitter.com/17MbvUJ1NG It’s true that by February 23, Trump had restricted travel from China. But the virus was already spreading within the United States. And Trump’s public statements belie the revisionist history he’s now offering about how he took the coronavirus seriously from the beginning.  For instance, during a news conference on February 26, Trump said, “when you have 15 [coronavirus cases], and the 15 within a couple of days is going to be down to close to zero, that’s a pretty good job we’ve done.” But instead of going down “close to zero,” the United States now has nearly 400,000 cases less than two months out from Trump uttering those words. During Tuesday’s briefing, a reporter pressed him on this point. “When Peter Navarro did circulate those memos, you were still downplaying the threat of coronavirus in the US,” the reporter said. “You were saying things like, ‘I think it’s a problem that is going to go away within a couple of days —’” “Which I’m right about,” Trump interjected. The reporter continued: “You said ‘within a couple of days the cases will be down to zero.’” Given the current magnitude of coronavirus cases in the US, you might think Trump’s comment about coronavirus going away on its own would be too much even for him to try and defend. You’d be wrong.  “Well, the cases really didn’t build up for a while,” Trump replied.  Asked about whether it was a good idea to urge people to go vote today in Wisconsin amid a deadly pandemic, Trump dodges the question and mentions that he won Wisconsin in 2016. pic.twitter.com/17MbvUJ1NG Trump later claimed that even if he had read the memo, it wouldn’t have made any difference because “I basically did what the memo said.” But he didn’t.  Navarro’s memo recommended significant immediate federal investment in personal protection equipment (PPE) for health care workers. But federal agencies largely held off on such expenditures until mid-March, when the crisis was already spinning out of control. Trump’s line on that point has been that states should’ve done more to help themselves.  If Trump really didn’t learn of Navarro’s memo until media reports about it in recent days, it’s an indictment of his administration — after all, you’d expect a top official’s conclusion that as many as 2 million Americans could die from a deadly disease would be worth bringing to his attention. But if he did see it and not only didn’t act but told the public that the coronavirus would go away “like a miracle” as he did on February 27, then in some ways that’s even worse. What we do know is that, for whatever reason, Trump was indulging in wishful thinking during a critical period in which more proactive measures could’ve saved lives. And as a result, the goalposts have now moved to a point where Trump is preparing to tout as many as 100,000 American deaths as a win. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Wisconsin held the first in-person election on Tuesday in the middle of the US coronavirus outbreak. In some precincts, it was an event plagued by hours-long waits and a tremendous shortage of both polling workers and stations, prompting civil- and voting-rights activists to call the legitimacy of the election into question before polls even closed.  State Republicans on Monday won a recent and bitter back-and-forth with Wisconsin’s Democratic Gov. Tony Evers on whether to postpone the election and further expand absentee ballot access. The Republican-majority state Supreme Court ruled the election would go ahead on April 7 as planned, and a separate US Supreme Court ruling late Monday night meant no extension for absentee ballots — effectively cutting many voters out of the process. Election results are expected to come in by next Monday. This pileup of last-minute changes meant many voters had to make a choice: risk getting sick while exercising their constitutional right to vote in person, or stay home and safe without voting.  Where you live determined how your Election Day experience went. The epicenter of the long lines and lack of polling stations appeared to be in Milwaukee, Wisconsin’s largest city, which is located in a county that’s home to nearly 70 percent of the state’s African American residents.  “For black people in Milwaukee, the fear is significant,” said Rashad Robinson, a spokesperson for Color of Change, of the calculus voters were making. “The black community in Milwaukee is facing the brunt of the coronavirus pandemic — accounting for over half of coronavirus cases and 81 percent of related deaths.” The lack of available poll workers on Election Day meant the number of polling places in Milwaukee shrank from 180 to just five for a city of about 592,000, according to Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel reporter Molly Beck. In the state capitol of Madison — which has less than half Milwaukee’s population — there were 66 polling places open, Beck pointed out. Madison and other areas also had more locations with drive-through voting.  “The WI legislature, the state Supreme Court & the U.S. Supreme Court consigned these U.S. citizens to risking their lives to exercise their right to vote today,” tweeted Sherrilyn Ifill, the president of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund. “Today’s election is now legal, but it is democratically & morally illegitimate.” Wisconsin’s decision to hold an election in the midst of a deadly pandemic could have profound consequences on American elections, far more than the state’s results. Especially if voters get sick from in-person voting, it raises the question of how states should be preparing for November’s general election, where turnout will likely be much higher.  “The aftermath of what Wisconsin Republicans just made happen might change the politics of continuing with this kind of insanity,” said Ben Wikler, the chair of the Wisconsin Democratic Party.  Wisconsin is the lone state so far to proceed with a scheduled election since the coronavirus outbreak got serious in the US. Many other governors, Republican and Democrat alike, have postponed their elections to not put voters or poll workers in imminent danger of getting the virus.   A few weeks ago, Evers and Republican leadership in the state legislature actually agreed they would continue to hold an in-person election on April 7 and encourage more people to sign up for absentee ballots. But as the weeks progressed and local election officials told state leaders they couldn’t hold an in-person election under social distancing orders, Evers wanted to postpone. Republican leaders did not.  “As the weeks wore on, the legislature dug into that position, allowing no accommodations, no flexibility for voters, and the governor slowly moved to the opposite side,” University of Wisconsin-Madison political science professor Barry Burden told Vox. Evers tried to move the date to June 9, first by calling a special legislative session this weekend and then through executive order on Monday night. Both times, he was overruled by Wisconsin Republicans in the state legislature and the state Supreme Court.  Republican leaders in the state legislature gaveled out of the weekend special session almost immediately after it was convened. Then on Monday night, Republicans appealed Evers’s executive order, saying the governor was “defying numerous state-election statutes and his countless previous statements that he clearly lacks legal authority to cancel tomorrow’s election,” and the Republican majority on the state Supreme Court agreed with them. Evers and Wisconsin Democrats were dealt another blow by the US Supreme Court on Monday. The court’s conservative majority handed down a 5-4 decision that required mail-in ballots in Wisconsin to be postmarked by April 7, overruling a lower federal court ruling that had allowed those ballots to be postmarked and received by April 13. “I think Democrats are going to wash their memories and not recall Evers and Republicans were on the same page a few weeks ago,” Burden said. The practical effect of this back-and-forth is the election went forward with far fewer polling places and poll workers in some cities. In addition to Milwaukee’s number of polling places being reduced from 180 to five, the nearby city of Waukesha (home to 72,000 people) had just one polling place open. There were numerous reports of long lines as voters tried to social distance, and some people waiting in line for hours to cast their ballot.  Notably, one of the most closely watched races taking place Tuesday is also one that Republicans have been eyeing for some time. The statewide race is for a seat on the state Supreme Court, which both Trump-endorsed Republican Daniel Kelly and Democrat Jill Karofsky are currently competing for. Whoever wins will secure a 10-year term in the state’s highest court, which is also poised to review a voting rights case that could lead to the removal of 200,000 people from the states’ voter rolls.  Voters who are sick — or afraid of becoming sick — will be unable to vote unless they received mail-in ballots and get them sent by April 7. And numerous people who requested an absentee ballot did not receive one, the New York Times reports. “If you’re in line before the polls close you get to vote. Well, how about you have your request in for your absentee ballot and you don’t get it?” Sen. Amy Klobuchar (D-MN), co-author of vote-by-mail legislation, told Vox in an interview Tuesday. “That is just wrong.” The Wisconsin election was not equal for all voters; those with access to cars and transportation could drive to the polls and in some instances safely vote from their vehicles. And information about such options wasn’t exactly clear. Places like Milwaukee offered curbside voting, but this effort wasn’t effectively communicated to voters, according to Dakota Hall, the executive director of Leaders Igniting Transformation, an advocacy group aimed at promoting voting rights. The lack of information and the last-minute nature of the election changes had a concrete effect on voters’ decisions to go to the polls. Shavonda, a Wisconsin voter who declined to share her last name, said that she was worried about the risk of physically going to a crowded location given the fact that she has asthma. “It’s too high-risk for me to go out to go to polling places,” she told Vox.  The haphazard implementation of this election means that thousands of voters who were interested in participating will effectively be disenfranchised.  As Vox’s Ian Millhiser reported, many voters who had requested absentee ballots had yet to receive them as of Monday evening, meaning that people probably wouldn’t be able to postmark them by the required Tuesday, April 7, deadline. According to the Wisconsin Elections Commission, roughly 408,000 absentee ballots still hadn’t been returned across the state as of Tuesday morning.  This dynamic suggests that those who weren’t able to get and mail in their ballots, and those who couldn’t physically participate out of concerns for their health, simply wouldn’t be able to engage in this election at all. Absentee ballots in Wisconsin also require a witness to sign the ballot, a requirement that’s incredibly limiting during the current public health crisis, where people are being advised to stay away from others.  “Voters are forced to make an impossible decision today: They are choosing between their health and losing their right to vote,” Kristen Clarke, the executive director of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, told reporters on a conference call.  The handling of Tuesday’s primary is expected to hurt specific subsets of voters disproportionately, including black voters, older voters, and voters with disabilities.  “Suppressing, limiting, and outright denying the vote to black citizens is a dark American tradition, but this is sadly one of the most egregious examples we’ve seen so far this century,” said Robinson.  ACLU voting rights campaign strategist Molly McGrath notes that the effects of the pandemic have only further exacerbated existing voter suppression efforts in the state.  “Let’s be totally clear: Voter suppression was happening in Wisconsin before Covid-19, through onerous voter ID requirements, gerrymandering, and attempted cuts to early voting,” she told Vox. “Due to the pandemic, the disparities of voter suppression have reared their ugly heads right in our faces.” Democrats in Congress say Wisconsin’s elections are a perfect demonstration of the need for expanded voting by mail in every state — at the very least in time for the November general election.  “Wisconsin is a messy dress rehearsal for what will happen in November if we don’t act,” said McGrath.  This effort is being spearheaded in the Senate by Sens. Klobuchar and Ron Wyden (D-OR), and House Democrats are also eager to enact reforms. Klobuchar and Wyden helped secure $400 million in Congress’s recent coronavirus emergency funding package to help states start or expand their vote-by-mail capacity. Each state will get at least $3 million.  But the two senators want to take that much further by requiring that states set up contingency plans for voting by mail before the fall election, giving voters more choice and flexibility, and recruiting younger poll workers to protect older folks who volunteer at the polls. That could take each state anywhere from $2 billion to $4 billion to do well, experts estimate. Wisconsin could be a critical moment for the senators to make their case for voting-by-mail reforms a matter of serious urgency, Klobuchar told Vox. With multiple governors of both parties looking for an alternative, she hopes it will convince congressional Republicans to make changes.  “I think this could be a game changer for reforming some of our election systems,” she said. “It’s not the game changer we wanted.” Despite the backing of officials from both parties on the state level, congressional Republicans — and President Donald Trump — have staunchly opposed the effort. They’ve argued that it could open the door to election fraud and weaken Republicans’ ability to win. “You’d never have a Republican elected in this country again,” Trump said recently of a Democratic effort that pushed voting by mail. “Some have made very clear that they are concerned that increased voting affects their candidacies, which says a lot,” says Vanita Gupta, the president of the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights.  Klobuchar and Wyden are pushing that more money to expand voting by mail be put into the next coronavirus funding package Congress will consider in the coming weeks. But Burden says Wisconsin shows they need buy-in from state lawmakers of both parties for it to really work. “Republicans generally don’t want the federal government to get involved at all,” Burden said. “There’s a huge set of things that have to happen behind the scenes to make it possible. States are going in that direction, there’s just going to be a lot of variability in how far they go and how successful they are in pulling it off.” There is something deeply frightening about relying on billionaires to save us in this crisis. But what if we have no better choice? The US government has repeatedly proven to be sluggish at best and impotent at worst at controlling the carnage of the coronavirus crisis. American deaths are now over 10,000, officials are comparing this week to 9/11 and Pearl Harbor, and at times it can feel like there are no leaders who can help. But saviors, of a sort, loom: billionaires — and tech billionaires in particular. Tech billionaires dominate the list of the world’s wealthiest people. And so Silicon Valley could not be better prepared to step into this void. And it has, even if unevenly. Jack Dorsey on Tuesday promised a new $1 billion philanthropy. Apple has donated 20 million masks. Bill Gates is building factories to produce vaccines that don’t even exist yet. And other tech elites — think millionaires, not billionaires — have mobilized their networks for ambitious efforts to find equipment from around the globe or feed hospital workers in their hometowns. But for all the wealthy’s good deeds, this status quo raises alarming questions about the long-term dangers of this dependency on this private sector and its generosity, especially about the world we’ll inherit once the dust settles. How can we be stronger the next time a pandemic, or any other crisis, strikes? In conversations with philanthropists, wealth advisers, and billionaires over the last week, they described the uneasy bind to Recode: On one hand, tech billionaires are doing many helpful things. A nurse on the front lines of the crisis probably couldn’t care less whether the mask that protects them came from Tim Cook or from Donald Trump — they’re just glad they have one. But two things can be true at once: Tech billionaires can be doing good while simultaneously revealing their power and entrenching it for the long haul. As the government struggles and the safety net crumbles, tech billionaires are reaching the apex of their influence — influence that may not recede so easily once we do manage to survive this pandemic. “If we need the resources now but we’ll regret them having this power later,” asked Megan Tompkins-Stange, who studies the influence of the elite, “what does it mean for immediate suffering at the moment?” “We do need billionaires to donate their resources when a state has failed so abjectly,” she told Recode. “At the same time, opening up all these avenues for philanthropies to provide for the public need — even in the short term — provides more space for them after the crisis to leverage that into new democratic legitimacy.” There are four interrelated spheres in which tech billionaires have commanded more plutocratic influence during this crisis: their philanthropic power, their corporate power, their political power, and the power of their personal brands. We are living in their world more than ever, and it’s worth asking if that’s a good thing. Over the past year or two, the world of billionaires has wrestled with a fresh, counterintuitive question: Is it wrong for the megarich to give to charity? After all, they could just pay more in taxes instead. But today’s crisis has laid bare how much we might need these billionaires in a specific moment: when the government is failing. And since philanthropists can only do so much, critics say that the crisis points to problems with our system more broadly — and that the US shouldn’t have to rely on charitable billionaires for masks or ventilators next time. “Philanthropy is taking on a greater portion of the responsibility for response than anyone expected,” said Dustin Moskovitz, a co-founder of Facebook and one of Silicon Valley’s most thoughtful billionaire philanthropists. “Unfortunately, I think it’s clear to anyone closely following the situation today that philanthropy simply can’t solve this crisis on its own.” That’s true despite the number of Silicon Valley billionaires whose net worths have skyrocketed over the past decade. Some of them are so wealthy that even if they want to give their money away, they literally cannot dispense their fortunes quickly enough. This has fueled the rise of charitable vehicles like donor-advised funds and thinned the line between a billionaire and an asset manager: Both are overseeing vast financial empires. Advisers to tech billionaires, in particular, describe a paralysis: The nouveau riche don’t even know what to do with the money so they stow it away to be tapped later. And yet the critique of billionaire philanthropy revolves around the idea that these donations are an expression of private power. Indeed, philanthropists like Moskovitz are some of the most important people in determining the shape of America’s response to an unprecedented crisis. They are imbued with unaccountable, untransparent, and undemocratic influence. Power grabs can happen. And their donations can legitimize the philanthropists as heroes, which can discourage scrutiny of their business practices. But that general theory misses two things about this particular moment: First of all, while the donations certainly do offer a public-relations boon, much of the current philanthropic response — for pandemic models, for vaccine research, or for feeding the hungry — are not directly emboldening billionaires’ short-term grip on society, although questions about their taxes remain. And secondly, this critique can overgeneralize the entire philanthropic response to the crisis by focusing solely on top-down efforts from billionaires. Even if you hypothetically believe that the rich should be taxed at a much higher rate and that democratic leaders, not billionaires, should be the ones making funding decisions, it is not as though the tax code is going to be rewritten right now. So in an emergency and with the government failing, you would certainly rather have, say, $25 million from Mark Zuckerberg for therapeutics research than not. The money donated by Zuckerberg or Gates or Moskovitz very well might save lives.  “Although I think concerns about the private sector and philanthropy doing what the government is supposed to be doing are somewhat valid, there isn’t a great alternative right now,” wrote Sam Altman, the former head of Y Combinator, on his blog as part of a plea for more private science funding. Defenders of billionaire philanthropy often point to people like Gates, who is spending his fortune to create manufacturing capacity for seven possible different vaccines. Admirers say they would rather have Gates deploying his billions on that, rather than have him pay a few more tax dollars that would be lost in the federal bureaucracy. That may be true, but it also gives him some indirect influence: Who elected Gates to be in charge of America’s vaccine production plan, even if he is savvily spending his money? The millions that Steve Ballmer has contributed to support communities in three particular cities close to his heart — Detroit, Los Angeles, and Seattle — will help, and so will the $100 million that Jeff Bezos is sending to food banks around the US, but who beyond them decided that these are the best uses of America’s resources?  Even Anand Giridharadas, among the most strident critics of billionaire megacharity, thinks the gifts are welcome in an emergency. But he argues we still have to continue to ask questions about how we grew so dependent on them in the first place. “We are now awash in press releases and narratives about billionaires stepping up. And there’s a little bit of a ‘How do you like them billions?’ thing happening. Where because this is such a desperate, urgent, fast-moving moment, there is the ability of very rich people to act quickly and step into the breach and do stuff in a way that feels redemptive to many people, even though I think we should be more suspicious,” Giridharadas told Recode. “While as a normal human being you celebrate someone buying a lot of masks quickly and donating them where an American state might take longer to get that done,” he explained, “it’s really important to ask why the crisis has hit us the way it has and the weaknesses it’s exposed. ... A lot of those people stepping up are responsible for the underlying conditions of weakness.” To Giridharadas, the real “stepping up” would come from billionaires renouncing the use of loopholes to evade taxes that weaken government’s revenue and ability to respond, to halt their use of offshore manufacturing that has hamstrung our domestic inventory of things like masks, and to campaign for a stronger social safety net with programs like universal health care. “When you are talking about people dying on a minute-to-minute basis, there has to be some space to say, ‘Can we talk about this afterward?’ But I want to be very clear, given where I come from: We actually have to talk about it afterward,” Giridharadas said. ”I don’t think it is unkind to note those things while we are, as a society, taking some of their money.” Secondly, not all donors are so easy to caricature as the critics suggest. It isn’t as though all of the people “stepping up” are power-hungry billionaires. In fact, some billionaires aren’t exerting power with their philanthropy for a different reason — because they’re not publicly doing much giving at all. Jeff Richards, a venture capitalist, feels the conversation about Silicon Valley plutocratic power can be too focused on billionaires and can overlook efforts by ordinary tech leaders who are wealthy, yes, but hardly titans, such as efforts organized by another investor, Ryan Sarver, and former Twitter CEO Dick Costolo, to sponsor meals or restaurants. “There’s no agenda. Neither of them are trying to build influence or build an empire or curry favor with politicians or anything like that,” Richards said. “I’m probably naive in that I believe that most of the things people do are from the goodness in their heart.” And a related point: It might not be the case that billionaires are even donating as much as we think, which ironically means they aren’t grabbing as much influence along the way as we might fear. Some of the most prominent tech billionaires, such as Google founders Sergey Brin and Larry Page, have so far proven to be MIA, at least publicly, amid the crisis. Representatives of the pair, who together control over $100 billion in assets, didn’t return requests for comment. And the gifts announced by people like Zuckerberg and Bezos are often astonishingly small percentages of their net worth, as critics on the left are quick to point out. Still, it’s hard to know for sure. In the opaque, atomized world of philanthropy, it is always possible that donors are making major gifts that they don’t announce. Activists worry that all this philanthropy could have an unintended — or perhaps perfectly intended — consequence: Political insulation for these billionaires’ corporations. These good deeds could slow the building bipartisan scrutiny of these companies’ size, labor practices, and data scandals. It’s not as self-evident that big tech companies will come out of this with enhanced reputations — these companies could be on a path to ugly scrutiny over how they treat low-level employees, for instance. But some are concerned that Big Tech, after years on the defensive, will be able to “charity-wash” their reputations and build corporate goodwill through redemptive, headline-grabbing donations that help lower the temperature on, say, breaking up the tech companies at the end of this. Big Tech’s billionaire class will have more power after the crisis than they had before, argues Sally Hubbard of the Open Market Institute. Brick-and-mortar retail is hemorrhaging jobs at a time when Amazon is adding hundreds of thousands of their own. Google is gaining even more of a foothold in the home as educators across the country deploy Google Classroom to teach students remotely — whether you want your family to use it or not. Officials, among others, from California Gov. Gavin Newsom to Vice President Mike Pence have repeatedly gone out of their way to offer thanks for the generosity of Cook and Zuckerberg — corporate leaders that they themselves will need to regulate for years to come.  Freada Kapor Klein, a tech philanthropist herself who worries deeply about tech philanthropists’ power, said she had applauded, for instance, the specifics of the two largest non-corporate gifts before Tuesday, the $100 million that Jeff Bezos and Bill Gates have each donated to charity. But she’s not naive. “It enhances their legacy, their standing, the way to which they are revered. And sometimes that makes it harder to hold them accountable,” she said. “It’s not a critique of this gift or of them as individuals. It is a critique of the dynamic.” At the very least, the pandemic is surely blotting out competing policy debates. After all, it is hard to focus on almost-academic concerns about tech monopolies amid tales of unprepared hospitals with rising body counts. And yet Hubbard hopes questions about tech power will return either way.  “As one crisis comes and destroys so many people’s livelihoods, they’re going to say, ‘Wait, why were these the only companies that were strong enough to weather this?’” she said.  Linked to billionaires’ corporate power is their political power. This crisis has shown how tech billionaires have been able to leave their imprint on American policy. After years of building muscular lobbying operations around the globe, some billionaires are wielding and deploying that influence to push their points of view. Take Larry Ellison. The founder of Oracle and one of the world’s wealthiest people, Ellison surprised many in Silicon Valley this February when he hosted a fundraiser for Trump that raised $7 million for his campaign, an event that undoubtedly strengthened Ellison’s ties with the White House. That fundraiser followed years of Oracle’s Washington shop fostering particularly close ties with the administration. Just one month later, Ellison was reportedly calling upon those ties to the administration to lobby Trump to push two unproven antimalarial drugs, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, as possible treatments for the coronavirus. And that can be problematic for the rest of us — who don’t have lobbying operations or estates to host presidential fundraisers. Trump in recent days has begun pushing from the White House briefing room that Americans should take chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, which some doctors say could cause severe side effects and have little evidence of efficacy. “My concern is when Donald Trump calls up Larry Ellison and says, ‘Hey, what do you think? What should I do?’ Because Larry Ellison is, again, not an infectious disease expert,” said Tompkins-Stange. “Larry Ellison is not accountable to a public that voted for him.” To be sure, Tompkins-Stange said she wasn’t yet aware of other overt ways in which tech elites were undemocratically shaping US policy. There aren’t exactly press releases about this sort of stuff. But Ellison’s relationship with Trump offers a case study in how tech billionaires could use their wealth to create political power going forward. “Larry Ellison,” Trump said Sunday from the briefing room. “Amazing guy.” And then there is billionaires’ brand influence — unquantifiable, yes, but universally recognized. In short: When they speak, we listen. Billionaires have for decades been our oracles and our rock stars, gracing gushing magazine covers, pacing commencement stages, selling how-to-get-rich-too books to the masses, and, more broadly, turning their money into cultural cachet. And during a crisis — when people are so desperate for trustworthy information — these billionaires have filled the void, deploying their celebrity and credibility to try to spread good information. Some tech leaders, in fact, were among the earliest to sound the alarm about the risk of a global pandemic when the coronavirus was only spreading within China. Despite all that good in the short term, this crisis could give these billionaires far greater influence in public life as our so-called thought leaders over the long term, enhancing the size of their platforms and the tenor of their reputations on matters far afield from tech. It is Gates who has emerged as by far the most visible tech leader during this crisis. At a time when representatives for other tech billionaires are evading questions about what their bosses are doing in response, Gates has been seemingly everywhere, offering sober, apolitical analysis. Commanding 30 minutes in primetime on CNN. Offering solutions in the Washington Post and on The Daily Show. On Reddit AMAs and TED livestreams. “At a time like this, we are searching for that kind of calm, clear leadership. Bill has been very consistent in his voice on these issues,” said Jeff Raikes, the former CEO of the Gates Foundation and still a close associate of Gates. “In a vacuum, then people like Bill [resonate more] if we don’t have that clarity of voice from our political leaders.” Along with Gates, tech’s biggest celebrities have generally used their platforms and personal brands to draw attention to the crisis (with the exception of Elon Musk, who initially called it “dumb.”) Zuckerberg, for instance, has been hosting smart, responsible interviews on Facebook Live with people like Newsom and National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Director Anthony Fauci. Marc Benioff has used his megaphone to call on other CEOs to promise no major layoffs for three months and for other mayors to lock down their cities. While some would like to see these billionaires be more confrontational toward Trump, it’s hard to criticize all that they have done. If tech leaders had an outsized voice in America before this crisis — they did, after all, invent some of the platforms — their brands have only been enhanced by it.  As is the case with their enhancement of their philanthropic, corporate, and political power, the question here to consider is: What is the alternative? It is understandable to be concerned about the enhanced influence of Silicon Valley’s wealthiest, but is that more concerning than the people who might die if its leaders didn’t make megadonations, expand their company’s reach, or use their voice to speak to their followers? If the powerful exerting their power to save lives brings them more power, there’s an argument to be made in three words: So be it. But there is a trade-off there that shouldn’t surprise us when this crisis is over and we see tech billionaires standing taller than ever in the rubble. “We’re in a situation where we’re both more reliant on the government than we’ve ever been,” said Richards, “but we’re also more reliant on the private sector than we’ve ever been.” And at the end of this, our society may be more unequal, too.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The US Navy’s top civilian official has resigned, the latest fallout from the ongoing controversy surrounding the Navy’s handling of a coronavirus outbreak on the naval ship USS Theodore Roosevelt.  Acting Navy Secretary Thomas Modly handed in his resignation on Tuesday, which Defense Secreatry Mark Esper accepted.  “With a heavy heart, I hereby submit my resignation, effective immediately,” Modly wrote in his resignation letter. “The men and women of the Department of the Navy deserve a continuity of civilian leadership befitting our great Republic, and the decisive naval force that secures our way of life. I will be forever grateful for my opportunity, and the blessing, to be part of it.” The decision comes just one day after he defended calling Capt. Brett Crozier — the now-fired commander of USS Theodore Roosevelt — “stupid” for having sent a letter to superiors about a Covid-19 outbreak aboard his ship, which leaked to the press.  In a Sunday speech to USS Theodore Roosevelt’s 4,000 crew members, Modly blasted Crozier, who has himself tested positive for the coronavirus. “If he didn’t think, in my opinion, that this information wasn’t going to get out into the public, in this day and information age that we live in, then he was either A, too naive, or too stupid to be a commanding officer of a ship like this,” Modly said, according to a leaked recording.  After the contents of his speech leaked on Monday, Modly put out a statement saying, “I stand by every word I said, even, regrettably any profanity that may have been used for emphasis.” But just hours later, under pressure from Pentagon leadership, Modly apologized in yet another statement: “Let me be clear, I do not think Captain Brett Crozier is naive nor stupid.” The about-face caused top Democrats, including Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi, to push for Modly to step down, turning a military matter into a much larger political one. Even President Donald Trump at one point insinuated he might step in to help with the situation. Esper has appointed Army Undersecretary Jim McPherson as the new acting Navy secretary shortly, though he praised Modly’s decision. “He resigned on his own accord,” Esper wrote in a letter he tweeted out on Tuesday afternoon, “putting the Navy and the Sailor above self so that the U.S.S. Theodore Roosevelt, and the Navy as an institution, can move forward.”  This morning I accepted Secretary Modly's resignation.  With the approval of the President, I am appointing current Army Undersecretary Jim McPherson as acting Secretary of the Navy. pic.twitter.com/FvfgOwuXw4 Crozier sent the four-page letter to Navy officials on March 30 because he was dissatisfied with the measures the service took to protect his sailors after they started testing positive for Covid-19 on the USS Theodore Roosevelt, the nuclear-powered aircraft carrier under his command.  After three sailors were medically evacuated from the carrier, which has a crew of nearly 5,000, Crozier wrote the missive that called for the Navy to act more aggressively. He asked for 90 percent of the crew to be removed so that they could be tested and quarantined properly, and so the ship could be disinfected. CNN’s Ryan Browne reports this process is now underway — half of the ship’s crew have been tested (with 155 confirmed cases as of April 5) and nearly 2,000 sailors have been taken off the carrier. In his letter, Crozier argued for such measures because he felt there was inadequate space aboard for social distancing, and that the spread of the disease was “accelerating” despite earlier evacuations. “[W]e are not at war, and therefore cannot allow a single Sailor to perish as a result of this pandemic unnecessarily,” Crozier wrote. “Decisive action is required now in order to comply with CDC and (Navy) guidance and prevent tragic outcomes.” Crozier sent the message via an unclassified email to Navy officials, copying around 20 or 30 individuals. It’s unclear who exactly was copied on the email, but eventually the letter was leaked and appeared in the San Francisco Chronicle. Initially, it looked as though Crozier might not be punished or fired. Statements from Chief of Naval Operations Adm. Michael Gilday and Modly suggested they were unhappy about the leak but that Crozier would keep his command. “I don’t know who leaked the letter to the media — that would be something that would violate the principles of good order if he were responsible for that, but I don’t know that,” Modly said on Wednesday. “The fact that he wrote the letter to his chain of command to express his concerns would absolutely not result in any type of retaliation.” He also said that the letter was something “we want our commanding officers to be able to do.” But the next day, Modly said that Crozier had shown “poor judgment” by sending his letter through email which was not secure to up to 30 people, and that his immediate superior on the ship was not among them. “I could reach no other conclusion than that Capt. Crozier had allowed the complexity of his challenge with the Covid outbreak on his ship to overwhelm his ability to act professionally, when acting professionally was what was needed most at the time,” Modly told reporters on Thursday.  It’s unclear if Trump’s reported desire for Crozier to be fired influenced decision-making for Modly, who is a political appointee. It is certainly possible that Modly’s overall assessment of the propriety of the situation was incomplete when he initially spoke to reporters.   However the decision was arrived at, when Crozier was dismissed, sailors aboard the USS Theodore Roosevelt gave him a raucous send-off with cheers and singing to show their appreciation of his efforts on their behalf. Here is Captain Crozier walking away from his ship while sailors chant his name after he was relieved from duty for blowing the whistle on a coronavirus contamination aboard the USS Roosevelt.He sacrificed himself and it sounds like everyone knows it. pic.twitter.com/hwiu7Z1MVV Modly’s argument for relieving Crozier of his command is that he violated the chain of command and didn’t abide by security protocols when communicating his grievances.  It’s also possible that Trump — who has routinely fired people in the federal government whom he perceives as disloyal and has intervened in the military’s justice system in a manner that’s highly unusual for presidents — could have played some role behind the scenes. When the president spoke on Saturday, he implied it might be Crozier’s fault that Covid-19 broke out on the ship after it stopped over in Vietnam, even though the stop was pre-scheduled by the regional command. “I guess the captain stopped in Vietnam and people got off in Vietnam,” Trump said. “Perhaps you don’t do that in the middle of a pandemic or — or something that looked like it was going to be — you know, history would say you don’t necessarily stop and let your sailors get off.” Trump also excoriated the letter as inappropriate. “I thought it was terrible what he did to write a letter. I mean, this isn’t a class on literature,” he said. But many experts, former military officials, and top Democrats disagree with Trump’s criticisms of Crozier.  According to the Washington Post, half a dozen former top Navy officials said in interviews that “Modly’s intervention was a mistake that they feared would have a chilling effect on commanders and encourage them to suppress bad news that might upset political leaders.” “I think the firing was a really bad decision, because it undermines the authority of the military commanders who are trying to take care of their troops, and significantly negatively impacts the willingness of commanders to speak truth to power,” retired Adm. Mike Mullen, the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told the Post. John Kirby, a retired rear admiral in the US Navy and security analyst for CNN, wrote that Crozier is “guilty of a process foul” in the way he failed to send out his letter over a secure network and didn’t include his immediate boss. But Kirby argued that he ultimately doesn’t consider these errors sufficient cause for being dismissed from a post. “[W]e’ve seen no evidence that others in Crozier’s chain of command were similarly bypassed or even surprised by its contents,” Kirby wrote in his analysis for CNN. “We’ve seen no evidence that he sent a ‘blast-out email’ to everyone he knows. And we’ve seen no public evidence that Crozier leaked the email to the media or was even aware that it had been provided to the San Francisco Chronicle.” “We’ve seen none of this evidence, because either Modly would not share those details or because he does not possess them,” Kirby added. Kirby argues it would’ve been more fair to let an investigation take place before taking action. Declining to do so, he said, is both a distraction for sailors and “sends a horrible message to other commanding officers about the degree to which they can be candid about their efforts to stop the spread of coronavirus in their units.” Top Democrats on the House Armed Services Committee agree, and released a joint statement arguing that Crozier’s chain-of-command offense didn’t merit a move that suggests instability or insecurity in the armed forces.   “While Captain Crozier clearly went outside the chain of command, his dismissal at this critical moment — as the sailors aboard the U.S.S. Theodore Roosevelt are confronted with the COVID-19 pandemic — is a destabilizing move that will likely put our service members at greater risk and jeopardize our fleet’s readiness,” the committee’s Democratic leadership said in a statement.  “Captain Crozier was justifiably concerned about the health and safety of his crew, but he did not handle the immense pressure appropriately. However, relieving him of his command is an overreaction,” the statement continued. Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden was even more frank about the matter: “I think it’s close to criminal the way they’re dealing with this guy,” he said on ABC’s This Week on Sunday. “I think he should have a commendation rather than be fired.”The White House’s coronavirus press briefing on the afternoon of Saturday, April 4, was grueling to watch. It lasted more than 90 minutes, and much of it was dominated by President Trump making the same handful of statements, worded only slightly differently, over and over and over. (At one point, he said “We have to open our country again” so many times, I thought he might be stuck.) And the briefings since then have been no different. At Monday’s briefing, Trump hit many of the same themes, particularly his favorite: how awful the media is.  What I noticed throughout Saturday’s presentation was how little new information Trump had to offer. He kept repeating his favorite talking points from the entirety of this ordeal — including that an unproven drug could be the magic bullet to take down Covid-19, that maybe churches should open up for Easter Sunday, and yet another gentle gibe about how Mike Pence doesn’t seem to be sleeping a lot. (In his treatment of Pence, he reminds me a lot of the worst boss I’ve ever had, a man who would learn one tiny detail about each of his employees, then relentlessly riff on that detail for as long as they might work for him.) There were a few newer snippets within Trump’s stream-of-consciousness ramble. He said there’s going to be “a lot of death” in the country this week, and he went on a long tangent where he named all the heads of major American sports leagues.  But even when Trump was saying nominally new things, I couldn’t shake the feeling that I’d heard all of this before. And then I realized the best possible comparison point for his performance on Saturday and at every other press conference: a clip show. The much-derided “clip show” is an episode of a TV series that stitches together clips from past episodes, usually with a loose framing device — the Simpson family, for example, sitting around and reminiscing about old times.  Clip shows are basically never good, but they’re often a budgetary necessity. (A notable exception: the fun “fake” clip shows produced by programs like the animated Clerks series and Community, which feature the characters remembering adventures the audience had never gotten to see. But fake clip shows tend to be incredibly expensive, so they don’t have the one benefit of a traditional clip show.) In TV seasons with 22 episodes or more, a clip show is a good way for a series to give everyone involved a light workweek and to save money by not hiring guest stars or building new sets. If 15 to 18 minutes of a 21-minute running time is taken up by previously aired footage, you can see how putting together a clip show would amount to a much-needed break during a taxing production schedule. Bearing that in mind, it’s easy to imagine a press briefing where Trump might say something like, “Remember that time I said we had to open up our country again?” before looking off to the side as that clip played, so everybody could remember the time he said just that. In many ways, it would accomplish the same function as his current press briefings, and better underline whatever new information he has to share. This vague clip show feel is the natural consequence of Trump’s insistence on doing near-daily briefings that play into his love of high ratings. There won’t be new information on the coronavirus every single day, beyond updating the number of confirmed cases and number of deaths. But if Trump is going to fill airtime, he needs something to talk about. Hence, the repetition, the restatement, the sense that we’ve heard him cover all the same ground many times before. (Another comparison to draw here might be to cable news networks and the 24-hour news cycle, where anchors are forced to talk a lot, even when they don’t have any new developments to share. Yet on a cable news network, anchors can interview experts or people affected by the pandemic. They can show footage from beleaguered hospitals, or they can talk about other stories in the news. Trump keeps recycling the same material.) This monotony might be alleviated if Trump were an esteemed virologist with a unique understanding of infectious diseases. (I know, I know.) It might even be alleviated if he turned over the podium more often to Dr. Anthony Fauci or even to Pence. I don’t know what, precisely, Pence could say that we haven’t already heard, but at least watching him speak would be something different. Trump has occasionally tried this strategy, as when MyPillow founder Mike Lindell offered a brief statement on how God had blessed America by making Trump our president at a press conference in March. But these guest spots rarely last long. To let someone else become the center of attention for too long runs counter to everything Trump knows how to do.  So he talks and talks and talks, and he barely says anything new, but at least there’s very little dead air. If there’s one thing Trump knows television can’t abide, it’s dead air.  
    Related
   My guess is that the monotonous repetition is starting to hurt Trump more than it’s helping him, and indeed, his poll numbers are starting to slump. As Trump keeps repeating the same things, the disconnect between his clip show press briefings and the increasingly dire situation of the country grows ever wider. A clip show might be an occasional necessity during a TV show’s run, but a season made up entirely of them would probably exhaust the patience of even the most forgiving viewer. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Covid-19 deaths in the US have risen dramatically, and experts warn the coming days and weeks will be extremely grim. “This is going to be the hardest and the saddest week of most Americans’ lives, quite frankly,” US Surgeon General Jerome Adams said on Fox News Sunday. After failing to avert the Covid-19 crisis or offering a coherent response or plan to end it, the Trump administration is resigned to a prediction of 100,000 or more total deaths from the coronavirus. As of April 7, there were nearly 11,000 reported deaths nationwide, and many experts say that’s actually an undercount. A steep rise is now expected, particularly in hot spots like New York, New Jersey, Louisiana, and Michigan.  Hospitals in these states are rapidly approaching capacity as they see a surge of patients who were infected weeks ago, before social distancing measures were ordered or followed. (Data from China published in The Lancet shows that for those who lost their lives to the disease, the average time between the onset of symptoms and death was 18.5 days, with a range of 15 to 22 days.) Some hospitals in these hot spots are now running short on critical equipment and staff, some of whom are home sick after being infected.  Yet the focus on the current numbers and long-range predictions may obscure something else: that the United States still has an opportunity to save thousands, even tens of thousands, of lives in the coming days, weeks, and months.  To do so, experts say, the US has to continue to slow down the rate of transmission by staying home: flattening the curve with social distancing to relieve the pressure on the health care system. Flattening the curve reduces the burden by keeping the peak of hospitalizations (and potential deaths) lower and more spread out so that resources aren’t overwhelmed. In Washington state and California, there are already some early signs the curve has been flattened. But to save more lives nationwide, experts say America must also raise the capacity of the health care system at lightning speed so there’s more lifesaving care for the patients who will develop severe Covid-19 illness in the coming weeks and months. Though 42 out of 50 states now have stay-at-home orders, experts worry that many people were infected before they were imposed, and others will be infected because they can’t, or won’t, follow the guidance. Most people are now familiar with the chart that Vox (and others) published in early March of flattening the curve. We’ve created a new one to illustrate “raising the line” with the help of Kumar Rajaram, a professor of operations and technology management at the UCLA Anderson School of Management: Several others have independently made similar arguments and created charts to raise awareness of this concept using the hashtags #raisethebar and #raisetheline: #FlatteningTheCurve by #SocialDistancing isn't enough. We must also #RaiseTheBar by increasing healthcare system capacityHow? An immediate, massive whole-of-country response, mobilizing all of America's manufacturing, logistical & personnel capability. #DefenseProductionActNOW pic.twitter.com/TGW2wdbNyy Because this is such an important message, I made a 20-second video summary of the @OsmosisMed piece echoing some ways to #FlattenTheCurve & #RaiseTheLine (w/ a few additional bits). And thank you to all these creative educators- your efforts mean more than ever these days! [4/4] pic.twitter.com/bigzNtFwck And representing the #covidcrew goal visually..   #FlattenTheCurve #RaiseTheLine   https://t.co/UUo3KrcUWe pic.twitter.com/YWooyi1R3c Increasing capacity doesn’t just mean more masks, beds, ventilators, or medicines for the 20 percent of cases expected to require hospitalization. It also means diverting resources to the least-resourced areas, training more staff to work in the ICU, and ramping up telemedicine for non-Covid patients to free up beds. Smaller cities and rural areas where hospitals and clinics have far less capacity are in desperate need of this kind of support. Raising the line requires an extraordinarily rapid mobilization of resources (humans, money, and equipment), ingenuity and flexibility, and leadership and coordination. It’s on all of us: the federal, state, and local government; the military; hospital leaders and staff; the private sector; and even the general public to support our hospital staff now.  While some hospitals, like the University of Washington Medical Center, have found ways to increase capacity in time for the surge and save lives in the process, others are reaching the worst-case scenario of scarce resources that force them to ration care. Hospitals in future hot spots could easily reach this stage, too — with many more lives lost as a consequence — without immediate support and coordination with other institutions and the government. 
    Related
   “The institutions that are really faltering are city hospitals and municipal hospitals,” said an emergency medicine doctor in New York City who asked that his name be withheld because his hospital forbade him from speaking with the media. “They don’t have the funding of private institutions to increase capacity.” The same doctor is also gravely worried about the limited number of experienced pulmonologists to treat the most critical cases. “There’s a lot of discussion of ventilators, and I hope there’s enough momentum to meet demand. My concern is we’re not focusing on other nitty-gritty details: shortages of ventilator medications and critical care personnel,” he said. “If the only pulmonologists at the hospital get sick, this is going cost a lot of lives.” The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation in Seattle has developed a series of models to gauge the capacity of the health care system to handle the surge in cases expected in the coming days and weeks. (IHME’s model is one of many academic models trying to estimate how the pandemic will play out; none can predict the future, all should be read with the understanding there’s still a lot of uncertainty.) One IHME model, which is updated daily with data from around the country, predicts that resource use — when the most hospital beds, ICU beds, and ventilators will be needed — for New York state will peak April 8, and that the nationwide peak will come on April 15. It also shows that there are still significant national shortfalls: As of April 7, there was a shortage of 36,654 hospital beds, 16,323 ICU beds, and 24,828 ventilators.  That huge shortfall also influences the model’s estimate of total US deaths by August — about 82,000 as of April 7. So we asked Ali Mokdad, a professor at IHME and chief strategy officer for population health at the University of Washington who is working on the models, whether this means many doctors will have to choose which patients get a ventilator — the deadlier, worst-case scenario — because of scarce resources.  “I think we can come up with the beds and ventilators we need, and I think this country has the resources to do it,” Mokdad said. “I know for instance that the same ventilator is being used on multiple patients. Our physicians are becoming very creative. I am really hoping we can still avoid the peak by more people staying at home.” He added that raising the line has to extend past the peak. “We are all concerned about the peak right now, but we should also be concerned after the peak, how we can reallocate resources,” he said. “Let’s avoid the peak, but also one week after let’s make sure we can provide the best medical care possible then for those who need it.” That won’t just involve moving equipment and supplies around the country but also transporting patients from overwhelmed hospitals to ones with more space and staff. Mokdad notes that he’s inspired by the rapid increase in capacity he’s seen at his own hospital at the University of Washington; the state was the country’s first hot spot after the first US case and death were reported there. With more time fighting Covid-19 than anywhere else in the US, its lessons from preparing for its resource-use peak could help others, too.  Many hospitals are rapidly trying to build up capacity so they can handle a coming surge in Covid-19 patients. They have to do this now because the US entered this crisis behind a lot of other countries in some important respects. The US has fewer hospital beds, fewer doctors, and fewer nurses per capita than other rich countries. It’s quickly run low on protective masks and gear that help keep health care staff safe and healthy and able to keep working. States are already setting up field hospitals (like tents in Central Park) and converting existing buildings (like dormitories) into temporary medical facilities. That is a necessary step just to make sure there are enough beds for Covid-19 patients, and to keep other patients routed away from the hospital to prevent further infection. New York state has taken the extraordinary step of organizing all of its hospitals into one gigantic system overseen by the state government. Doctors and nurses from less affected areas upstate could be transferred to downstate hospitals. Patients could also be shuffled around, moved from overcrowded hospitals to those with open beds. This plan comes with plenty of logistical challenges — funding, most of all — but the goal is to lift the line for NYC facilities and slow the outbreak there in the hope that hospitals elsewhere in New York will never see as high a peak as New York City did. 
    Related
   “It’s to everyone’s benefit to work together to try to get people healthy,” Karen Joynt Maddox, co-director of the Center for Health Economics and Policy at Institute for Public Health at Washington University in St. Louis, said. “It’s bad for everyone else in New York state if the epidemic doesn’t get contained in NYC, economically and from a health perspective. It’s actually bad for the country, too, of course.” Hospitals are also making key changes internally. At the University of Washington, Mokdad said they canceled elective surgeries and called in doctors who are retired to help. Recovery rooms have been converted into ICU rooms, and beds were brought out of storage.  “We feel such plans have really helped us with the medical response,” Mokdad said. “And we did the same thing for the county and the next-door county, and also diverted resources to Harbor View Hospital, which we were concerned about. It serves our prisons and the homeless.” Manufacturing more supplies like ventilators, masks, and gloves — another key element of raising the line — isn’t easy, exactly, but it’s no mystery how the US can do it: by reengineering America’s immense manufacturing power to focus on the current crisis.  Ford is refitting its car assembly lines to produce ventilators, 3M is ramping up its production of protective masks, and so forth. If President Donald Trump fully exploits the powers of the Defense Production Act, the path to more medical supplies is pretty clear. So far, he’s been mostly reluctant, but he has the authority to make some big moves if only he had the will. But the US doesn’t just need to make the supplies, it needs to get them to the workers who need them. Ad hoc efforts like Project N95 are trying to coordinate between those who have protective masks and other lifesaving equipment to give and those who need such reinforcements. As Ingrid Burrington recently wrote for Vox, the gray market for medical gear reflects a failure of US medical supply chains and the government’s inability thus far to fix them: It’s possible this ad hoc market will dissipate as quickly as it formed when supply for N95s evens out; it’s also possible that the vacuum of government action to make mass purchases or jump-start domestic manufacturing by using the Defense Production Act will mean these informal efforts will be filling a void for weeks or even months to come. While the wherewithal, generosity, and determination of many of these efforts is incredibly inspiring, the fact that such a massive grassroots effort has to exist at all speaks to how weak medical supply chains already were before this crisis — and, unless they’re radically changed, how likely they are to break again in the future.  So America can build more ventilators and make more protective masks. Then it has to distribute them where they’re needed. With a Trump administration that sometimes seems vindictive toward states whose leaders criticize the president, that’s easier said than done.  Some states have said they aren’t getting enough equipment from the federal government, with New York recently relying on donations of ventilators from another state and a major Chinese company. The Washington Post reports that the Trump administration could end up giving Florida and other states favorable to him politically whatever they say they need. But expanding the US health system’s capacity also requires increasing the number of people working to support it. America needs to make sure there are enough specialists to treat the most difficult cases during the surge. Doctors and nurses are getting sick. We saw it happen in Italy and Spain, where medical staff account for 10 percent or more of their Covid-19 cases, and we’re starting to see it here. These two issues, staffing and supplies, are interrelated. More protective gear hopefully means more physicians and nurses. Every ventilator needs somebody trained to operate it. But doctors and nurses across the country don’t feel like they are being protected right now, with lax protocols potentially exposing them to infection and requiring them to take time off when they are most needed. As an internal medicine physician at one of the major New York City hospitals previously told Vox: “My frustration is that I have never felt like my safety is important,” this physician said. “When I’m going to work, I could endanger me and my family and I feel like my institution doesn’t even care at all.” “I think one of the biggest limiting factors is staffing,” Cynthia Cox, who directs the Peterson-Kaiser Health System Tracker, told Vox. “We might be able to increase staffing by bringing back retirees and allowing early graduation from medical and nursing schools. But it’s equally likely staffing numbers could fall as nurses and doctors are exposed to the virus and fall ill or need to be quarantined.” States are already taking action. New York has put out a call for retired doctors to volunteer their services. California Gov. Gavin Newsom is trying to build up a California Health Corps, calling on all kinds of retired doctors and non-MDs or RNs who work in the health space or are already training for it — medical residents, pharmacists, nursing students, paramedics, EMTs, and more — to sign up and be placed where they are needed as the virus spreads. Newsom told the Los Angeles Times that he thought the state could recruit as many as 37,000 health care workers through the program. But the big question is, would that be enough?  Well, let’s do some crude math. Spain has about 450,000 doctors and nurses. As of March 27, about 9,400 of them had tested positive for Covid-19, or about 2 percent. California has about 1,670,000 health care workers; if 2 percent of them got sick and couldn’t work for a couple of weeks, the usual length of an infection for somebody with Covid-19, that means 33,400 medical personnel out of commission.  So Newsom’s health corps is maybe enough — based on what we’ve seen in other countries so far. But it would be close.  Complicating matters is the fact that many hospitals are also taking big financial blows by canceling many elective surgeries, one of their biggest sources of revenue; industry leaders are already warning some hospitals may need to lay off staff or even close. It’s not clear the money already allocated by Congress in the coronavirus stimulus bill will be enough and another funding infusion may soon be needed, as Stanford professor Ciaran Phibbs wrote for the Incidental Economist. It’s also not enough to train doctors and nurses to help support ICU and emergency medicine staff, said the New York City emergency medicine doctor. Hospitals also need experienced pulmonologists on hand to treat Covid-19 patients who have severe lung injury and are rapidly deteriorating from acute respiratory distress syndrome.  “Each patient is different, the way they react, and a lot of us don’t have the expertise to know the best way to treat them,” he said. If the experienced pulmonologists who can provide that care get sick or if a small, rural hospital doesn’t have any to begin with, there will be more deaths, he said. Which is why raising the line should also involve flying in pulmonologists from parts of the US that don’t yet have a surge (or are past their surge) to the places that are in one. “In Nebraska, they have a ton of pulmonologists; why can’t we bring some of those doctors here in New York? The federal government would have to coordinate, but it would be very helpful to have,” he said. Raising the line is proving to be a frantic, stressful experiment for the US. It’s not clear yet how comprehensive it will be and whether it will reach the hospitals and clinics in rural areas that need the most support.  “The long-term lesson is that the US health system needs to think about slack or flexible capacity,” said Kumar Rajaram of UCLA, who helped us with the chart above. “While this may be costly, this is required to handle unforeseen public health emergencies in the future. If you value life, that’s all you need to do.”  For most people, flattening the curve and lifting the line start with the same step: stay at home. “What is really helping us to reduce demand on our hospitals and our medical supply is the fact that people in Seattle and Washington state are staying at home,” Mokdad said. “What we are projecting now for maximum need, we can avoid it if people stay home.” There have been early promising signs from California and Washington, states that acted early and aggressively to lock down society and maintain strict social distancing, that such measures can have a quick and substantial impact if they are followed. 4/ Is CA out of woods (for Phase I, at least)? Not yet, but @IHME_UW projections https://t.co/Q0aJHNZQsM awfully good. One wk ago (L), projected CA peak Apr 27, with 1896 ICU beds needed. Today’s projection (R), peak Apr 14; 798 ICU beds needed. Our curve is flat, unambiguously pic.twitter.com/Asc8GpdBRw And even if you can’t staff a ventilator assembly line or volunteer your medical services, you can help increase America’s medical capacity. If you’re a little crafty, you can make masks for front-line workers. Vox’s Alanna Okun has a handy guide. You can also donate money or time to efforts like Project N95, a clearinghouse to connect health care workers with equipment. If you have an elective surgery scheduled and it’s not urgent, consult with your doctor and think about postponing it until next year. Your hospital is already probably thinking about how to modify its planned procedures to free up staff and space; you, as the patient, can make that easier by being understanding and flexible. Telehealth is an easy way for people who need routine medical check-ups or have mild symptoms to stay in touch with their doctor without exposing medical staff to a potential infection that would take them out of service. Medicare is temporarily paying for more telehealth services in response to Covid-19, and some major health insurers have waived cost-sharing for telehealth visits as well. As with flattening the curve, we know what to do to raise the line — and just like social distancing, increasing the country’s health system’s capacity is a group effort. Editor’s note, April 7: The article was updated to note other, independent efforts to raise awareness around increasing the capacity of the health care system. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  President Donald Trump’s aggressive support for the unproven idea of using the lupus and malaria drug hydroxychloroquine to treat coronavirus has puzzled public health experts, journalists, and others for weeks.  A Monday New York Times report appeared to offer one possible new explanation: financial interest — his own, and that of those close to him.  Per the Times: If hydroxychloroquine becomes an accepted treatment, several pharmaceutical companies stand to profit, including shareholders and senior executives with connections to the president. Mr. Trump himself has a small personal financial interest in Sanofi, the French drugmaker that makes Plaquenil, the brand-name version of hydroxychloroquine. However, Trump’s Sanofi stake is indirect and rather small — he owns shares through a fund that includes a diverse array of stocks. As Vox’s Emily Stewart noted, a government official repeatedly promoting a product made by a company they have a minute stake in would be a very inefficient way to be corrupt: So the issue on the Trump/Sanofi thing is that if I were planning to make money off talking up a stock, I'd ... invest directly in the stock, not a small portion through a mutual fund. Like if I'm talking up Apple and am invested in an S&P index, I'm doing it wrong. The immediate interest in Trump’s financial connections to the pharmaceutical companies is another indicator of how the president’s decision not sell off his assets or put them into a blind trust opens him up to allegations of impropriety. But it was also a sign of how puzzled some experts are by the president continuing to tout the drug in nearly every public appearance, particularly given that it can have some dangerous side effects. Overall, Trump’s top medical experts have taken a more measured tone, as director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and White House coronavirus task force member Dr. Anthony Fauci did in speaking with CBS’s Face the Nation Sunday. “The data are really, just, at best, suggestive,” Fauci said on the program. “There have been cases that show there may be an effect and there are others to show there’s no effect. So, I think in terms of science, I don’t think we could definitively say it works.”  Trump appears to have been convinced of the drug’s effectiveness by its advocates in his inner circle, including trade adviser Peter Navarro and his personal lawyer Rudy Giuliani, as well as by a French study that indicated the drug is effective against the virus — but that, as Vox’s Umair Irfan has explained, came with a number of caveats the president may have missed, and that has been retracted. And this — combined with the fact that the president, unlike Fauci, has no scientific training — had led a number of observers to believe Trump genuinely thinks hydroxychloroquine is promising and should be further investigated. This view was encapsulated in the Times’s reporting Monday by a medical director at Brooklyn Hospital Center, Dr. Joshua Rosenberg. “I certainly understand why the president is pushing it,” Rosenberg told the Times. “He has to project hope. And when you are in a situation without hope, things go very badly. So I’m not faulting him for pushing it even if there isn’t a lot of science behind it, because it is, at this point, the best, most available option for use.” But the report of Trumpworld’s connections to the pharmaceutical industry caused many to believe something more sinister was afoot — namely, that Trump hoped to use the coronavirus pandemic to enrich himself and his allies.  Trump has on numerous occasions been accused of, put under investigation for, and refused to rule out using his position to financially benefit himself. And he was, of course, impeached about four months ago on charges of using his office for his political benefit.  It’s this history that has online observers, political strategists, and journalists highlighting the president’s financial ties to Sanofi, which makes hydroxychloroquine. But while there are a number of outstanding questions about Trump’s financial stakes and how his current role influences them, it isn’t clear there is great cause for concern with respect to his pharmaceutical holdings.  For one, the president doesn’t directly own Sanofi stock. His 2019 financial disclosures suggest he holds it in three family trusts through an investment in the mutual fund company Dodge & Cox’s international stock fund. According to Dodge & Cox, that fund includes shares of a number of drug companies — including AstraZeneca, Novartis, Bayer, GlaxoSmithKline, and Sanofi. But it also includes shares of companies in other industries, from online retail to banking to electronics. And of the drug companies it does include, only some, like Novartis and Sanofi, are major manufacturers of hydroxychloroquine.   This would suggest that the president — and anyone else who bought this particular Dodge & Cox product — may not profit very much from increased hydroxychloroquine sales, and that any benefits drug companies in the portfolio see may not be enough to offset the loses of other included companies. Trump’s financial disclosures don’t show exactly how much each trust has invested in the fund, but they do say it is $15,000 or less. Financial Times reporter Kadhim Shubber wrote this means the president’s stake in Sanofi is likely worth about $450. It also is not clear how much the stakes in those other pharmaceutical companies will benefit the president. In late March, Novartis donated 30 million doses of hydroxychloroquine to the US federal government, and Bayer donated an additional 1 million doses of its hydroxychloroquine drug. Other pharmaceutical companies, including Mylan and Teva, have pledged to donate millions of doses as well. This does not mean these companies will make zero sales — particularly given continuing demand among lupus and malaria patients, as well as at hospitals and other medical facilities for Covid-19 care — but that they may not be making money hand over fist thanks to the coronavirus. And as Ami Fadia of SVB Leerink, a health care investment company, told Barron’s, any additional hydroxychloroquine sales aren’t likely to greatly impact drug companies’ bottom lines because, even if they are able to quickly ramp up production, it is a relatively cheap drug in its generic form. Fadia said it can cost as little as 32 cents per pill. Assuming increased demand over the short term, Fadia said, Mylan could expect to make $15 million in hydroxychloroquine sales. This sounds like a lot, but not when you bear in mind Mylan’s 2019 revenues were $3.19 billion.  Given demand, Mylan Sanofi and other companies could raise prices in order to increase profits. This would likely cause public uproar and be met with pushback from lawmakers. It is true that a number of drug companies have shown themselves able to disregard that sort of criticism in the past, as with drugs to treat diabetes, for instance — but thus far, there has been little sign there will be hydroxychloroquine-related opportunistic pricing.  And the Trump allies with investments in the drug companies that would seem to be helped by Trump’s advocacy for the drug — which include Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross, investor Ken Fisher, and Amneal Pharmaceuticals co-founder Chirag Patel — also do not seem to be the beneficiaries of any underhanded behavior.  Ross, like Trump, is connected indirectly, through a fund he used to run; Fisher has long been a Sanofi investor through his asset management company; and while Patel’s company does plan to produce hydroxychloroquine, Amneal has said it plans to donate pills as well — and, should the treatment actually prove effective, it may seem wise to empower those able to make it. Again, there are many reasons some are suspicious of Trump policies and how they affect his pocketbook. He tried to steer millions of dollars of business to his Florida resort by planning to hold a G7 meeting there. He has faced questions over Air Force and White House spending at his resorts worldwide. He was ordered to pay a $2 million fine by New York for “improperly using charitable assets to intervene in the 2016 presidential primaries and further his own political interests.”  This has made many of his critics sensitive to what could appear to be improprieties on his part. It is important those sensitivities do not lead to false alarms, but past behavior means there is an important line for interested parties to walk when assessing Trump’s behavior. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Polls opened at 7 am in Wisconsin despite the ongoing coronavirus pandemic, despite the Democratic governor’s attempts to delay the election because of said epidemic, and despite calls from public-health experts to stay home.  The result by mid-morning was what critics feared: Voters were queued up in long lines, waiting for hours to vote in crowded and understaffed polling stations.  Experts fear the prolonged public gatherings could undermine efforts to control the spread of the coronavirus.  Take this line of scores of voters waiting at one city’s singular polling location, which a journalist with the local ABC affiliate tweeted: Polls open in minutes. Here’s a look at the line in Waukesha, the city’s only polling location pic.twitter.com/Uqg08gannt The state has been under a shelter-in-place order since March 25, but Republican officials in the state fought to ensure the election would proceed as originally scheduled, and the state’s and nation’s highest courts ruled in their favor on key logistical outlets. The highest-profile race at stake Tuesday is the Democratic presidential primary, which Joe Biden is expected to win, according to recent polls. But given the state of the Democratic primary, the state Supreme Court seat also on the line could be far more consequential. (There are also several other key state and local elections on the ballot.) As of Monday afternoon, there have been 2,440 confirmed cases of Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, in the state, along with 77 deaths, according to the Wisconsin Department of Health Services. Here’s what we know about the chaos seen in Wisconsin and what it could mean for the November general election throughout the country. In the middle of the coronavirus pandemic, THIS is the line for in person voting as the polls open for Election Day in Wisconsin.  #COVID19 #ElectionDay pic.twitter.com/WplsSHy9RF A voter just sent me this video of the line outside a polling location at Riverside High School in Milwaukee pic.twitter.com/osT7mQtUQx Long line outside of East High School this morning, one of two polling places open in Green Bay. There are normally 31. pic.twitter.com/fc7vN6HKe0 Wisconsin Assembly Speaker ⁦@repvos⁩ works the polls in Burlington, wearing a protective mask, gloves and gownCos sued ⁦@GovEvers⁩ after the Democratic governor tried to postpone the electionThe Wisconsin Supreme Court yesterday ordered it to proceed pic.twitter.com/hn4ErAsr2o A voter contacted a campaign in Milwaukee, and said “I need a witness for my absentee ballot, and I have coronavirus.” We are literally sitting here trying to figure out how to find somebody who had it, so they can go witness the signature, and get the ballot. This is insane. The deed is done. #8 at my polling place this morning. -requested an absentee ballot, never got it -found out the reason why I never got it was because the city accidentally de-registered me after I voted in the Feb. election -the ROAD to my polling place was closed lol Simply put, there aren’t enough election workers to run a free and fair election in Wisconsin on Tuesday. Poll workers in the state have refused to staff the polls for fear of catching the virus. As a result, while the city of Milwaukee usually has 180 polling locations for a given election, there’s now only enough staff for five. More than 100 municipalities reported that they didn’t have enough poll workers to open a single polling place. In response, Democratic Gov. Tony Evers called in the National Guard in order to work the polls. While other states simply delayed their elections, Wisconsin was initially reluctant to do so because of the general elections for the state and local offices. When Evers did begin attempting to delay the election, the state’s Republican-controlled legislature declined to take any action to move Election Day. As recounted by Vox’s Ian Millhiser: The Supreme Court’s decision in Republican is the capstone of a weeks-long effort by the Republican Party to make it difficult for voters to actually cast a ballot in Wisconsin. Last week, Gov. Evers called the state legislature into session and asked it to delay the election. But the Republican-controlled legislature ended that session just seconds after it was convened. After Evers acted on his own authority to delay the election, the state’s Supreme Court voted along partisan lines to rescind Evers’s order. Republicans also rejected Evers’s proposal to automatically mail ballots to every voter in the state. That set off a series of legal challenges that all broke along party lines and culminated in a Monday US Supreme Court decision with the court’s five conservatives deciding that absentee ballots must be postmarked by Election Day. (That overturns a previous court’s ruling that allowed ballots to be postmarked later, as long as they arrived by April 13.) The actions in Wisconsin could have repercussions in this fall’s general election, Millhiser explained: The background is that Republicans hope to hold onto a seat on the state Supreme Court, which is up for grabs in Tuesday’s election. As law professor and election law expert Rick Hasen recently noted, “only 38% of voters who had requested an absentee ballot in heavily Democratic Milwaukee County had returned one, compared with over 56% of absentee voters in nearby Republican-leaning Waukesha County.” So there’s at least some evidence that, if additional voters are unable to return their ballots, Republicans will be overrepresented in the ballots that are counted. It’s also worth noting that, if Wisconsin had free and fair elections to choose its state lawmakers, Evers would most likely have been able to work with a Democratic legislature to ensure that Tuesday’s election would be conducted fairly. In 2018, 54 percent of voters chose a Democratic candidate for the state Assembly. But Republicans have so completely gerrymandered the state that they prevailed in 63 of the state’s 99 Assembly races. There is far more at stake in Wisconsin, moreover, than one state Supreme Court seat. Wisconsin could be the pivotal swing state that decides the 2020 presidential election. The question of whether Donald Trump or Joe Biden occupies the White House next year could easily be determined by which man receives Wisconsin’s electoral votes. And the Court’s decision in Republican suggests that the Supreme Court will give the GOP broad leeway in how US elections should be conducted. Wisconsinites, for their part, have tried to make do and vote safely. As of last Wednesday, 1,053,556 absentee ballots had been requested from the state. However, it’s unclear how many of those absentee ballots will end up counting, after the Supreme Court decision. The legal maneuvering and the pandemic’s inherent risk have created a perfect storm to produce long — and potentially life-threatening — lines for voting.  In the middle of a coronavirus pandemic, Wisconsin is voting on Tuesday. Gov. Tony Evers (D) has repeatedly tried to delay the state’s elections, citing fears that in-person voting could bolster the spread of coronavirus. But Wisconsin Republicans and the state’s Supreme Court, which is controlled by conservatives, rebuffed Evers. Republicans also fought off Evers’s efforts to mail ballots to every voter and allow ballots to be counted beyond the original April 7 election date. The result is long lines at the polls as voters turn out for the presidential primary and a batch of local and state elections, including a particularly controversial Wisconsin Supreme Court race. Polls open in minutes. Here’s a look at the line in Waukesha, the city’s only polling location pic.twitter.com/Uqg08gannt Public health experts are not mincing words: This is not good. People across the country are being asked to stay home as much as possible to avoid the spread of the Covid-19 disease. Requiring them to show up to long lines and cramped schools, gyms, and churches to vote obviously goes against that. As of April 7, Wisconsin has 2,440 reported coronavirus cases and 83 deaths. The state is currently under a stay-at-home order. Jen Kates, director of global health and HIV policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation, called the decision to continue on with Election Day “a serious unforced error” and “very unwise.” While it’s theoretically possible for people to do their best at social distancing under these circumstances and keep six feet away from each other, Kates explained, that will require a lot of coordination and can be especially risky to poll workers, who could spread the virus to the rest of their community once this is all over. “This is a highly infectious virus with no cure or vaccine,” Kates said. “Anything that public officials can do to minimize crowding is critical.” Tara Smith, an epidemiologist at Kent State University, said that the long lines are “really concerning”: “It puts voters and poll workers at risk. I doubt they’re going to be consistently able to maintain distance, and either way they’ll be touching the same objects inside the voting areas and the doors when they enter and leave.” Citing her own state’s experience, Smith argued that “this doesn’t have to be a partisan issue.” Ohio, under the leadership of Gov. Mike DeWine (R), postponed its primary election from March 17 to April 28 and made voting entirely by mail, citing the coronavirus outbreak. Wisconsin Republicans, however, refused to do the same — and now people are at greater risk for Covid-19.In New York, officials were cautiously hopeful that the coronavirus outbreak there might be beginning to stabilize. For two days in a row, the death toll has stayed below 600. That changed Tuesday, however, with the death toll reaching a record-high 731. Still, there was a sliver of some good news, as hospitalizations may be stabilizing. Still, it is a reminder that the United States is braced for a challenging week. The number of confirmed cases in the country now exceeds 369,000 as of April 7, with a death toll around 11,000. Health care workers are on the front lines of the crisis in the US, but so too are the grocery store and pharmacy workers who are the lifelines for people to buy food, medicine, and other vital goods. And now, they too are starting to succumb to Covid-19. According to the Washington Post, at least four workers in retail stores have died from the coronavirus across the country. The United Kingdom is on edge as the coronavirus crisis has reached the highest levels of government. Prime Minister Boris Johnson remains in an intensive care unit battling coronavirus symptoms, as the UK tries to bring its outbreak under control. Here’s what you need to know today. White House officials have said the country must prepare for a very difficult week. But there are some signs of hope that social distancing measures are helping to “flatten the curve” in places that have been at the center of the outbreak, like New York City and the surrounding areas. But the city isn’t out of the worst of it yet. For two days in a row, deaths in New York have stayed below 600. Then, on Tuesday, the number of deaths in the last 24 hours reached 731. Hospitalization rates in New York are also beginning to stabilize, and New York Governor Andrew Cuomo said Tuesday that he believed New York might be reaching a plateau in hospitalization rates. New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio also said Tuesday that the number of patients being placed on ventilators in recent days has improved.  It’s really too soon to know for sure if this is a blip or a real sign that infections are slowing. Either way, the message from officials is clear: Social distancing is working, and we can’t stop now. “We get reckless,” Cuomo said, “you will see these numbers go up again.” The majority of states have asked nonessential businesses to shutter, but places that sell groceries or other essential goods remain open. And those workers — the cashiers, the greeters, the stockers, the janitors, the managers — are another workforce on the front lines of the crisis. According to the Washington Post, at least four such workers have died in recent days from the coronavirus:  A Trader Joe’s worker in Scarsdale, N.Y., a greeter at a Giant store in Largo, Md., and two Walmart employees from the same Chicago-area store have died of covid-19, the disease the novel coronavirus causes, in recent days, the companies confirmed Monday. This may not even capture the scale of the crisis, as workers fall ill and companies rush to hire more workers to meet the spike in demand at grocery and other stores. While companies are now offering more protections to workers such as gloves and masks, employees are still putting themselves at risk. Congress is considering adding hazard pay to another coronavirus stimulus bill, which would supplement incomes for essential workers, including grocery store clerks, postal workers, and truck drivers.  British Prime Minister Boris Johnson remains in the intensive care unit due to his worsening coronavirus symptoms. He is receiving oxygen, but he is not on a ventilator and does not have pneumonia, a spokesperson for the prime minister said Tuesday. Johnson, the spokesperson said, was “stable.” Dominic Raab, the UK’s foreign secretary, has been deputized to take over for Johnson where needed. Raab has been leading the daily coronavirus response meetings, but Johnson’s absence has raised concerns about the government’s management of the coronavirus emergency.  Michael Gove, another cabinet official who’s helping to coordinate the UK’s coronavirus response, also went into self-isolation on Tuesday, just as a precaution because a family member had shown symptoms, but he is continuing to work as normal. The UK’s stay-at-home orders are also set to expire this coming Monday, and the government hasn’t made an official announcement yet on whether it will extend them.  This story is a few days old, but whatever, good news is hard to find these days. In Brooklyn, a landlord, Mario Salerno, told his tenants not to worry about April rent. He told the New York Times that meant not collecting rent from some 80 apartments, maybe 200 or 300 tenants, but his main concern was the health and safety of his tenants.  While most renters can’t rely on a generous landlord, and more needs to be done to keep people in their homes, it’s always nice calling out an act of kindness and decency during these troubled times.On Tuesday, Axios published internal White House memos that make the statements from President Donald Trump downplaying the coronavirus before it became a full-blown crisis look even more willfully ignorant.  A February 23 memo labeled as a “MEMORANDUM TO PRESIDENT” sent through the National Security Agency, then-acting Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney, and the Covid-19 task force warns in its very first sentence that “[t]here is an increasing probability of a full-blown COVID-19 pandemic that could infect as many as 100 million Americans, with a loss of life of as many as 1-2 million souls.” Three days later, however, Trump held a news conference in which he suggested the coronavirus would soon go away on its own in the United States. “When you have 15 [coronavirus cases], and the 15 within a couple of days is going to be down to close to zero, that’s a pretty good job we’ve done,” Trump said. On Feb 23, Trump was sent memo warning 2 million Americans could die from Covid https://t.co/2ZUooAyA413 days later, Trump said, "we’re going to be pretty soon at only 5 people, and we could be at just 1 or 2 people over the next short period of time." pic.twitter.com/0O6IouQhJJ On February 27, as the US confirmed case count stood at 15, Trump went even further, claiming of the coronavirus that “one day — it’s like a miracle — it will disappear.” Needless to say, the memo that was addressed to him four days earlier made no allowance for the miraculous.  The February 23 memo doesn’t identify its author, but Axios reports that it was written by White House trade adviser Peter Navarro. The document presciently advises the federal government to immediately invest $618 million in ventilators and personal protective equipment (PPE) for health care workers. “This is the first line of defense for our health care workers and secondary workers in facilities such as elder care and skilled nursing,” the memo says. “Key items include N-95 facemasks, goggles, gloves, Tyvek suits, ventilator circuits and Positive Air Press Respirators (PAPRs).” Fast-forward 10 weeks and there are now hundreds of thousands of confirmed coronavirus cases in the US and more than 10,000 dead. Shortages of PPE and ventilators have become major problems and a source of tension between Trump and state governors who have called on him to do more to obtain supplies.  But instead of heeding the February 23 warning that major investments in PPE and ventilators were needed, Trump dithered — and not just until there was a sudden uptick in confirmed cases in early March. The Associated Press’s Michael Biesecker reported on Sunday that a review of federal purchasing contracts “shows federal agencies largely waited until mid-March to begin placing bulk orders of N95 respirator masks, mechanical ventilators and other equipment needed by front-line health care workers.” “By that time, hospitals in several states were treating thousands of infected patients without adequate equipment and were pleading for shipments from the Strategic National Stockpile,” Biesecker added. When asked about the federal government’s slow response, Trump’s line has been that the states should have done more on their own. The February 23 memo was not the first White House document to warn that the coronavirus could be really bad. Axios also published a January 29 memo also authored by Navarro that advised “an immediate travel ban to China” and sounded the alarm about data indicating Covid-19 spreads more easily from person to person than the H1N1 flu or SARS. The memo estimated as many as 18 million Americans could be infected by the coronavirus, with 543,000 deaths. “The lack of immune protection or an existing cure or vaccine would leave Americans defenseless in the case of a full-blown coronavirus outbreak on US soil,” the January 29 memo, which was addressed to the National Security Council, says. “The lack of protection elevates the risk of the coronavirus evolving into a full-blown pandemic, imperiling the lives of millions of Americans.” During a rally the next day in Des Moines, however, Trump downplayed the coronavirus threat, saying, “We think we have it very well under control.” “We have very little problem in this country at this moment — five [cases] — and those people are all recuperating successfully. But we’re working very closely with China and other countries, and we think it’s going to have a very good ending for us … that I can assure you,” he added.  Trump’s comments about the coronavirus in Iowa are tragicomically unreassuring pic.twitter.com/vwUTsivEzO Trump did move to restrict travel from China on February 2. But by then, the virus was already spreading inside the borders of the United States. And in the days that followed, Trump continued to make public statements that gave Americans a false sense of security. “You know, a lot of people think that goes away in April with the heat,” he claimed on February 10. During a news conference on March 17, Trump tried to pretend that he took the coronavirus seriously from the jump. “I felt it was a pandemic long before it was called a pandemic,” he said. Trump, who not a month ago characterized Democratic criticism of the coronavirus response as a "hoax," now claims, "I felt it was a pandemic long before it was called a pandemic." pic.twitter.com/6GTpZ59b75 Then, during a Fox & Friends interview on March 30, Trump said of the coronavirus pandemic that “nobody could have predicted something like this.” But the memos indicate Trump’s own advisers had not only anticipated it but tried to warn him about it. The Navarro memos reveal the sheer brazenness of Trump’s attempt to rewrite history. Instead of taking action, Trump engaged in wishful thinking until the spread of the virus was so out of control that many major population centers in the country were forced into a state of virtual lockdown. Hospitals, meanwhile, continue to struggle with resource shortages that the federal government did nothing to alleviate during the crucial period between January and early March. Now, instead of misleading suggestions that the coronavirus will go away on its own, Trump has moved the goalposts dramatically. No longer are 15 cases a “good job” — instead, it’s a far more ghastly number. “If we can hold [the number of US deaths] down, as we’re saying, to 100,000, it’s a horrible number, maybe even less, but to 100,000, so we have between 100 [thousand] and 200,000, we altogether have done a very good job,” he said on March 30. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  The Strategic National Stockpile, a relatively obscure office in the federal government that manages the country’s emergency medical supplies, exists to respond to a crisis like the coronavirus pandemic.  As the United States faces hundreds of thousands of Covid-19 cases, a widespread shortage of medical supplies is reaching a critical point. States lacking essential equipment like ventilators and masks need relief quickly. But as President Donald Trump struggles to coordinate a cohesive response to the pandemic — fighting with state governors over how these supplies will be distributed and reportedly seizing shipments from private companies before distributing supplies to political allies — the stockpile is becoming a contentious subject. It’s also starting to run out of supplies. That’s why Jared Kushner, senior adviser to the president, prompted controversy when he made a rare public appearance at the April 2 coronavirus task force briefing and commented on the federal stockpile. When asked about states’ needs for supplies, Kushner said the stockpile was “supposed to be our stockpile.” The president’s son-in-law added, “It’s not supposed to be states’ stockpiles that they then use.”  Then, the following morning, the Strategic National Stockpile website had been changed to deemphasize its commitment to helping states and to downplay the size of its inventory. This particular description online now refers to the federal stockpile as “a short-term stopgap buffer.”  Part of this new definition of the Strategic National Stockpile does reside in the general vicinity of reality. The stockpile is running low. The Trump administration admits it. And no, this is not the states’ fault. But it’s not entirely clear what will happen when it’s emptied out. The Strategic National Stockpile, like the nuclear arsenal, is something government officials hoped they would never need to use. Formed in 1999 as anxiety over Y2K mounted, this federal stockpile was designed to prevent an interruption to hospital supply chains, if all the computers ended up melting down on New Year’s Eve. That never happened, but because biological attacks were becoming a growing threat, the US government outfitted the stockpile in the interest of national security. If a bioweapon struck an American city, for example, officials could quickly access vaccines and antitoxins to fight back against nerve agents or diseases like smallpox. These biological countermeasures still exist and are stored in six warehouses located in strategic, undisclosed locations across the country, where they are maintained by a staff of about 200. The exact inventory of the Strategic National Stockpile is classified, though journalists have reported that it contains over 1,000 categories of drugs and medical items worth about $8 billion.  In the 20 years since the stockpile was established, it was first mobilized after 9/11 and the anthrax attacks that followed. Later, the US government deployed it in response to various major hurricanes, as well as to the H1N1 pandemic in 2009-2010, during which the stockpile sent flu medication to all 50 states.  Since then, the office of the Strategic National Stockpile has been preparing for the next outbreak, though no one knew when or what it would be. With an annual budget of about $600 million, the stockpile has maintained a large supply of personal protective equipment, including N95 masks, face shields, and surgical gowns, as well as medical equipment like the ventilators that hospitals so urgently need now to treat Covid-19 patients.  A significant challenge is that many of these items have a shelf life. “Part of stockpiling is not just accruing the necessary equipment, but also maintaining it and replacing it as needed,” Andrew Lakoff, a professor of sociology at the University of Southern California who studies health preparedness, told Recode. “So it’s sort of an ongoing, indefinite process that takes a lot of resources that may or may not prove to be necessary.” While the Strategic National Stockpile was originally part of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the Trump administration moved it to a different part of the Health and Human Services Department in 2018. At the time, this concerned certain experts and lawmakers, who worried that the move could disrupt the delicate process of managing the stockpile. As the Washington Post reported at the time, some even worried then that the Trump administration’s plan would “politicize decision-making about products bought for the stockpile.” It’s important to note that the mission of the Strategic National Stockpile is ultimately of limited scope. As spelled out in the law that established it, the federal stockpile is intended “to provide for and optimize the emergency health security of the United States.” The word “emergency” does a lot of work in that sentence.  Richard Branson, a respiratory care specialist and professor at the University of Cincinnati Medical Center who advises the federal government on ventilator supplies, explained to Recode that the federal stockpile was designed to meet initial needs in a crisis, until industry could ramp up production. Because ventilators are such specialized pieces of equipment with parts sourced from all over the world, quickly manufacturing more is a uniquely difficult challenge.  “This is the first time in 20 years ventilators from the stockpile have been used,” Branson told Recode. “If last year, you had known that fact and there were 80,000 ventilators in the stockpile that had never been deployed, you would be asking me why this money was wasted while people went without health care.” But there aren’t actually 80,000 ventilators in the federal stockpile. As of early March, the Strategic National Stockpile only had 16,600 ventilators. It has even fewer now: On April 3, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) told Recode the federal government has just 9,800 ventilators available. There are 9,054 remaining in the Strategic National Stockpile, and the Department of Defense has 900.  New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said that just his state, which is currently at the epicenter of the pandemic, will need as many as 37,000 ventilators at the peak of the outbreak. After waiting for relief from the Trump administration, Cuomo ultimately enlisted the National Guard to relocate ventilators from upstate facilities to New York City. As far as the rest of the country is concerned, it’s safe to say that the Strategic National Stockpile isn’t even close to meeting the overall demand that’s expected during the coronavirus pandemic. Besides ventilators, the Strategic National Stockpile is running low on other urgently needed supplies as well. On April 1, the Washington Post reported that the federal stockpile’s stock of personal protective equipment, including N95 masks, was almost depleted. A Department of Homeland Security official told the paper that the stockpile was only “designed to respond to a handful of cities,” pointing to a global shortage of these products. And experts and lawmakers are concerned that the Trump administration’s uneven distribution of supplies is driven by political goals. In early March, when Washington state requested 233,000 N95 respirators and 200,000 surgical masks, the Strategic National Stockpile sent them less than half that amount. Illinois, Massachusetts, and Maine also said they received fractions of what they requested from the federal government.  But on March 10, after Washington’s request, Florida asked for 430,000 surgical masks, 180,000 N95 respirators, and other equipment. The full order arrived three days later. One anonymous official told the Washington Post, “The president knows Florida is so important for his reelection … He pays close attention to what Florida wants.” Trump’s brazen behavior isn’t going unnoticed. Adam Schiff, chair of the House Intelligence Committee, said that in the distribution of medical supplies there should be “no favoritism in terms of political allies, no discrimination against states or governors based on lack of presidential flattery.”  Sen. Cory Gardner of Colorado sent a letter to the Health and Human Services inspector general requesting an investigation into the Strategic National Stockpile’s supply of ventilators. Gardner told Politico that “any kind of mismanagement or abuse needs to be rooted out and those responsible held accountable.” And Connecticut Gov. Ned Lamont called the state of the stockpile “disturbing.” After Trump declared a national emergency over the novel coronavirus crisis on March 13, he told states to order their own medical supplies, kicking off a process that has led to governors entering bidding wars with each other and even with the federal government over essential goods like ventilators and N95 masks. “It’s like being on eBay with 50 other states, bidding on a ventilator,” Cuomo said in a daily press briefing at the end of March. “What we’re seeing now is a sort of competition on the open market among states trying get ahold of stuff that the stockpile doesn’t have enough of — or is running out of,” said Lakoff, the USC professor. “Everyone’s scrambling to try to figure out how to get ahold of this stuff.” We don’t really know what happens when the Strategic National Stockpile runs out of essential supplies. But we might learn soon enough.  “FEMA planning assumptions for Covid-19 pandemic response acknowledged that the Strategic National Stockpile alone could not fulfill all requirements at the state and tribal level,” a FEMA spokesperson told Recode. “Therefore, the federal government will exhaust all means to identify and attain medical and other supplies needed to combat the virus.” The agency added that it would meet additional demand through the private sector or the Pentagon.  This effort includes a public-private partnership called Project Airbridge which will include 20 flights transporting supplies from Asia to various cities in the US in early April. FEMA says these flights are transporting masks, gloves, goggles, and surgical gowns, all of which go first to medical distributors and then to hospitals and health care facilities. The new project is not without its own controversy. In the days after its launch, several state and local governments as well as private hospitals reported that the federal government was confiscating their shipments of medical supplies in order to redistribute them as it saw fit. This practice would directly contradict the Trump administration’s earlier statements about states fending for themselves. Trump has also invoked the Defense Production Act to order GM to begin producing ventilators and 3M to produce more N95 masks domestically, as well as ordering 3M to cease exports of these products. (3M has warned, for what it’s worth, that ceasing exports will actually make the mask shortage in the US worse.) Meanwhile, private corporations and everyday Americans have been making an enormous effort to fill in the gaps the government has failed to close. Elon Musk has promised that his companies, Tesla and SpaceX, will start building ventilators. Hobbyists are coming up with new designs for cheap breathing machines that can be built out of simple materials. Automotive parts factories have changed their workflows to start producing face shields and other supplies, and a movement of people sewing face masks out of leftover fabric is taking the country by storm. Put quaintly, everybody is doing their best. The federal government, on the other hand, seems to be getting worse at dealing with the Covid-19 crisis. After spending the first two months of the year denying the severity of the coronavirus outbreak, it’s now clear that the Trump administration has settled on deflecting blame and establishing a posture of unaccountability. As Vox’s Matthew Yglesias puts it, the “federal government, led by Donald Trump, has essentially abdicated its traditional role of spearheading a coordinated response.” Coming up with a response, it seems, is the states’ problem. This is what makes the shifting role of the Strategic National Stockpile so frustrating for so many people right now. Before Kushner’s appearance at the coronavirus task force briefing, the stockpile’s website said the “Strategic National Stockpile is the nation’s largest supply of life-saving pharmaceuticals and medical supplies for use in a public health emergency severe enough to cause local supplies to run out.” The following morning it read, “The Strategic National Stockpile’s role is to supplement state and local supplies during public health emergencies.” So the stockpile that was designed to help the entire nation in an emergency is now a backup plan. Also, it’s basically gone. What Kushner said about the federal government not being there to help out with supplies? Unfortunately, that’s true. The states are on their own, and that reality is starting to sink in.  Update, April 7, 11:15 am ET: This piece has been updated to include reports of the federal government confiscating medical supplies from state and local governments.It was the White House coronavirus clash of the heavyweights: Dr. Anthony Fauci, perhaps the most respected public health official currently working in the US government, against Peter Navarro, an eccentric Trump economic adviser who shares the president’s anti-China obsession (and once quoted a fake version of himself named Ron Vara — an anagram for Navarro — in a book he wrote).  Per Axios, Navarro got into it during a coronavirus task force meeting on Saturday. Navarro claimed that hydroxychloroquine, an anti-malarial drug that Trump had been touting as a potential counter-coronavirus drug, had been shown to have “clear therapeutic efficacy” in foreign trials. When Fauci, who has become one of the most trusted medical experts on the subject, corrected him by pointing out that the evidence for the drug’s success against coronavirus was “anecdotal,” Navarro reportedly flew into a rage — raising his voice and (falsely) accusing Fauci of opposing the travel ban Trump imposed on China. On Monday, CNN’s John Berman asked Navarro about the confrontation: “What are your qualifications to weigh in on medicine more than Dr. Anthony Fauci?” Navarro’s response: “My qualifications, in terms of looking at the science, is that I’m a social scientist.” It’s only fitting that there’s a concept from social science — psychology, specifically — that helps us understand Navarro’s bluster. In a now-famous 1999 paper, Cornell University’s David Dunning and Justin Kruger found that people who did poorly on tests of abilities like logic and grammar “grossly overestimated” their own talents in those fields relative to peers. Competent people, by contrast, were less likely to overestimate their own talents. It seemed that the incompetent people knew so little that they were unable to adequately assess how little they knew — and thus were overconfident. This phenomenon, known as the Dunning-Kruger effect, may explain Navarro’s outburst. There are important differences in this case: Navarro has basic knowledge and expertise — he has a PhD in economics from Harvard, and actually warned Trump early on about the risks from coronavirus. He is not, however, an expert on medicine, and an economics doctorate doesn’t qualify him to give medical assessments over Fauci. But not being an expert also means that you’re unable to fully appreciate how little you know — and perhaps might even make you feel comfortable shouting down a preeminent expert in the field on an issue of vital national importance.  It’s not just Navarro, though. The entire Trump administration is an exercise in what happens when people without relevant expertise get to run the world’s most powerful government. Nothing makes that clear than its response to the coronavirus. No figure, other than the president himself, better embodies the ethos of the Trump administration’s coronavirus effort than Jared Kushner. A presidential son-in-law with no relevant experience in medicine or epidemiology, Kushner has nonetheless come to occupy a key role in coordinating the White House’s response to the virus. He has been previously failed in his roles attempting to solve the opioid crisis and the Israel-Palestine conflict (about which he once bragged about having read 25 books). Early on in the crisis, per the New York Times, Kushner told Trump that the media was overhyping the virus to hurt his presidency. He later went on to convince Trump to hype an essentially nonexistent Google testing website, crowdsourced ideas for policy responses from said brother’s father-in-law, and launched a drive-through testing initiative that (as of early April) produced a grand total of five testing sites across the country. Despite Kushner’s efforts, the testing situation in America remains dire. A dearth of adequate and rapid tests makes it harder for doctors and nurses to allocate scarce resources to the patients who need it. In the long run, the failure to test makes it harder for America to relax social distancing measures and move toward a South Korea-style surveillance model. Failure after failure, both during the pandemic and his broader time in government, Kushner reportedly remains convinced of his own abilities — that he knows better than anyone else, including federal experts and state officials. “Kushner shares the president’s view that governors are driving their residents into a panic by airing worst-case projections of medical needs,” the Times reports. “In conversations with advisers to the president, many of whom were stunned by the remark, Mr. Kushner has stressed what he considers his own abilities, saying that he has figured out how to make the government effective.”  Here's Jared Kushner going for the world record of most meaningless corporate buzzwords used in a single one-minute video clip pic.twitter.com/Vy1QJEhLQa By any reasonable lights, Kushner shouldn’t be anywhere near the White House’s coronavirus response — let alone coordinating it. Navarro, widely considered a crank in his own field of economics despite his Harvard degree, shouldn’t be in the White House — let alone working on the coronavirus response team. Yet Kushner is in on purely nepotistic grounds — and he reportedly brought Navarro in after discovering the latter’s book on Amazon. This is the nature of the American government today.  The Republican Party and its allies in the right-wing media have spent the past several decades attacking the very idea of neutral policy expertise, treating academia as enemy-held territory rather than a source of important knowledge about the world. As a result, it became fertile ground for an arrogant anti-elite populist — a man who seems to believe he knows more than everyone about everything — to take it over and remake in his image.  Experts aren’t infallible, of course. If there’s one thing we’ve learned in the past two decades, it’s that our elite class is eminently capable of catastrophic failure. Yet blanket skepticism of elites in Trump’s style is no more justified than blind faith in their pronouncements. In fact, it’s arguably quite a bit more dangerous, particularly when it comes to something like a pandemic response, a difficult task that requires understanding and synthesizing conclusions from a variety of technical and deeply specialized intellectual disciplines.   Instead, though, we have a president and a ruling party that instinctively distrusts the people most qualified to do that. It is under these conditions that Jared Kushner and Peter Navarro could end up playing key roles in confronting the biggest public health crisis in a century. Trump, Kushner, and Navarro may be the ones suffering from the Dunning-Kruger effect. But Americans will be the ones suffering the consequences. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The Supreme Court’s Republican majority, in a case that is literally titled Republican National Committee v. Democratic National Committee, handed down a decision that will effectively disenfranchise tens of thousands of Wisconsin voters. It did so at the urging of the GOP. The case arises out of Wisconsin’s decision to hold its spring election during the coronavirus pandemic, even as nearly a dozen other states have chosen to postpone similar elections to protect the safety of voters. Democrats hoped to defend a lower court order that allowed absentee ballots to be counted so long as they arrived at the designated polling place by April 13, an extension granted by a judge to account for the brewing coronavirus-sparked chaos on Election Day, April 7. Republicans successfully asked the Court to require these ballots to be postmarked by April 7. All five of the Court’s Republicans voted for the Republican Party’s position. All four of the Court’s Democrats voted for the Democratic Party’s position. The decision carries grave repercussions for the state of Wisconsin — and democracy more broadly. As Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg notes in her dissent, “the presidential primaries, a seat on the Wisconsin Supreme Court, three seats on the Wisconsin Court of Appeals, over 100 other judgeships, over 500 school board seats, and several thousand other positions” are at stake in the Wisconsin election, which will be held on Tuesday. Of all these seats, the state Supreme Court race, between incumbent conservative Justice Daniel Kelly and challenger Judge Jill Karofsky, is the most hotly contested. The April 7 election is shaping up to be a train wreck. Most poll workers have refused to work the election, out of fear of catching the coronavirus, which forced Gov. Tony Evers (D) to call up the National Guard in order to keep polls open. But even this measure appears woefully inadequate. In Milwaukee, election officials announced that the state only has enough election workers to open five poll locations — when the city would normally have 180 polling places. Meanwhile, the state has received a crush of absentee ballot requests — about 1.2 million, when it typically receives fewer than 250,000 in a spring election. That’s left state officials scrambling to send ballots to voters in time for Tuesday’s election. And on top of all these complications, a state law required all ballots to be received by election officials by 8 pm on April 7, or else those ballots would not be counted.  Tens of thousands of voters are not expected to even receive their ballots until after Election Day, effectively disenfranchising them through no fault of their own. In response to this brewing catastrophe, Judge William Conley, an Obama appointee to a federal court in Wisconsin, ordered the deadline for receiving ballots to be extended to 4 pm on April 13. In response to this order, the Republican Party asked the Supreme Court to modify Conley’s decision to require all ballots to be postmarked by April 7 or they will not be counted.  The Supreme Court’s Republican majority granted the GOP this very specific request. Again, many voters are not expected to receive their ballots until after this April 7 deadline. As Justice Ginsburg notes, “as of Sunday morning, 12,000 ballots reportedly had not yet been mailed out,” so the number of voters disenfranchised by the Court’s order in Republican is likely to be vast. The Court’s decision in Republican, moreover, is the culmination of a weeks-long effort by Republicans to thwart various efforts by Democrats to accommodate voters who might be disenfranchised by coronavirus. The majority opinion, which is unsigned, relies heavily on the Court’s previous decision in Purcell v. Gonzalez (2006). Purcell is by no means a famous decision. It received far fewer headlines than the Court’s decisions striking down much of the Voting Rights Act or permitting partisan gerrymandering. But it’s proved to be one of the greatest thorns in the side of voting rights advocates. And the Court’s decision in Republican cements Purcell’s status as one of the greatest obstacles facing a voting right litigator. Briefly, Purcell held that courts should be reluctant to hand down orders impacting a state’s election procedures as Election Day draws nigh. “Court orders affecting elections,” the Court warned in Purcell, “can themselves result in voter confusion and consequent incentive to remain away from the polls. As an election draws closer, that risk will increase.” There is some wisdom to this vague guideline. Voters may, indeed, be quite confused if a wave of court orders are handed down close to an election. For example, if the US Supreme Court were to declare, well after sunset on the eve of an election, that voters must mail their ballots by April 7 or be disenfranchised, such an order is likely to confuse some voters and lead to them being unable to vote. In any event, there are good reasons why Purcell’s warning about courts deciding voting rights cases too close to an election should not be read as an inexorable command. For one thing, the consequences of a new voting law may not become apparent until that law is actually operating close to an Election Day. Voting rights advocates may not learn that voters are struggling to obtain absentee ballots, for example, until an election is close and many voters are complaining that they haven’t received ballots. If courts cannot intervene under these circumstances, many impediments to the right to vote will go unaddressed. Similarly, as the Democratic Party unsuccessfully argued in its brief in the Republican case, court orders are not the only thing that can “result in voter confusion and consequent incentive to remain away from the polls.” In Republican, voter confusion and an incentive to remain away from the polls arose from “the COVID-19 pandemic and the ‘voter confusion and electoral chaos’ it is causing.”  Until recently, the Democratic brief explained, “Wisconsin voters reasonably expected they would be able either to vote safely in person on election day or through a reliable, well-functioning absentee ballot system.” Those voters learned very close to the election that this reasonable expectation was wrong. And Judge Conley’s order was an attempt to alleviate the disruption caused by the pandemic. Nevertheless, Republican treats Purcell’s warning about last-minute election orders as something very close to mandatory. “By changing the election rules so close to the election date,” the Court’s Republican majority claims, “the District Court contravened this Court’s precedents and erred by ordering such relief.” “This Court,” the majority opinion added, “has repeatedly emphasized that lower federal courts should ordinarily not alter the election rules on the eve of an election.” This conversion of Purcell from guideline to something close to a mandatory decree is likely to have sweeping consequences for future elections. It means that if voting rights advocates discover in the final days before an election that a new state law is disenfranchising African American voters — or a pandemic keeps away most voters — federal courts most likely would not intervene. It means that many problems that are unlikely to be discovered until Election Day itself will go unaddressed. The Supreme Court’s decision in Republican is the capstone of a weeks-long effort by the Republican Party to make it difficult for voters to actually cast a ballot in Wisconsin. Last week, Gov. Evers called the state legislature into session and asked it to delay the election. But the Republican-controlled legislature ended that session just seconds after it was convened. After Evers acted on his own authority to delay the election, the state’s Supreme Court voted along partisan lines to rescind Evers’s order. Republicans also rejected Evers’s proposal to automatically mail ballots to every voter in the state. The background is that Republicans hope to hold on to a seat on the state Supreme Court, which is up for grabs in Tuesday’s election. As law professor and election law expert Rick Hasen recently noted, “only 38% of voters who had requested an absentee ballot in heavily Democratic Milwaukee County had returned one, compared with over 56% of absentee voters in nearby Republican-leaning Waukesha County.” So there’s at least some evidence that if additional voters are unable to return their ballots, Republicans will be overrepresented in the ballots that are counted. It’s also worth noting that if Wisconsin had free and fair elections to choose its state lawmakers, Evers would most likely have been able to work with a Democratic legislature to ensure that Tuesday’s election would be conducted fairly. In 2018, 54 percent of voters chose a Democratic candidate for the state Assembly. But Republicans have so completely gerrymandered the state that they prevailed in 63 of the state’s 99 Assembly races. There is far more at stake in Wisconsin, moreover, than one state Supreme Court seat. Wisconsin could be the pivotal swing state that decides the 2020 presidential election. The question of whether Donald Trump or Joe Biden occupies the White House next year could easily be determined by which man receives Wisconsin’s electoral votes. And the Court’s decision in Republican suggests that the Supreme Court will give the GOP broad leeway in how US elections should be conducted. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. President Donald Trump was asked repeatedly during Monday’s White House coronavirus task force briefing about a new Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) inspector general report detailing the federal government’s failure to provide hospitals with the testing and equipment resources they need. His contemptuous responses spoke volumes about his disdain for oversight, as well as for any reporter who has the gall to ask him questions he doesn’t like. The HHS IG report was released on Monday, two days after Trump fired intelligence community Inspector General Michael Atkinson for not doing his political bidding with a whistleblower’s complaint about the president’s dealings with Ukraine. Trump’s initial response on Monday to a question about the HHS IG report referenced his reflexive distaste for the oversight position. “It’s just wrong. Did I hear the word ‘inspector general?’” Trump said. “Could politics be entered into that?” Trump dismisses HHS IG report critical of federal coronavirus response: "It's just wrong. Did I hear the word 'inspector general'? Really ... what's his name? ... could politics be entered into that?" pic.twitter.com/SMsHlgKMI4 When he was asked about the report for a second time, Trump suggested it couldn’t be trusted because he wasn’t sure whether the HHS official who put it together — Principal Deputy Inspector General Christi Grimm — was appointed by him. Grimm, however, has experience in the federal government under both Republican and Democratic presidents dating back to the Clinton administration. Moreover, the IG report is based on direct conversations with hospital administrators. Later, when Fox News reporter Kristin Fisher attempted to ask Trump specifically about the report’s finding that hospitals are working with a “severe shortage” of testing materials, Trump unloaded on her. “You should say ‘congratulations, great job,’ instead of being so horrid in the way you ask a question,” he said.  Trump castigates a female reporter who asked him about testing failures: "You should say 'congratulations, great job,' instead of being so horrid in the way you ask a question." pic.twitter.com/PCYGlkZ2au Fisher wasn’t alone in being on the receiving end of Trump’s abuse. Trump also bashed ABC’s Jon Karl because Karl didn’t tell Trump that Grimm had served under President Obama when he asked a question about the IG report — as though Grimm’s experience under a previous administration destroyed her credibility. “You’re a third-rate reporter. What you just said is a disgrace,” Trump said to Karl. “You will never make it.” You're a third-rate reporter. What you just said is a disgrace ... you will never make it" -- Trump attacks @jonkarl pic.twitter.com/uEO9zB25nK The HHS IG report, which is based on a random sample of administrators from 323 hospitals across the country conducted March 23-27 — before the worst of the coronavirus pandemic hit the US — details a lack of testing supplies and medical gear that’s making things difficult for hospitals, and alludes to the disorganized nature of the federal response. One administrator told HHS the supplies they received from the federal government “won’t even last a day.’” Another detailed how their staff had resorted to jury-rigging ventilators from anesthesia machine. A third administrator, referring to shortages of surgical masks that the federal government hasn’t been able to address, said, “we are throwing all of our PPE best practices out the window.” And a fourth lamented “instances of receiving conflicting guidance from different Federal, State, and local authorities.” Instead of engaging with that reality, however, Trump on Monday characteristically deflected from it with ad hominem attacks. You can’t solve problems if you don’t even recognize they exist. The IG report comes days after the Associated Press broke news that the federal government waited until mid-March to try and replenish the national stockpile of medical gear. By that time, “hospitals in several states were treating thousands of infected patients without adequate equipment and were pleading for shipments from the Strategic National Stockpile,” the AP reported. When asked about his administration’s tardy response, Trump’s standard line is that states should be doing more on their own and should be grateful for any federal help they’re fortunate enough to receive. “The people that you’re looking at — FEMA, the military — what they’ve done is a miracle,” Trump said during the White House briefing on Sunday, referring to the AP report. In a move he’d repeat again on Monday, he then went on the attack against the reporter who dared to ask him a question that reflected poorly upon him. "You should be thanking them for what they have done, not always asking wise guy questions" -- Trump ends the press briefing by berating an Associated Press reporter who dared to ask him about the government's slow response to coronavirus pic.twitter.com/EUq6SG42aN “What they’ve done for states is incredible, and you should be thanking them for what they’ve done and not always asking wise-guy questions,” he said. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Miren Algorri has been a licensed day care provider for 22 years — her 23rd anniversary is coming up this month. Ordinarily, Algorri and her assistant take care of up to 14 kids in her home in Chula Vista, California. The youngest right now is 16 months old. “We still rock him to sleep,” Algorri said. The oldest is 8, and she has been caring for him for six years. But on Tuesday, she told Vox, “I am sad to announce that today we have zero attendance.” Algorri was still technically open on Tuesday, and said she hopes to stay that way in case any families need her. It is her “duty and responsibility to these families so they can continue to make a living,” she told Vox. But as the coronavirus pandemic worsens, she’s not sure how long that will last. “We are running very low on cleaning, disinfectant, and sanitizing supplies,” she said. “When I don’t have those supplies, then I will have to stop providing services.” Algorri still has income — all of the families her day care serves receive subsidies from the state of California, and those have not been cut off. But she sees other day care providers who rely on private payment losing all of their income. Meanwhile, six of the parents whose kids she cares for are restaurant servers who were laid off after California ordered bars and restaurants closed to help slow the spread of the coronavirus. Algorri has been trying to help her fellow providers and the families she serves by sharing resources to get through the crisis, whether it’s the number of a food or diaper bank or the news that Taco Bell is offering free tacos. “I know it’s not healthy,” she said, “but on those empty bellies, whatever they can get.” Her story is mirrored across the nation, as child care providers face layoffs and loss of income as well as concerns about how or whether to stay open as coronavirus spreads around the country. Though states have closed K-12 schools in recent weeks, many have allowed — or even encouraged — day cares to remain open. That leaves some day care providers to decide for themselves whether to shut down and lose their livelihoods, or stay open and risk exposing themselves and their families to Covid-19. In other cases, the decision is made for them as families pull their kids out and stop paying — according to one report, child care providers around the country lost more than 70 percent of attendance in a single week as the pandemic worsened. The crisis is hitting child care providers especially hard because they already earn disproportionately low incomes — an average of just $10.82 an hour — and many lack health insurance and paid sick leave. Day cares are typically small businesses without a lot of cash on hand, and a long-term closure could force them out of business. According to a survey by the National Association for the Education of Young Children, 30 percent of child care providers would have to shut down permanently if forced to close for two weeks or more. But for some families, especially those of health care workers and other essential employees, their services are more important than ever. Child care workers say the pandemic is highlighting something they’ve been trying to impress upon the public for years: that although their services keep the economy going, their low pay and lack of labor protections leave them incredibly vulnerable in a crisis. As Algorri put it, “We’re overworked, we’re underpaid, and we don’t even exist.” All 50 states have closed K-12 schools in response to the pandemic, with an increasing number now saying the closures will extend through the end of the academic year. But America’s early child care system is less centralized than its schools, ranging from larger day care centers to smaller in-home day cares that may have one (or zero) employees in addition to the owner. While some are supported, at least in part, by public subsidies, many rely entirely on fees paid by parents. And many states that have closed schools haven’t extended the same order to day cares: In New York and California, for example, some day care centers remained open as of this week, although many, like Algorri’s, had little or no attendance. For many providers, the decision about whether to keep coming to work during this time is a difficult one. “I know providers who are 65 years old, so they’re part of the vulnerable population,” said Algorri, a member of the union Child Care Providers United. She’s also heard from providers who have been forced to close because they live with older family members and don’t want to risk exposing them to the virus. Others say they want to stay open to help parents who need to work right now. Marisol Hoffmann, who operates two day care centers in New York’s Dutchess County, says parents who use her centers include a single mom who is a state trooper and a dad who is a police officer. “They need to work,” she says. But of the roughly 25 children who usually come to her centers, only about four to six are currently attending. For the parents of the others, she’s handling payment on a case-by-case basis. “Although some parents are paying, we’ve got some parents who can’t, who have been laid off,” she said. That means the business has taken a financial hit. And one of her biggest concerns is how to keep paying her eight employees. Elsewhere in the country, day cares are laying off staff. Leslie Spina, owner of Kinder Academy in Philadelphia, laid off her 100 employees on March 20, according to the Philadelphia Inquirer. She said she wanted to make the call sooner rather than later so that her employees could begin collecting unemployment. “My biggest fear is that I can’t go back to work soon,” one of her employees, Yashira Morant, told the Inquirer. “If I have no income coming in, what happens to us?” Other day care employees say they’ve stayed home from work due to fears of coronavirus, but have done so without pay. Jessica, a Connecticut child care worker, told Time magazine that she was told to report to work last month or risk not being paid. But because of the hands-on nature of child care work, she didn’t feel comfortable going in. For example, “When I’m feeding the child, I’m touching all the things in their lunchboxes,” she said. While laid-off workers can get extra unemployment benefits from the recently passed stimulus bill, people who aren’t going to work because of concerns about coronavirus are not eligible. And child care workers often have little safety net to fall back on. Many are low-income: Between 2014 and 2016, 53 percent were on at least one public assistance program, according to a 2018 report. They are also more likely than other workers to lack health insurance and paid sick leave. Many — 75 percent in Los Angeles County, for example — are immigrants, and many speak English as a second language, which could make it more difficult to apply for unemployment, especially if the stimulus package creates new or complex methods for doing so. Operating a daycare is an “entrepreneur opportunity for people who are first coming to this country,” Kim Kruckel, executive director of the Child Care Law Center, told Vox. “Traditional relief packages are just going to be really hard for people to access,” she said. As Algorri put it, “I know we’re all in this together, but at the same time, as providers, we are on our own.” Even as many parents keep their children out of day care during this time, child care remains necessary around the country, especially for health care workers and others on the front lines of fighting the pandemic. Many areas, including New York City, have set up emergency child care centers for the children of essential workers. But even in the midst of great need, providers say they are still often going unrecognized by American society. But “the nurses, and the techs, and the doctors could not go to work” if it wasn’t for child care providers who are “open and willing to work through this pandemic,” Algorri said. And experts say that without support, child care centers will close permanently, leading to joblessness and a long-term shortage of this crucial service. “Child care will not be there for us when we’re all ready to go back to work if we don’t include them specifically, in a targeted, effective way, in the relief packages,” Kruckel said. The most recent stimulus legislation included $3.5 billion in funding for child care, but Kruckel says the need could be closer to $50 billion to support providers who aren’t getting parent fees right now, as well as to provide cleaning supplies, mental health support, and other resources to providers who are staying open to care for children of essential workers. Many say the crisis only highlights the needs of a workforce that has long been largely ignored. In addition to some acknowledgment of their work, Algorri says child care workers around the country need better working conditions, including a living wage and health insurance, not just now but also for the future. “We want to be healthy,” she said. “If we’re healthy, we can serve you, we can serve the community.” Correction, April 6: An earlier version of this story misstated the source of a survey on the impact of closures on child care providers. It was conducted by the National Association for the Education of Young Children.Ambulance and emergency sirens in New York City are wailing ceaselessly this month, as the number of reported deaths from Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, in the state surpassed 4,100 as of April 6. (Public health experts say that these tallies are severely undercounting the total.)  As one of the hardest-hit locations in the US so far, the city is scrambling to find enough ventilators — equipment that gets oxygen into the lungs of severe Covid-19 patients having trouble breathing on their own — for the expected surge in patients. Gov. Andrew Cuomo said at a press conference April 4 that the state had ordered 17,000 ventilators from the federal government, but “that order never came through.” Although New York City may be the first city in the country to run out of ventilators, other cities are expected to follow. New Jersey Governor Phil Murphy recently tweeted, “Ventilators are our #1 need right now. I won’t stop fighting to get us the equipment we need to save every life we can.” Louisiana Governor John Bel Edwards predicted that his state would run out of ventilators by April 6.  But to save a Covid-19 patient’s life with a ventilator, you also need an ample supply of medications, both to be able to use the machine and to prevent agonizing pain. Experts say there’s a worrisome shortage of those, too — one that’s only expected to grow worse.  
    Related
   “The minute you talk about ventilators you need to talk about medications,” says Esther Choo, an associate professor of emergency medicine at Oregon Health & Science University. Choo says hospitals are already running out of medications like fentanyl, versed, propofol, and even neuromuscular blockades, what she calls “everyday bread and butter medications,” the drugs needed to induce and maintain sedation while on a ventilator. “Ventilators can’t really be used without these medications.” In severe cases of Covid-19, the patient's’ own immune system can cause their lungs to fill with fluid. At this point, ventilators are a critical tool for keeping people alive. Medical staff insert a tube deep into the lungs in a process called intubation, in order to deliver more oxygen from a ventilator than the patient can inhale on their own. “You can imagine if I tried to shove a plastic tube down your throat, it’s a very human reflex not to let someone do that,” Choo says. “So we place people in deep sedation.” After the tube is placed in the trachea, patients have to stay sedated — in the case of some Covid-19 patients, that can last for several weeks. Without the right medications, “that experience can be agonizing,” Choo says.  It’s alarming that hospitals are already experiencing shortages of these drugs, knowing what’s coming. Although President Trump has invoked the wartime Defense Production Act to start producing the additional 40,000 ventilators New York alone has requested, these won’t help stem the crisis for long without the drugs needed to use them — to say nothing of the freewheeling chaos of inter-state bidding wars for scarce supplies. The American Hospital Association estimates close to a million Americans will need ventilators during the pandemic. So far, between roughly five and 11 percent of Covid-19 patients in the US have required intensive care. Although how many Americans have needed ventilators isn’t publicly tracked, in one study in China, 17 percent of intensive care patients required ventilators.  Already, “our health systems and hospitals are seeing demand across the country on pharmaceuticals that’s unprecedented,” says Dan Kistner, a group senior vice president at Vizient, an organization that negotiates contracts for medicines on behalf of over half of hospitals and health care facilities in the US. “We have never had the amount of demand for some of these life-saving drugs as we do now.”  “If you say we need ventilators and not, and the drugs to make them go, we’re going to have a ton of ventilators sitting around not being used,” he says. “It’s like having a car without gas.” While the FDA tracks drug shortages, the agency is mainly responsible for their safety and efficacy, not their supply. “Unfortunately, hospitals and health systems are way too familiar with drug shortages,” Kistner says, explaining that for at least the last decade, hospital drug shortages have been commonplace and dangerous. “The number one problem is that no one knows exactly where a drug — and at what volume — is being made today.” Because this information is regarded as a trade secret, “not even the FDA has insight into how much volume of a particular product, or the raw materials of that product, are being made.”  That said, it’s clear many active pharmaceutical ingredients (API) come from abroad: According to the Council on Foreign Relations, about 80 percent of these are thought to come from China and India, “though the exact dependence remains unknown, since no reliable API registry exists.”  This lack of transparency, coupled with quality control problems and supply chain bottlenecks, have led to frequent shortages of even “workhorse products,” such as fentanyl and hydromorphone, says Erin Fox, who manages drug information and monitors supplies at University of Utah Health Care’s four hospitals. Many of these crucial generic drugs are made by just a few companies, so “when one has a problem or needs to fix something at a factory, there’s not enough capacity at the others to pick up the slack.”  
    Related
   Hospira, which before its 2015 acquisition by Pfizer was the world’s largest producer of generic injectable pharmaceutical drugs, made many of these generic medications. As a result of the merger, Pfizer inherited Hospira’s quality and control problems, and even pre-Covid-19, was having trouble producing sufficient quantities. In January, before the coronavirus was spreading widely in the US, many hospitals had a 95 percent fill rate of some common sedatives — if they ordered 100 vials, they only got 95.  Even when factory lines are running properly, these companies forecast their manufacturing out years ahead of time based on how much has sold in the past, says Fox. “With this situation, where all of a sudden we need 10 times the usual amount of sedative drugs — no manufacturer has that sitting in their warehouse.”  “The drugs that go short, always and unfortunately, are generic drugs,” says Kistner. These are the drugs that have competition in the market, while branded drugs are patent-protected and companies invest in their supply chains because the profit margins are often higher.  Just how many additional patients will need ventilation and the essential accompanying medicines depends on how well social distancing measures succeed at flattening transmission rates. But according to Vizient’s data, which approximates real-time orders from over 3,000 hospitals, between January and March there was a 51 percent increase in demand for a group of sedatives and anesthetics. “This is all happening when everyone is canceling elective surgeries,” for which sedative drugs are also required, Kistner says. “So it’s really more than a 50 percent increase.” Fox says that her hospital system in Utah normally has 80 patients a day, and is ramping up to take care of more than 200 critically ill people a day. “It’s more than double,” she says. But most of the drug wholesalers are trying to limit hoarding, and many of these medications are controlled substances, meaning “the Drug Enforcement Administration has rules about how much a hospital is allowed to buy,” she says. “You can’t just order double.”  Jennifer Davis, the system director of pharmacy services for SCL Health Medical Group in Colorado, says she is expecting a five-fold increase in patients needing these medications. “For these drugs in particular, I would say we get less than half of what we order.” The limited supply of these essential drugs is not an easy problem to solve. Most of the drugs needed for patients on ventilators are administered through an IV or injections, and making them is harder than making tablets that can be taken orally. They also have a built-in 21-day sterility period, where they need to be quarantined to make sure nothing is contaminated.  Kistner says that if you started making more of these drugs today, it would take a minimum of five weeks to get it into the hands of an ER doctor beside a ventilator.  “We can’t say tomorrow we’re going to make this drug and have it by the end of week,” he says. That’s why although there are uncertainties in all of the models, “you don’t need a model to say if the country would usually use 6 million vials of sedatives a month, and now you need 10 or 12, and you can’t make these drugs overnight — you have to act now,” Kistner says.  Manufacturers of these critical medications have to do what they can now to start increasing production, but at the same time, medical staff also have to start planning for how to handle shortages. So far, we have been behind the curve in preparing for Covid-19 every step of the way. “Hospitals will need to be flexible, and think about not just Plan A and B, but Plan C, D, E, F, and G,” Fox says. “That may mean patients get different therapies depending on what is in stock,” Davis agrees. Pharmacists and doctors can substitute second and third-line medications, or try different combinations, or even try using a feeding tube to give drugs orally (instead of by injection).  But Fox says, “We do worry about medical errors when people have to use medications they’re not as familiar with dosing, especially if you think about having to take care of so many sick patients all at once.”  Choo is advocating for the federal government to establish centralized systems that could track patients, move supplies to where they are most needed, and inform manufacturers of demand. “We need to use something like Defense Production Act to mobilize industry and create public-private partnerships and stimulate mass production of these medications,” she says. Widespread Covid-19 testing is part of this strategy — by knowing who is sick, vital medicines can be shifted to the right states at the right time.  But Fox is more cautious. “We need to think through ways to conserve products,” she says. “I don’t know if Donald Trump can make drug companies churn out more drugs when some aren’t even American drug companies.”  She also notes that although the FDA has asked companies to ramp up supply, they may not have the capacity to do so. “They may literally be limited by the total amount the factory can make in a certain amount of time.” In normal times, a solution could have been importing critical medications from other countries, but in a global pandemic, we don’t have that luxury. “Europe is having their own shortages of the same medications,” Fox says. “It’s not like there’s empty factories we can just turn on and start cranking out drugs.” Choo adds that simply reinforcing stay-at-home measures to slow the number of critically ill patients coming into the hospital will also help. That helps spread out the demand for these medications over time, giving manufacturers a chance to keep up.  But so far, this is a looming and unsolved problem. “The thing that keeps me up at night,” says Fox, “is that there will be physicians and nurses and ventilators for patients — and not enough medication.” Lois Parshley is a freelance investigative journalist and the 2019-2020 Snedden Chair of Journalism at the University of Alaska Fairbanks. Follow her Covid-19 reporting on Twitter @loisparshley. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. In January, Sen. Elizabeth Warren was the first presidential candidate to release a plan for combating coronavirus. In March, she released a second plan. Days later, with the scale of economic damage increasing, she released a third. Warren’s proposals track the spread of the virus: from a problem happening elsewhere and demanding a surge in global health resources and domestic preparation to a pandemic happening here, demanding not just a public health response but an all-out effort to save the US economy. Warren’s penchant for planning stands in particularly stark contrast to this administration, which still has not released a clear coronavirus plan. There is no document you can download, no website you can visit, that details our national strategy to slow the disease, transition back to normalcy, and rebuild the economy.  So I asked Warren to explain what the plan should be, given the grim reality we face. We discussed what, specifically, the federal government should do; the roots of the testing debacle; her idea for mobilizing the post-coronavirus economy around building affordable housing; why she thinks this is exactly the right time to cancel student loan debt; why America spends so much money preparing for war and so little defending itself against pandemics and climate change; whether the Democratic primary focused on the wrong issues; and how this crisis is recasting Ronald Reagan’s old saw about “the scariest words in the English language.”  You can listen to our full conversation by subscribing to The Ezra Klein Show, available on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, Stitcher, or wherever you get your podcasts. A transcript of our discussion, lightly edited for length and clarity, follows.  There still isn’t a single coronavirus response plan from the White House — I can’t actually go and look up our strategy as a nation for stopping and recovering from this. During your presidential campaign, you released three plans on coronavirus — one in January and two in March. But the situation has gotten worse since then. What should the plan be now?  Let’s start with the fact that if you want to get something done, you ought to have a plan. Back in January, I put out a plan that really focused on the importance of getting ready: making sure that we had all the masks and the gowns and the respirators and all the things health care professionals need, and opening up centers to help people if the health care system got overwhelmed. It was also focused on testing because the testing is crucial. We need enough test kits not just to test people who are showing raging symptoms, but enough test kits to be able to test people who appear to be healthy, so you can keep detecting it in the population and identify hot spots.  That’s what a plan should still look like today, even though this thing is huge. We’ve got to keep our doctors and nurses safe. They need personal protective equipment. And we need to have enough test kits so that we’re testing not just people who are being admitted to the hospital or showing high fevers, but we’re testing in the population on a regular basis. That’s our best chance in dealing with it.  But it all comes down to having a plan.  The White House has taken the attitude that this is mainly a problem for states and localities to respond to, and to the extent they’re asking for federal help, it reflects failures on their part. What is the specific role for the federal government here? What can they do that others cannot?  The White House is just simply wrong on the notion that somehow the states can manage this on their own. We need a national response. Think about what I was just talking about. It is the federal government that can order the tests. It is the federal government that can use the Defense Production Act in order to force companies to produce the test kits, the masks, the gowns, the kinds of things that we actually need in a crisis. The states don’t have the power to do that. Only the federal government does.  Look at what’s happening when the states are out there trying, for example, to buy these masks in a market with no rules. What happens is states end up bidding against each other. New York bids against Massachusetts and they both are bidding against Arizona and California. That’s great for whoever is sitting on a couple of million masks, but it’s sure not good for the states that desperately need these masks and are paying more and more and more just to get basic supplies. It is the federal government that can allocate these masks not based on who bids the highest price, but where there’s a real need. That is what a federal government that has a plan can do.  The other half of this is the economic half. Only the federal government can cushion the economic blow here in a meaningful way. The state of Massachusetts, for example, already predicts that we’re going to have a $3 billion shortfall because expenses have gone up dramatically as we’re trying to support people out of work, those who need shelter, and our hospitals. At the same time, revenue has gone down. Taxes won’t come in until July 1, and with a lot of small businesses closing and a lot of people out of work, tax revenues are likely to be lower.  It is only the federal government that can actually print money in a time of crisis. Only the federal government that can deficit spend. Massachusetts, as a matter of our state constitution, cannot engage in deficit spending. So it’s the federal response that we need both on the health front and on the economic front.  I want to pick up on this idea of the federal government as an allocator of resources. It  does seem that the government is allocating resources, but Florida is getting everything it has asked for and Kentucky is getting more than it asked, while Massachusetts, among others, is getting less than it asks for. There have been concerns that the way the Trump administration is allocating these resources is based on which states they feel have been politically friendly to them and which states they feel are important for them in 2020. Do you think that’s true?  
    Related
   Donald Trump has made clear for years now that he cares about exactly one thing: Donald Trump. It’s all politics all the time. And now he’s focused on how Donald Trump is going to get reelected. That invades every decision that he makes.  So just look at the data you cited. How can it be that Kentucky and Florida get 100 percent or 100 percent-plus of what they need while Massachusetts doesn’t? I think anyone would look at that and say it’s Donald Trump playing politics once again.  In your plan earlier, you talked about testing and about getting health resources out. But what comes next? I think one of the most damaging parts of there being no clear national plan is that people who are sheltered in place, like me, have no idea how long that will last or what will come after. If you are creating the plan, what would you tell people comes after social distancing? What is phase two of the public health response?  It’s a great question. The first part of this is to collect as much data as we can. That’s what testing should be all about: so we can keep watching where the hot spots are and how this plays out over time. Who’s most affected? Where do we need to intensify our resources in terms of a response?  But there’s the second part to it to think about. Over time, we’re going to have a growing proportion of the population that is immune because they’ve had the coronavirus and they’ll have antibodies. That means there are going to be people who can go out and start engaging in the activities we need, helping restart both our economy and helping support our health care system. We need to start to think of them as a resource, both getting us through the worst part of this crisis and also helping us to restart parts of this economy as quickly as possible. But that only happens if we’re collecting that data.   We are, as a country, testing far fewer people per capita than, say, South Korea. What is your view of the testing failure? Why did it take so long to roll the testing out? And what is needed to get this scaled up quickly?  The reason we didn’t have testing early on was plain old politics. Donald Trump didn’t want to see those numbers. Remember when [Trump] said that he didn’t want people to disembark from the ship that had an infection? He said he didn’t want the numbers to go up, meaning the confirmed number of cases at that point.  I believe that the reason that the Trump administration wouldn’t buy the World Health Organization test kits was they didn’t want them. They didn’t want to see a crisis here in America. I think this is part of a mindset that a president believes that he can just declare how the world works and somehow the world will conform to him. And, boy, that doesn’t work in reality. It sure doesn’t work in a pandemic.  That point about mindset is interesting. When I look back at your January plan, what is striking about it is you were looking at coronavirus at a time when it was not yet primarily here. It was a problem in China. And the question was, can we contain it? That plan was very much about how to surge global public health, how to make sure we are getting good global testing results, how to make sure that we are in good information flows with other countries. What we’re seeing right now as the Trump administration responds politically to coronavirus is a sharp increase in tensions with China. There is a very aggressive effort to get American companies to stop exporting to other countries, even if that means — in critical ways — other countries will stop giving us things that we need.  Can you talk a bit about the difference between approaching a global health crisis like coronavirus from the perspective that we are in transactional competition with all these other nations, versus a positive-sum perspective?  What you’re asking is the question we face all the time around climate change: We may be in competition with other countries economically and politically, but when it comes to saving the planet, we have to find a way to work together. There’s no such thing as saving the United States of America and letting the rest of the planet burn up. That won’t happen.  The same is true about a pandemic. We live in a world where if this disease spreads in one country and one region, then it’s going to reach all around the globe. And it’s going to do it fast. Part of the failure of this administration is that their mindset is to build a wall rather than work cooperatively with other countries to address the risks that we all face. Had we helped contain this earlier, the spread might have been slower — it might have been arrested entirely. China is not blameless. But, even so, we should be supporting international information sharing.  I also believe that a big part of foreign relations is a value statement about who we are. Yes, we have terrible problems with Iran and Iran’s development of its plan to develop a nuclear weapon and its support for terrorism. But Iran is in the throes of a true crisis of enormous proportions. This is a moment when we could offer a generous hand to the Iranian people, and demonstrate both to them and to the rest of the world that we want to do our best to build a world where everyone is treated with some dignity and some respect. The idea that the Trump administration wants to use this moment of crisis as a way to sharpen our pressure on other nations and throw elbows economically — I just think is fundamentally the wrong approach. I don’t think that’s who we want to be as a nation. And, frankly, I don’t think it makes us safer over the long run. I think we build more security for the United States when we try to work with other nations and treat other human beings with respect.  I want to hold on this point for a minute, because what you’re saying, something your colleague, Sen. Chris Murphy (D-CT), said to me, which is that if you look at the federal budget, we spend hundreds of billions of dollars every year buying insurance against the possibility of a Russian attack. We spend almost no money buying insurance against the possibility of a global pandemic.  Someone who thinks a lot about issues of risk made the argument to me that we take risk very seriously if we can locate it in an external enemy, like another country or a terrorist group. But when there is a risk that would affect the whole world, that cannot be seen as adversarial — risks like climate change and pandemics — we tend to downplay or ignore them. I’m curious if you think there’s truth to that.  I very much agree with what you’ve just described, but I think there’s another dimension to understanding it. Think about the two kinds of threat that you’ve just talked about. One is the kind that we’ve understood since the time that human beings lived in caves. And that is punching each other, competing for resources, using ever-sharper weapons. But the second kind [requires] a better understanding of the world around us, the world of threats to our health and, ultimately, threats to the planet we live on. What troubles me so deeply about the past three years in the Trump administration has been the hostility to science — and not just the science of climate change. Driving the scientists out of the Department of Agriculture. To disregard what our scientists tell us about the world around us puts this country and this world in grave danger.  I want to move our conversation to the economy. We saw more than 6 million new unemployment claims this week. For those not used to looking at this data, that is apocalyptic; it makes the Great Recession disappear on a chart.  There’s been an argument going around that we are facing a choice between our economy and our lives. We’ve heard from some people, including from President Trump, that we cannot let the cure of social distancing be worse than the disease. Do you think that is the choice — our economy or our lives — we’re facing? Is that the right way to frame it?  No, that is not the right way to frame it. These two work together. Saving lives strengthens our economy, and strengthening our economy can help us save lives. The idea that there is a choice between those two, and somehow they are in competition with each other, is just flatly wrong. Let me talk about this at two levels. First, what does it mean to be a nation if we’re not here to take care of our own people? The first job of the president of the United States of America is to help keep Americans safe. What that means in a time of a pandemic, then, is making sure that we have adequate health care — that we have a plan to deal with this crisis.  It is also the case that it’s just false on the economics. There’s a great new white paper out at the Safra Center at Harvard that talks about three possible responses to the pandemic. One is really hardcore sheltering for a truly extended period of time. One is about sheltering to try to flatten the curve and moving back into some economic activity over time. And the third is to just give up and say it’s the economy and nothing more.  It turns out the costliest is to say it is only about the economy and let people go about their business. The reason that is the costliest is that it causes the maximum number of deaths, and deaths are costly. We lose the benefit of those lives. They use what is the standard dollar value we put on a life and show that it will be far more expensive if we just let this pandemic race through our country, without trying to take these measures to protect the lives of people. These two things are not in tension. If we want to strengthen our economy, then we need to solve this medical problem.  You were deeply involved not only in the policy response to the financial crisis, but also in making sense of it for people. That was a financial panic that froze much of the real economy, and the problem was in supporting businesses and people to unfreeze. Now we have frozen much of the economy by choice.  What is different in how people need to think about the economic needs and policies here compared to the financial crisis? If you’re coming into this with 2008 as the operative metaphor in your mind, how do you need to change the way you’re looking at it?  The first thing that changes is there’s such a powerful health overlay to everything we’re looking at. You can’t just say, let’s have an infrastructure package and send everybody to work on this piece of infrastructure. We still have to worry about contagion. That changes everything we think about in terms of getting people back to work.  The second part of it is that it touches the economy in a very different way. In the 2008 crash, everyone could still go to work. The problem was whether or not the money system would freeze up. This time it’s different. Small businesses are leading the shutdown, not because they can’t get access to money, but because they can’t have workers there and can’t access their customers. So you have to think about this differently. For example, the tool of simply getting money into the hands of tens of millions of people across this country is critically important. Why? Because we want them to buy food. If they buy food, we keep that part of the economy functioning. We need that supply chain to keep working so that the grocery stores are still stocked. And that only happens if customers are coming in. Then the grocery stores buy from the wholesalers and the wholesalers are buying from the farmers and from the canners and other producers. And the truckers are still up and running. We want to keep that supply chain functional — both for the health of the American people and for the health of the economy. And that only happens if people have money to buy food.  The question about people being able to stay in shelter is a little different. Do we give people money so they can make their mortgage payment and rent payment, or do we just say we’re going to freeze debt collection so that nobody gets evicted? Nobody gets foreclosed against, nobody gets a bad credit rating during this. But we’re gonna have to hit the pause button here on people making their payments for shelter, and for those owners of those properties making their payments. So you have to think about this structurally in a different way.  One of the lessons from 2008 was that, frankly, the Republicans just wouldn’t go for a big enough stimulus package. And that meant the recovery was slower and more anemic than it would have been had we put more money into stimulus. They were determined not to let Barack Obama have that kind of power in the recovery. And we paid a price for it as a nation. We’re still paying a price for it. Now, it’s the same kind of thing. We’ve got to have a strong enough response to support our families, to support our small businesses, to keep the parts of this economy functioning that are absolutely essential for our physical health and ultimately for our economic security.  In the same way that we talked earlier about two phases of public health response, I think we can also think of two distinct phases on the economic side. What you’re talking about is phase one: putting the economy on life support. That means giving people the money to continue buying groceries and paying rent while at home, and potentially give businesses money through forgivable loans to stay open. But after we do that for some number of months, some parts of that economy are going to come back and some won’t. Unlike the financial crisis, I don’t think we can just unfreeze the economy we had before — there’s going to be too much damage.  To that end, there have been arguments for different kinds of post-virus mobilizations in response to this crisis. One is a public health mobilization. But also there are different mobilization ideas that have been lurking for some time now, around a Green New Deal or on infrastructure. Are we going to need some kind of economic mobilization, in the way we often see them during wartime?  One of the mobilization efforts I would add to your list is housing. We’ve had a real problem in this country and that is that we haven’t built enough housing for middle-class families, for working-class families, for the working poor, for the poor-poor, for people with disabilities, for seniors who want to age in place, for people who are returning from prison, for people who are homeless. I grew up in a two-bedroom, one-bath house built by a private builder. The garage was converted to hold my three brothers. Private builders aren’t building those houses anymore. They build mansions. I’m not mad at them — that’s where the profits are. But the housing that houses middle-class families is just not being built privately anymore. And there’s a federal law in place now that says for every new unit of public housing brought on, the federal government has to take one old unit off.  So when you ask the question about where should we be thinking about mobilization? I think that in this time of crisis, we see the importance of safe, secure, affordable housing for everyone. Over the next few years, we need to expand our housing availability for folks. This is true in cities. It’s true in small towns. It’s true in rural America. It is a widespread problem and it’s a place where we could make a federal investment that, in the short run, gets people off the street and puts people to work in construction. And then in the long run, creates a stronger, more stable housing supply that takes a lot of economic pressure off families.  So as we move out of the economic life support period of this, Congress and the administration need to think about a more publicly planned economy to rebuild and create a bridge back to a fully functioning economy?  I think it’s going to be absolutely necessary. This is a chance to upgrade our energy grid, a chance to harden our infrastructure over time against coming climate change, to make a real investment in public transportation. And those have double economic advantages: They put a lot of people to work, but they also reassure markets and investors that we’re going to build our way out of this depression. When you have a plan and people can see it, they can start making their plans to supplement that — whether it’s small businesses or it’s big Wall Street investors. We’re going to print money for a while to make it happen, but that’s going to get money down into this economy. That’s going to build up demand. That’s how you build a boom. You don’t do it with stock buybacks. You do it by actually investing in people and in the things that people need.  There’s a moral dimension of this I want to ask you about. Right now, we’re seeing a lot of solidarity and sacrifice being demanded of working-class people, of young people — many of whom feel, I think correctly, that America hasn’t shown a lot of solidarity and sacrifice when confronted with their needs in the years before this. What needs to be done with this moment so the people from whom we’ve asked the most feel like this is an ethic that extends to them, not just one that is activated to take from them when needed?  I want to see us cancel student loan debt. Right now, there’s a six-month hiatus. So we’ve got a little breathing room. But I want to see us cancel a big chunk of this debt or all of this debt. And the reason for that is partly economic: We can now track that student loan debt has been having a negative effect on our economy. It depresses small business startup. Young people are not buying homes. So there’s an economic stimulative effect from doing this.  Young people have just been left behind. They’ve been cheated. I graduated from a college that cost $50 a semester. I didn’t have a big student loan debt burden because I could go to a school and get an education for a price that you could pay for on a part-time waitressing job. That alternative is just not out there for young people today. And the consequence is young people who try to get an education, who try to invest in their future, have been left out pretty much on their own. The federal government’s response is to lend you the money at interest and then be your biggest creditor for years and years to come. I think that’s an intergenerational crime. It’s fundamentally wrong. So I think forgiving this debt would not only give a boost to 45 million people, but would also be an acknowledgment that a lot of young folks in this country caught the short end of the stick here.  This economic recession is going to be tough on all of us, but it’s going to be especially tough on people who are graduating into it — on people who are in their first jobs. And I think that canceling out our federal government as their biggest creditor would be a way of acknowledging that and saying: It’s your future that we want to invest in.  When you look back on the Democratic primary, given what’s happening now, does it feel like the debate was focused on the wrong things?  I don’t think so. I think we talked a lot about the role of government — a government that is either working just for the rich and the powerful, or a government that’s working for everyone else. In this crisis, that truly is the issue.  Remember Ronald Reagan’s famous line? “The worst words in the English language are ‘I’m from the government and I’m here to help.’” Those are not the worst words in the English language. We’ve seen during this crisis that among the worst words in the English language are, “We’re in a crisis and the government doesn’t have a plan to help us get out of it.” The idea that somehow we’re all going to be better off with a government that doesn’t invest in science and in long-term planning has been shown not only to be wrong, but to be dangerous. I think that what the election in 2020 is going to be about, in part, is people who want a government that is competent and that is on their side in planning for an uncertain future.  You can listen to the full episode by subscribing to The Ezra Klein Show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, Stitcher, or wherever you get your podcasts. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. In mid-March, amid mounting outcry over the critical shortages of masks, ventilators, and other medical supplies facing American hospitals fighting Covid-19, Jonathan Schwartz was one of the countless entrepreneurs scrambling to answer one question: How can we help? Schwartz is a co-founder of Voodoo Manufacturing, a 3D printing company with two factories in Brooklyn, New York, including one that makes clear orthodontic aligners for companies like Smile Direct Club. Because of that, the team already had experience getting clearance from the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to make medical devices — but it still wasn’t immediately clear where their resources were most urgently needed. “There was just a lot of noise that we were trying to filter out,” says Schwartz, recalling the cacophony of engineers, makers, and megacorporations jumping into the fray all at once.  Voodoo is part of a private-sector push that in recent weeks has mobilized fashion designers, automakers, distilleries, perfume producers, and others to repurpose their manufacturing lines to make health care products that traditional supply chains can’t provide fast enough. A similar effort began in China in early February as the coronavirus swept through Wuhan and put hundreds of millions under lockdown: Factories that usually made sneakers and iPhones switched over to masks to meet the unprecedented demand.  These initiatives are ongoing and have been expedited by a mandate from the Communist Party, according to Stanley Chao, managing director at All In Consulting, which helps Western companies do business in China. “The government is saying, ‘Whatever you make, we will buy.’ So you don’t worry about the supply and demand issues,” he said.  Today, the virus has become a global pandemic, and the countries with the most urgent needs don’t have the manufacturing infrastructure or labor pool that has made China the “world’s factory.” Even in the US — where Detroit automakers famously churned out military aircraft, artillery, and tanks in World War II in their efforts to “outbuild Hitler” — companies have run into hurdles as they’ve tried to scale up. For one, while state and local governments have welcomed the assistance — and President Donald Trump has begun attacking companies who don’t produce fast enough — most of the work is still being coordinated from the ground up. Absent any central resources for private companies to find out what’s most needed and what the government itself will commit to buying, many have resorted to researching online, cold-calling medical institutions, and tracking down personal protective equipment (PPE) through their own supplier networks abroad (in some cases inadvertently driving up prices by outbidding other offers).  While the US saw its first confirmed case of Covid-19 on January 21, and the WHO warned about global shortages of PPE in early February, the Trump administration dragged its heels in invoking a federal act that would compel American companies to manufacture more medical equipment to fill the gaps in the supply chain. The Defense Production Act (DPA) of 1950 can compel companies to prioritize orders from the federal government, and while Trump announced he had signed it on March 18, he said he only did so “should we need to invoke it in a worst-case scenario in the future.”  Apart from a somewhat confusing invocation just over a week later — ordering General Motors to go forward with a plan it had already announced — the administration’s first announcement that it would use these powers came on April 2 when it said it would work to procure 100,000 ventilators by the end of June along with tens of millions of PPE units. Throughout the third week of March, Voodoo talked to dozens of doctors, health care organizations, and hospital procurement teams, eventually settling on protective face shields as the device it could produce quickly and safely at scale.  Face shields are typically worn in conjunction with N95 respirators or surgical masks, and like other forms of PPE, inventories are so limited at some hospitals that doctors have been forced to fashion their own using office supplies.  For a company like Voodoo, though, the product is fairly simple: a 3D-printed headband, interchangeable plastic sheeting, a foam pad for comfort, and elastic to help secure it to the wearer’s head. “We can go from just a design file to the first 500 units in a single day, and so we’re really here trying to just act as a stop-gap to get these urgently needed supplies to hospitals so they can start ramping up their care of patients,” says Schwartz, acknowledging that major medical equipment suppliers will ultimately need to step in to provide long-term scale. For now, the company is producing 2,500 units per week and has set up a Shopify site — CombatingCovid.com — to sell directly to health care institutions. Typically, hospitals don’t shop for medical equipment the same way the rest of us shop for leggings or mattresses, but these are extraordinary times. As the coronavirus crisis has progressed in the US, doctors and nurses across the country have raised alarms about dwindling supplies of PPE. The shortfall not only puts front-line workers at risk of infection, it may also limit testing capacity (because someone wearing PPE is generally required to administer the tests) and reduce the number of doctors attending to patients at the most critical moments. Similarly urgent is the need for ventilators, the machines that help the sickest Covid-19 patients breathe when they can’t do so on their own; too few, and doctors could be faced with the same horrifying triage scenarios as in Italy, where doctors had to decide which of their patients would be hooked up to the lifesaving equipment based on their odds of survival. To help prevent the spread of the coronavirus so hospitals don’t become even more overwhelmed, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends using hand sanitizer if soap and water aren’t available. A ready supply is needed to protect essential workers like grocery store clerks, delivery drivers, and warehouse workers, but many have complained they don’t have access to it since it has been sold out almost everywhere since February. With work slowing to a trickle across much of the economy due to store and restaurant closures, grounded flights, and supplier delays, American companies aren’t just motivated to help fight the virus — they also want to keep their teams employed if they can do so safely. Here’s how some are pitching in: With the coronavirus battering the fashion capitals of Milan, New York, and Los Angeles, the industry has enlisted an army of seamstresses to come to their defense.  On March 20, designer Christian Siriano tweeted to New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo to offer the services of his 10-person atelier to make face masks for local health care workers. A week later, he delivered a box of 1,000 washable cotton-blend masks to front-line workers at a temporary medical center at the Javits Center in Manhattan, and the team has made thousands more in the days since.  Melanie in our office has us up to 600 masks a day and that will be 3,000 just this week! Thank you everyone for all your wonderful donations we so appreciate you. You can donate at ChristianSiriano.com    A post shared by  Christian Siriano (@csiriano) on Mar 31, 2020 at 10:41am PDT Siriano’s masks aren’t medical-grade, but they can be worn by nonclinical workers to free up supplies or over tight-fitting medical-grade N95 masks to extend their life — a tactic some institutions have instructed doctors and nurses to use in order to help conserve supplies.  According to the Department of Health and Human Services’ own estimates, the US would need as many as 3.5 billion N95 face masks over the course of a year fighting a “full-blown” pandemic. At the outset of the coronavirus crisis, the country’s emergency stockpile held about 1 percent of that: 12 million N95 masks, which filter out at least 95 percent of all airborne particles when worn correctly, and 30 million surgical masks, which are looser-fitting and provide a physical barrier against large droplets, Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar testified on March 3.  In part because of this scarcity, the World Health Organization (WHO) and CDC for months advised that healthy people need only wear masks if they’re caring for someone infected with the virus, despite evidence of the effectiveness of even homemade masks at helping reduce the risk of transmission. Because even asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic carriers are thought to be able to spread the coronavirus and the US has been plagued with months of testing delays, many people could well have put others at risk while believing that they themselves were healthy.  On April 3, the CDC updated its guidance with the recommendation that Americans wear “cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain,” such as grocery stores or pharmacies, particularly in areas with significant community transmission. It clarified that N95 respirators and surgical masks should not be worn so as to conserve supplies for health care workers. (In its guidance for health care workers, the CDC says coverings like scarves and bandanas should be considered a “last resort” after respirators, surgical masks, and non-FDA-regulated face masks.) At a press conference announcing the new guidance, President Trump made clear that it is voluntary and said that he would not be complying: “You can do it. You don’t have to do it. I’m choosing not to do it.” Initiatives like Siriano’s have sprung up throughout the industry: Fellow Project Runway alum Michael Costello has made more than 4,500 masks so far — some cotton-blend, some with HEPA filters, and some medical-grade, thanks to a fabric donation from a surgeon friend — funded by donations and mask purchases. For Days, a closed-loop T-shirt line, has dedicated its sewing capacity to making 10 masks for every purchase on its site. OESH Shoes, a Charlottesville, Virginia-based brand, is 3D printing flexible masks and mask adjusters based on insight from co-founder Casey Kerrigan’s experience as an MD.  Apparel companies with scalable US-based supply chains are a vanishingly rare group these days, but a coalition of them is working with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the White House Office of Trade and Manufacturing Policy to produce up to 10 million face masks per week in domestic and Central American plants.  The group includes Hanes, Fruit of the Loom, and yarn manufacturer Parkdale Mills, which is supplying the raw material for the cotton masks. American Giant, a San Francisco-based brand that specializes in hoodies, T-shirts, and other casual apparel, has redirected its two North Carolina cut-and-sew plants to make masks full-time. Separately, Brooks Brothers has committed to producing 150,000 masks a day as well as gowns for health care workers at its plants in New York, Massachusetts, and North Carolina. Nordstrom, the country’s largest employer of tailors, is working with its partner Kaas Tailored and health care network Providence Health & Services to sew more than 100,000 masks made from surplus surgical wrap.  We wanted to share a few clips of our new mask production process. 1) Todd works on cutting the fabric in bulk. 2) Aidee sews together a mask by hand. Please make sure to join us on IG live this morning, where our founder/CEO Bayard will be answering your questions about our mask production. If you miss it live, it will be shared to our stories after the fact. #ppeshortage #maskshortage #protectivemask #medicalpasks #coronamasks #covid19usa #covid_19 #americanmanufacturing A post shared by  American Giant (@americangiant) on Mar 26, 2020 at 7:16am PDT In Los Angeles, former American Apparel chief Dov Charney is hiring sewers, forklift operators, and other warehouse workers to help produce and distribute hundreds of thousands of masks and gowns for FEMA and other organizations. His new brand, Los Angeles Apparel, is selling three-packs of cotton-terry masks online for $30 to support the cost of labor, operations, and donations of masks to hospitals and first responders.  LA’s garment industry is focusing its efforts on non-medical masks through a program called L.A. Protects. Conducted by the mayor’s office in partnership with millennial-favorite brand Reformation and health care company Kaiser Permanente, it aims to provide 5 million masks to front-line workers like delivery drivers, grocery store clerks, and non-clinical health care staff.  Other countries are also seeing corporations and small brands work in tandem: In Italy, Prada and Gucci are manufacturing masks alongside family-owned facilities like the Everyn Calzaturificio factory, which produces shoes for luxury footwear brands like Nomasei. The few American brands that have managed to procure medical-grade masks have done so mostly through their suppliers in China, where half of the world’s masks were produced before the crisis and where mask manufacturing has accelerated nearly twelvefold since, according to the New York Times. Even there, N95 masks account for less than 2 percent of daily mask production due to a shortage of melt-blown fabric, one of the key materials needed to make them. The ultra-fine particle-blocking material is made using expensive, highly specialized machines, so companies haven’t been able to simply pivot to producing it even as global demand has skyrocketed.  On March 21, luxury group LVMH announced plans to secure 40 million surgical masks and FFP2 respirators (the European equivalent of N95 masks) to help France fight Covid-19. Chairman and CEO Bernard Arnault funded the first delivery of 10 million masks at a cost of 5 million euros ($5.4 million), while the government is expected to finance the remaining shipments over the coming weeks. Eddie Bauer is importing 20,000 masks, including 5,000 N95s, for donation to the Washington State Department of Enterprise Services, after some of the brand’s suppliers of technical outerwear pivoted to PPE.  Eugenia Kim, a New York-based designer of luxury hats and accessories, says she taught herself how to import masks in six days after seeing Cuomo’s call for aid and witnessing what her sister and father were experiencing as doctors on the front lines. Her hat factories in China, she says, “had previously been reaching out about mask production and I realized I could help the cause.” The facilities can produce between 10,000-50,000 units per day of N95 masks, surgical masks, and other PPE, and Kim is working with hospitals and government agencies to arrange direct shipments. The great Purell shortage of 2020 is still well underway, but other industries with access to hand sanitizer’s key ingredient — alcohol — are doing their best to fill in the gaps. Morgan McLachlan, co-founder and chief product officer at LA distillery Amass, says she first started making the label’s “alcohol-based botanic hand wash” at the beginning of March when she couldn’t find any hand sanitizer in stores or online. Initially, it was just to protect herself and her friends and family, but as more and more people caught wind of the idea, it became something much bigger. “We were going to have our people give it out to all of our accounts as a friendly thing to do to keep all of the service staff safe,” she recalls. “Well, bars and restaurants got shut down. But we’re getting orders from across the country now.” The craft-distillery price tag — $38 for a 16 ounce bottle, with 10 percent going to the US Bartenders Guild Emergency Assistance Program, compared with $2.50 for a 10 ounce bottle of Purell, pre-price-gouging — hasn’t deterred customers, nor has the 10- to 14-day wait for shipping (a result, in part, of delays from packaging suppliers). On top of its direct-to-consumer sales, the distillery is also working with public health agencies to distribute the sanitizer more broadly. “I think we all have our desert island skills,” she says. “As distillers, we’re usually creating little quotidian pleasures to help people get through the day — but now we’re keeping people safe.” Some of the biggest liquor companies in the world have since taken a similar attitude: Diageo, whose brands include Smirnoff and Tanqueray, is donating up to 2 million liters of ethyl alcohol to hand sanitizer manufacturers, while the vodka maker Tito’s said it would produce 24 tons of its own hand sanitizer to give away to first responders and other front-line workers. (Initially, the Texas brand was forced to caution the public that its vodka didn’t meet the 60 percent alcohol threshold required by the CDC to make hand sanitizer after frustrated shoppers began formulating their own at home.)  #LVMHjoinsforces  Given the risk of a shortage of hydroalcoholic gel in France, Bernard Arnault instructed the LVMH Perfumes & Cosmetics business to manufacture within their production sites as much gel as needed to support the public authorities. Since Monday, the gel has been delivered free of charge daily to the French health authorities and as a priority to the Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris. The LVMH Group would like to express a special THANK YOU to all those who made it possible, in particular to our exceptional production teams from @guerlain, @diorparfums and @givenchybeauty who have shown great solidarity and engagement in a spirit of collective effort for the common good. The Group and its Maisons are extremely proud and humbled to do their part in the fight against COVID-19 and to help those whose mission is to protect and care for others.  As such, we will continue to honour this commitment for as long as necessary, in connection with the French health authorities. #Coronavirus #COVID19 #APHP #staysafe #StayAtHome #COVID2019france #LVMH #LVMHtalents #Guerlain #ParfumsChristianDior #DiorParfums #Dior #GivenchyBeauty #Givenchy A post shared by  LVMH (@lvmh) on Mar 19, 2020 at 10:13am PDT Uncle Bud’s, a hemp-based personal care line, was already in the process of creating its hand sanitizer when the coronavirus outbreak arrived on its doorstep. The shortage convinced the team to push the October launch date up to March, which meant sidelining other projects and shifting manufacturing lines to make millions of units of hand sanitizer, all while scaling up the company’s online business as more and more of its retail partners closed stores. “Being a smaller company, we were able to pivot quickly and fast-track finalizing formulation and production,” says co-founder Bruno Schiavi. The sanitizer launched online on March 23, selling for $9.99 per 8 ounce bottle. Perfume producers, another major alcohol consumer, have also joined the fight: On March 16, LVMH began producing and delivering free hand sanitizer to French health authorities and hospitals, using the production lines that typically manufacture fragrance for Dior, Givenchy, and Guerlain. The luxury conglomerate pulled from its reserves of purified water, ethanol, and glycerine to create the sanitizing gel and bottled it in the same plastic dispensers used for Dior hand soap, getting the initiative up and running within 72 hours. L’Oréal is distributing millions of bottles of hand sanitizer throughout Europe through two of its brands: La Roche-Posay is heading the initiative for hospitals, nursing homes, and partner pharmacies, and Garnier is doing the same for its food distribution clients so grocery workers can be protected on the job. Stateside, the Estée Lauder Companies Inc. has pledged to reopen a factory in Long Island, New York, to manufacture and donate 10,000 bottles of hand sanitizer to its home state every week. Coty Inc. — which makes fragrances for brands like Marc Jacobs and Gucci — likewise said it plans to donate tens of thousands of units per week, including through a partnership with Kris and Kylie Jenner. Coty, which recently bought a majority stake in Kylie Cosmetics and Kylie Skin, plans to distribute the hand sanitizer to health care workers and first responders in Southern California. As companies have rushed to get sanitizing products out the door, US agencies have eased some of the regulations around them: On March 27, the FDA updated its policies to allow producers of fuel ethanol to sell the product to hand sanitizer manufacturers provided it meets certain standards of purity. Prices of the ingredients typically used in hand sanitizer — either isopropyl alcohol or ethanol for food and drug manufacturing — shot up in March due to the surge in demand.  The Trump administration’s $2 trillion stimulus package also includes a temporary exemption for excise taxes on alcohol used to produce hand sanitizer during the course of the Covid-19 crisis. Even before Covid-19 was declared a national emergency in the US on March 13, ventilator manufacturers around the world were ramping up production to meet the escalating demand. Even at maximum capacity, though, they haven’t been able to keep up with health care needs caused by the rapidly spreading respiratory illness. To help move the needle, American automakers have stepped in to offer their support. General Motors is working with Ventec Life Systems, a Seattle-area manufacturer that typically makes about 200 ventilators per month. On its own, Ventec expected to be able to increase production to 1,000 units per month, but with the help of GM, it has been able to source enough of the 700 components that go into the device to increase its capacity tenfold, according to the New York Times. Ford, too, announced on March 30 that it is partnering with General Electric’s health care division to produce ventilators based on a “simplified” design licensed from Florida-based Airon Corp. The car company will reopen one of its plants in Ypsilanti, Michigan, to produce the devices beginning the week of April 20. Even working around the clock, both of these initiatives will take time, however. Ford expects to be able to deliver 1,500 new ventilators by the end of April, 12,000 by the end of May, and 50,000 by July, ramping up to a capacity of 30,000 per month. Once they’ve finished overhauling a GM electrical components facility in Kokomo, Indiana, and training 1,000 workers, Ventec and GM expect to produce more than 10,000 units per month, with “hundreds” shipping by the end of April, according to The Verge. Prior to the coronavirus crisis, the US had around 170,000 ventilators available for patient use spread among hospitals, smaller health care facilities, and the national emergency stockpile, according to a February report from the Center for Health Security at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. While that number is normally more than enough to serve the population, the report’s authors found that “the need for ventilation services during a severe pandemic could quickly overwhelm these day-to-day operational capabilities.”   Despite this, the federal government has waffled on its commitment to obtaining more ventilators, delaying the current production efforts.  As recently as March 26, President Trump questioned the need for more of the devices on Sean Hannity’s Fox News show. “I have a feeling that a lot of the numbers that are being said in some areas are just bigger than they’re going to be,” he said. “I don’t believe you need 40,000 or 30,000 ventilators.” (New York state, Gov. Cuomo has said, will need a minimum of 30,000 to deal with the crisis.) The next day, Trump changed course, berating GM on Twitter for charging “top dollar” and not working fast enough to produce the ventilators, though the company had announced its partnership with Ventec just hours earlier and said it would sell the items at cost.  The administration said it would invoke the DPA to require the automaker to prioritize the government’s ventilator orders. As of March 30, the federal government still hadn’t indicated how many ventilators it planned to buy or what price it was willing to pay, according to the Times, though at a news conference the day prior, Trump changed his tune again. “General Motors is doing a fantastic job,” he said. “I don’t think we have to worry about General Motors now.” Tesla, too, is chipping in, despite CEO Elon Musk’s tweets downplaying the severity of the pandemic. The company has donated more than 1,200 ventilators to the city of Los Angeles and hundreds more to New York City, shipping surplus stock from China while it works to establish production lines to manufacture more at several of its US plants.  Schwartz and the Voodoo Manufacturing team aren’t the only ones that have latched onto the idea of face shields: Nike is prototyping a design in partnership with Oregon Health & Science University in the company’s home state, and according to a recent earnings call, its innovation and manufacturing teams are working on other PPE concepts for further down the road. With the NHL season on hold, hockey equipment manufacturer Bauer has also shifted to face shields, effectively switching one type of protective gear for another. At its factories in upstate New York and Quebec, Canada, it began producing 20,000 to 25,000 units per week in late March, and it plans to rapidly scale up in order to fulfill orders for 2.5 million by the end of May.  It has also posted the product’s specs online, and so far, at least one other hockey company has joined in the effort. Bauer’s face shields cost about $3 each including shipping, which covers the cost of raw materials and overhead; it says it does not expect to make a profit on the sales. At its own 3D printing and manufacturing facility in Nashville, Tennessee, Smile Direct Club has produced thousands of face shields for customers including St. Luke’s Boise Medical Center in Idaho and The Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto, Canada. It’s also working to prototype respirator masks and nasopharyngeal testing swabs. The crisis has mobilized all corners of the 3D printing community, from the thousands of engineers and hobbyists organizing in private Slack groups to Carbon, the multibillion-dollar company that makes 3D printers for brands like Adidas and Johnson & Johnson. Sign up for The Goods’ newsletter. Twice a week, we’ll send you the best Goods stories exploring what we buy, why we buy it, and why it matters.  Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. The coronavirus has created a health crisis and an economic crisis. But it has also created a crisis for consumers — one that has the former director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), Richard Cordray, sounding the alarm and arguing the agency, created after the last economic crisis to help everyday Americans in their financial lives, is doing too little to help those suffering from the effects of the pandemic. Cordray, who headed the CFPB under President Barack Obama and resigned in November 2017, told Vox he is particularly concerned that Americans will lose their homes and fall victim to the finance industry’s most predatory practices, just as they did during the 2008 economic crisis.  He doesn’t want that to happen again — and is pressing the CFPB’s current leadership to take action before it’s too late. Monday, he released a Medium post outlining immediate actions the bureau can take to address the coronavirus crisis and make sure the American people are protected from the myriad ways they are financially vulnerable right now.  “It’s not that the CFPB was a bureaucracy that was put in place to be a regulator after the last crisis. It is an agency that’s supposed to be responding to consumer needs and consumer harm, and we know that’s going to be acute distress for consumers here immediately as they’re losing jobs, hence they’re losing health care along with their jobs, not able to make mortgage and rent payments, not able to pay back their debts,” Cordray told me in an interview over the weekend. “There is going to be a lot of misery, and it’s going to happen immediately to people.” To Cordray’s point, about 10 million have filed new jobless claims over the course of two weeks — a number some economists expect could quadruple in the weeks to come. By comparison, during the Great Recession, 8.7 million jobs were lost total. While some of those who lost their jobs will receive unemployment benefits, those benefits aren’t guaranteed to cover their costs of living, and as the pandemic continues, millions more people will likely be struggling to pay their bills.  Cordray and two other former CFPB officials, Diane Thompson and Christopher Peterson, have crafted a report spelling out the risks consumers face. The paper highlights mortgages and foreclosures, debt collection, and credit reporting as three major areas of concern. The message is specifically directed to current CFPB Director Kathy Kraninger, who Cordray believes is “fundamentally misreading” the situation consumers face at the moment. “She is viewing it like the administration is viewing it: as a business crisis, and that we need to go easy on business and give them a lot of leeway. But when the businesses are businesses that serve consumers, giving them leeway means they’re not performing for consumers and consumers are the ones who will bear the brunt and suffer the harm,” Cordray said. “That’s the mistake she’s making: she’s a consumer agency, not a financial institution agency.” Coronavirus is, first and foremost, a health crisis — a novel virus is sweeping across the world, and in the United States, cities and states across the country are responding. That response has, in part, triggered an economic crisis: Government officials have shut down broad swaths of the economy in an effort to fight the disease. Businesses are shuttered, production is slowed, and millions of people are out of work. And so comes the next part of this: how the catastrophe in the economy translates to a catastrophe for everyday people. “One helpful way to describe the situation may be as the third wave of the crisis — the first wave being the Covid pandemic, the second wave being the macroeconomic fallout, and now the consumer crisis emerging as the third wave,” Cordray said. There are three areas in particular he’s concerned about, and what he believes can be done to fix the issue he sees: Mortgages: Roughly 10 million Americans lost their homes during the Great Recession, and we’re at risk of a repeat if people aren’t able to negotiate with lenders so that they can put a pause on payments until they’re back on their feet. The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security, or CARES, Act, a $2.2 trillion stimulus package the president signed into law in late March, provides some relief specifically for federally backed mortgages. It includes a foreclosure moratorium and a right to forbearance, meaning a pause on payments, for such mortgages.  But, those with private mortgages are left out, and even for federally backed mortgages, people have to deal with their mortgage loan servicers to get relief, it’s not automatic. About 70 percent of home mortgages are backed by a federal agency. It’s the CFPB’s job to keep an eye on mortgage lenders and servicers to make sure they’re following through on the law, and to find other ways to help homeowners and lenders, and the worry is the agency’s not doing it. The bureau has a guide on mortgage relief, but that puts a lot of onus on consumers to navigate their situations, and unlike the government, individuals don’t have many means by which they can hold lenders accountable. It says it is providing guidance for companies to implement forbearance and work with borrowers affected by coronavirus. Debt collection: Debt collectors are already … aggressive. And with more debts about to go unpaid, they’re about to get more harassing and insistent, especially if they’re working on commission. The Fair Debt Collection Practices Act makes it illegal for debt collectors to engage in unfair, abusive, or deceptive practices when they’re going after debts, and according to Cordray, the bureau should remind debt collectors of that, and it has the ability to enforce civil penalties and make criminal referrals. It can also lay out parameters for the industry to observe amid coronavirus, including barring new debt collection lawsuits or garnishing wages. The CFPB can take the lead in pushing companies to give some leeway on debts, whether that means waiving penalties for bounced checks or helping lenders explain to people how to make use of programs and initiatives to help them manage their debts. The bureau also has a big role to play in making sure companies and lenders aren’t taking advantage of people and deceiving or misleading them.  And inevitably, the coronavirus crisis means new crops of scammers for consumers and the government to watch out for. The bureau has put out a warning to consumers telling them to beware of potential scams.  Credit reporting: Many people are going to wind up unable to pay off their debts amid the current crisis, which could ultimately harm their credit scores and cut them off from credit in the time they need it most. But credit scores are supposed to be an indication of your creditworthiness in normal times — not during a global health crisis. That’s why it’s important to make sure that information given to consumer reporting companies specifies that a “natural or declared disaster” caused the issue, meaning people’s credit reports won’t be dinged. There’s already a framework for this to happen, and it’s the bureau’s job to ensure compliance. If you were unable to pay your rent because the restaurant you work at was shut down by the government in the midst of a pandemic, that shouldn’t affect whether or not you can take out a loan for the rest of your life. Cordray isn’t the only figure openly worrying about how consumers are going to be affected by the coronavirus crisis and laying out proposals for them to get help. Americans for Financial Reform, a financial advocacy group, also recently put out a set of recommendations for financial policy responses to coronavirus, including requiring banks to accumulate capital in order to better finance forbearance and lending, and canceling federal student debt. We are in truly extreme circumstances, and there’s only so much that we, as individuals, can do. Sure, it’s great to order delivery from your local favorite to try to help keep them afloat, but your $10 sesame chicken isn’t going to pay their multi-thousand-dollar rent. The same goes for consumers — it’s hard to keep paying your mortgage, your car payment, and your credit card bill when suddenly you have no money coming in, especially the longer this all goes on. “What people need is help and protection, more than advice,” Cordray said. The CFPB hasn’t been entirely unresponsive, but by his assessment and that of other consumer advocates, it’s just not approaching this right. It’s focusing on educating consumers rather than directly helping them, which leaves it up to consumers to advocate for themselves and navigate complicated systems.  Cordray and other experts argue the actions the bureau is taking could ultimately make life more difficult for consumers. It’s relaxing some data reporting requirements for businesses, arguing that doing so will allow the businesses to focus on their customers. While that may be appropriate in some areas, critics of the policy say it could actually let companies off the hook on compliance, which ultimately hurts people. How are we going to know if mortgage servicers and other lenders are complying with the law without any data on what they are doing?  The CFPB is also being criticized for appearing not to be all hands on deck for the coronavirus response. It’s continuing rulemaking on other matters, even as both advocates and some bankers call on it to put that on pause. In an email to Vox, however, a CFPB spokesperson pushed back against some of Cordray’s concerns, saying said the agency has been working “around the clock to protect consumers” during the coronavirus pandemic. And that it is using all of its tools — regulation, supervision, enforcement, and education — to keep consumers protected. Specifically, the spokesperson said the CFPB taking action by providing guidance to companies to implement forbearance, continuing to identify unlawful behavior, and educating consumers on their rights and avoiding scams. Consumers can also file complaints of potential wrongdoing.  Amid the Trump administration’s botched response to the coronavirus crisis, there have been growing questions about whether lawmakers and leaders of the past, including those within the Obama administration and the former president himself, should be speaking out more. Cordray, who plans to share his report with state officials, said he’s tried to stay out of Kraninger’s way, but he feels he no longer can. “This is such an urgent moment, and they are so missing the boat that I need to be out and pushing hard right now, even if it destroys potential relationships. It’s just really urgent to put that pressure on right now,” he said. “This is what the CFPB was built for, it was built to protect and support customers.”On Friday evening, President Donald Trump announced that he had picked White House lawyer Brian Miller to oversee how billions of dollars in coronavirus-related relief money is spent. Though Miller has a long history of serving as an agency watchdog and was celebrated as Trump’s pick by some transparency experts, Democrats have pushed back on the decision. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and others said over the weekend that Miller’s current work within the administration means he will be insufficiently neutral as special inspector general over a $500 billion corporate bailout fund, part of a $2 trillion stimulus package passed by Congress to offset some of the economic damage caused by the spread of Covid-19. In negotiations for the third coronavirus relief package, passed on March 25, Democrats pushed for transparency measures over the half-trillion-dollar fund, which was set aside for large industries. The final bill created the office of a Special Inspector General for Pandemic Recovery (SIGPR) within the Treasury Department to audit and investigate usage of that fund. Miller is currently a special assistant to the president and serves as senior associate counsel in the Office of White House Counsel, so he was involved in the president’s defense during his impeachment trial. For that reason, Democrats have criticized the pick, saying Miller is not sufficiently neutral. “This oversight position, which will be responsible for overseeing hundreds of billions of taxpayer dollars, requires complete independence from the president and any other interested party to assure the American people that all decisions are made without fear or favor,” Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer said in a statement Saturday. “To nominate a member of the president’s own staff is exactly the wrong type of person to choose for this position.” Democratic Sen. Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut likened the pick to putting the “fox in charge of the henhouse.” Prior to working for the Trump administration, however, Miller worked as an inspector general for the General Services Administration, which operates federal properties, from 2005 until 2014. In that position, he investigated scandals within both the Obama and second Bush administrations. “He was a very serious IG at GSA,” an expert on inspectors general, Danielle Brian of the Project on Government Oversight, told the Washington Post, using an acronym for the position. “The best specific example is he went toe to toe with the GSA administrator and was largely responsible for [George W.] Bush firing GSA Administrator Lurita Doan. He wasn’t afraid of taking direct action.” Doan was a GSA administrator who resigned from office in 2008 after being accused of using her office to help Republicans. Miller also investigated allegations that GSA officials had spent thousands of dollars partying in Las Vegas in 2010.  “He is a quality pick. You couldn’t do better. He combines loyalty to the administration with the independence you need in an IG,” agreed Keith Ashdown, former staff director for the Senate Homeland Security Committee, which has oversight over inspectors general, according to the same Post article. Not all transparency advocates lauded the choice, however. Noah Bookbinder, who serves as the executive director for Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, an advocacy group for ethics, criticized Miller’s nomination on Twitter. The same night, he nominated a White House lawyer to be special inspector general for the stimulus program--an important oversight position that should be going to an independent expert, not a loyalist. 3/7https://t.co/tlTnYzeQwb Miller must still be approved by the Senate, at which point he would also sit on a council of watchdogs from other agencies, forming a broader oversight group. It is unclear when that confirmation would take place, however, because the Senate is out of session until at least late April.In recent weeks, President Donald Trump has moved from dismissing the threat posed to Americans by the coronavirus to styling himself as a “wartime president.” But until mid-March, new reports reveal, he was planning to send the army into battle with only a fraction of the weapons and armor they’d need. On Sunday, the Associated Press reported that the government largely failed to place bulk orders of N95 respirator masks, ventilators, and other medical equipment vital to those treating coronavirus patients until mid-March, according to federal purchasing contracts. The Washington Post reported that the Trump administration received its first briefing about the outbreak in China on January 3. On March 12, the day before Trump finally declared a national emergency due to the pandemic, the Department of Health and Human Services placed its first bulk order with 3M for $4.8 million worth of N95 masks. Nine days later, when there were over 30,000 confirmed cases in the country, it placed a larger second order for $173 million. Those masks would be added to the national stockpile, which was created in 1999 in anticipation of potential effects from the Y2K computer bug and expanded following 9/11. But, the AP reported, the mid-March contracts signed by the federal government and 3M don’t require the company to begin delivering the masks until the end of April — after the White House’s forecasts predict the pandemic will have peaked: “We basically wasted two months,” Kathleen Sebelius, health and human services secretary during the Obama administration, told AP. By March 31, according to the Trump administration, more than 11.6 million masks from the stockpile had been distributed to state and local governments. That represents about 90 percent of the stockpile at the start of 2020. According to HHS official Dr. Robert Kadlec’s congressional testimony in March, the US would need about 3.5 billion masks to get through the pandemic. 
    Related
   The stockpile also contains ventilators, machines that helps patients in serious condition breathe. At the beginning of March, the stockpile had 16,660 ventilators, some of which were nearly 20 years old, with 2,425 out for maintenance. On March 31, the White House said it had already distributed half of them.  The federal failure to order equipment until it was far too late to mitigate much of the damage is consistent with the denial and dysfunction that has plagued the administration’s response. And it has left other leaders scrambling to fill gaps, rather than coordinating to get aid to the parts of the country that need it the most. To understand the holes the federal government’s response has left for states to attempt to fill, look at what’s happening with ventilators.  On March 27, Trump pledged to ensure 100,000 ventilators would be available “within 100 days,” saying he’d use the Defense Production Act to order companies to step up production. That means they’d be available in late June, when experts project the virus will be past its peak in the US. And it’s unclear that it will happen; on April 2, FEMA officials said in a House Oversight and Reform Committee briefing that 100,000 ventilators would be available in late June “at the earliest.” That delay has created dire situations in places like the state of New York, which has become an early epicenter of the outbreak, with more than 4,100 deaths and 122,000 confirmed coronavirus cases as of April 5.  New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said on April 3 that he anticipated his state alone needing up to 40,000 ventilators for coronavirus patients. FEMA has sent about 4,000 to the state, according to the New York Times. But Cuomo has said he’s essentially stopped assuming that the federal government will be able to help by distributing ventilators to New York from the stockpile. “I know that the ventilator ability is just a problem for everyone — you have 50 states competing for it, you have the federal government trying to buy it,” he said on April 2. “Our attitude here is we’re on our own.” Because the White House’s strategy for distributing medical equipment and personal protective equipment, such as masks, gowns, and gloves, has been so varied, states have been pitted against one another as they bid for equipment on the open market — or they’ve been forced to take extraordinary measures to obtain equipment for hospitals in their states. On April 4, Cuomo announced that the Chinese government was sending 1,000 ventilators to New York. Shortly after, he tweeted that Oregon Gov. Kate Brown was sending 140 more. And Massachusetts Gov. Charlie Baker worked with Patriots owner Robert Kraft, the Chinese UN ambassador, and Chinese officials to ship 1.2 million masks to the state on the Patriots’ team plane. Baker said in a press conference on April 2 that Massachusetts had previously ordered 3 million masks that were seized by the federal government, so in order to “keep the Feds from finding out” about the masks and seizing them, he had to classify the trip as a “private humanitarian mission.”  Gregory F. Treverton, former chair of the National Intelligence Council, said in an April 4 Washington Post article detailing the extent of the federal dysfunction that “this has been a real blow to the sense that America was competent. That was part of our global role. Traditional friends and allies looked to us because they thought we could be competently called upon to work with them in a crisis. This has been the opposite of that.”Wisconsin’s Republican-controlled state legislature has rejected Democratic Gov. Tony Evers’s last-second bid to delay the state’s fast-approaching elections in light of concerns about the spread of coronavirus. On Saturday, state lawmakers ended a special session intended to consider Evers’s request to make the election on Tuesday, April 7, an all-mail election and to allow ballots to be sent in through late May within seconds of convening.  That means that despite the fact public gatherings in Wisconsin are banned and residents are living under a stay-at-home order Evers instituted in March, the state appears set to hold an in-person election that will include the state’s Democratic presidential primary and a vote on a state Supreme Court justice. Wisconsin, which has more than 2,000 confirmed cases of coronavirus as of April 5, is the only state out of 11 originally scheduled to hold Democratic presidential primaries in April that has not postponed or substantially changed the way people can vote in nominating contests.  On Saturday, Wisconsin Republicans not only rebuffed the attempt to cancel in-person voting but also asked the US Supreme Court to block a recent lower court ruling that extended the absentee ballot deadline in Wisconsin by six days.  Republicans accused Evers of undermining the electoral process by pushing for a change in procedure just days before the primary.  “In elections during uncertain times, it’s important that no one questions the process,” Republican legislative leaders Robin Vos and Scott Fitzgerald said in a statement on Saturday. “That’s why it’s so disappointing that Governor Evers has flip-flopped on the very question that we have been discussing over the past month.” But Evers, who enacted the stay-at-home order on March 24, said that the GOP was being irresponsible as estimates of health risks have changed.  “Republicans in the Legislature are playing politics with public safety and ignoring the urgency of this public health crisis. It’s wrong. No one should have to choose between their health and their right to vote,” said Evers in a statement on Saturday. “Being a good leader means listening to the experts, being willing to adjust our course based on the science, and making the tough decisions necessary to protect the people of our state.” Evers has also expressed concern over whether voters willing to defy the stay-at-home order will be able to find a place to cast their ballots, as Vox’s Ian Millhiser has written:  In Milwaukee, which typically has 180 polling places open on an election day, city officials expected that they would only have enough workers to keep 10 to 12 sites open. More than 100 of the state’s municipalities reported that they lacked enough regular poll workers to staff even one polling place. The governor attempted to solve this problem by ordering the National Guard to staff polling sites — but Wisconsin’s attorney general has said this emergency measure can only do so much, and that even with guards members as poll workers, there will be staffing shortages on Tuesday. While the state legislature is the only branch of Wisconsin’s government that has the formal authority to reschedule elections, according to Politico, Evers has some options available to him to attempt to delay the primary — but he appears unlikely to exercise them. For instance, Politico reports that Evers could try to ask a health official to close the polls, but likely won’t because he is concerned about depleting political capital that will be needed for coronavirus legislation in the coming weeks. And such a move would face legal challenges that could result in decisions that would limit the power of the governor in the future. In his analysis of the Wisconsin primary, Millhiser has described the back-and-forth between Evers and Republican lawmakers over delaying the election as a highly politicized process:  Armed with [a majority], Republican leaders have dismissed Evers’s proposals with scorn and contempt. In response to Evers’s suggestion that the state implement automatic vote-by-mail, for example, Republican State Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald accused Evers of “lying directly to Wisconsinites about this even being remotely possible” and dismissed his plan as a “hoax.” Many Democrats, meanwhile, attribute the worse possible motives to Republicans. On Twitter, voting rights attorney and former Obama White House lawyer Daniel Jacobson accused Republicans of refusing “to delay the primary” and to provide for “more mail voting, seemingly on the calculus that COVID will more likely affect voting in heavily Dem areas,” skewing Tuesday’s state supreme court race towards the conservative incumbent. It is true that Democratic areas of the state have been hit particularly hard by Covid-19 and could face severe polling place shortages. Milwaukee County, for instance has 1,112 confirmed cases as of April 5, and before the National Guard was called in, Milwaukee itself warned as few as 10 of its 180 polling places would be staffed.  However, in an effort to ensure those infected with the coronavirus and those unable to venture out to vote were not disenfranchised, a federal judge’s ruling on Thursday expanded the ability of voters to cast their ballots by mail. While the deadline for absentee ballots was originally Tuesday, April 7 — the day of the in-person primary, Judge William Conley ordered the deadline for ballots to be extended to 4 pm on April 13, and loosened a requirement that stated absentee ballots must be signed in front of a witness — something challenging for those self-quarantining and those living alone.  “While Conley’s decision is not the ideal remedy for many Wisconsin voters, it is also likely to rescue tens of thousands of voters from disenfranchisement,” Millhiser wrote in an analysis of the ruling. “And it will potentially prevent an election where voters lose their right to vote based on arbitrary factors like how quickly the postal service delivers their ballot.”  Republicans in the state appealed the decision. On Friday, the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals denied their request to reinstate the original mail-in ballot deadline, but did block Conley’s loosening of witness requirements, saying it opened the door to fraud. That means absentee ballots sent in without a witness certification — something that’s hard for people who live alone to obtain when the state is under lockdown — won’t be counted toward the final tally. Following this ruling, the Republican National Committee and Wisconsin Republicans filed an emergency petition to the Supreme Court on Saturday, again asking for the ballot deadline to be moved back and requesting the court to act no later than Monday.  As countries across the globe face a shortage of medical supplies needed to combat the spread of Covid-19, some US allies have begun expressing dismay over President Donald Trump’s efforts to secure personal protective equipment (PPE) for the United States. A German official has accused the US of “modern piracy,” calling the country’s efforts to obtain PPE overly aggressive, and officials in Brazil, Spain, and Canada have expressed a frustration shared by numerous US governors — that the Trump administration is aggressively outbidding them, leaving them unable to buy badly needed PPE. These complaints come as Trump invoked the Defense Production Act (DPA) — which allows the federal government to dictate the production and delivery schedules of private companies — Friday in order to prevent the export of protective medical gear overseas. In response, Canadian and German leaders have expressed dismay but say they will not formally retaliate against the United States. “We are not looking at retaliatory measures or measures that are punitive,” Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said during his daily address in Ottawa, while warning there may be some unintended negative consequences nevertheless. “We know it is in both of our interests to work collaboratively and cooperatively to keep our citizens safe.” American manufacturing company 3M, one of the few US-based manufacturers of critical N95 masks, issued a similar warning Friday, arguing that attempts to keep protective equipment within the US could have the opposite effect, depressing trade among allied countries and leading to punitive measures by other nations’ governments. 3M is under a DPA order to prioritize the US in delivering masks, and that order seems as if it may have caused some friction with Germany — a shipment of 200,000 masks ordered by German police was allegedly confiscated by the US, something German officials believe was done under the act. It was this that led Berlin’s interior minister Andreas Geisel to accuse the US of “an act of modern piracy.” “We are currently assuming that this is related to the US government’s ban on mask exports,” Geisel said in a statement. “This is not how you deal with transatlantic partners. Even in times of global crisis, wild west methods shouldn’t rule.” German press reported that the shipment came from 3M facilities in China; that company has denied that the seized masks came from them. A German official later gave a more measured statement, according to the Washington Post, that made it unclear where the masks eventually ended up. Meanwhile, Brazilian and French officials have accused the White House of outbidding them on equipment purchases and of leveraging resources they cannot compete with. “The United States has ordered 23 huge airplanes to China to bring back the materials that they’d acquired,” Brazilian health minister Luiz Henrique Mandetta told reporters this week, as the country has seen its medical stockpile depleted. And a regional official in Paris likewise accused the US of outbidding France on a mask order, an allegation which the US government has denied. These exchanges underscore the challenges that world leaders are facing in trying to both keep their citizens supplied with necessary equipment and comply with international trade deals and long-standing alliances. Germany and France have both attempted to crack down on exports of their own manufactured goods, according to the Financial Times, and nearly every country with a major outbreak — including the US — faces a shortage of PPE and other medical supplies. But increasingly, the US is being warned that restrictive policies could lead to widespread consequences.  In a statement Friday, 3M warned the Trump administration’s use of the DPA to limit exports could both snarl the US supply chain and create humanitarian disasters in countries that could not otherwise readily access equipment. And earlier on Friday, Trudeau warned about trade interruptions during a global emergency. “It would be a mistake to create blockages or reduce the amount of back-and-forth trade of essential goods and services, including medical goods, across our border,” he said. Although Canada is not a leading producer of PPE and other medical goods, thousands of health care professionals go back and forth between Canada and American hospitals — particularly in the hard-hit city of Detroit. Should the Canadian government want to retaliate, it could limit this travel. Trudeau said Saturday, however, that he would not halt those workers. Instead, Trudeau said, his nation is working to ensure it does not have to look beyond its borders for goods. It is ramping up domestic production of PPE including gowns, gloves, and masks, and is anticipating a shipment of several million masks within the next two days. In response to criticism about the new use of the DPA, Trump said that in-process orders would not be halted and that large shipments to countries with especially bad outbreaks could continue to go forward. However, given the international scale of the pandemic, international cooperation will be increasingly necessary to ensure equipment — the production of which often relies on a global supply chain — is available to everyone who needs it. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo (D) announced on Saturday that the Chinese government is helping “facilitate a donation” of 1,000 ventilators to his state, and said they would arrive at JFK Airport later in the day. “We finally got some good news today,” the governor tweeted as he made the announcement. New York is the US state hardest hit by the coronavirus pandemic, with 113,704 cases and over 3,560 deaths confirmed as of April 4. It’s also facing a serious shortage of necessary equipment to protect Covid-19 patients and health care workers alike.  The donation comes two days after Cuomo announced New York had just six days left of ventilators in their state stockpile, and was coordinated by the Chinese government and businessmen Jack Ma and Joe Tsai, according to Cuomo’s tweet. Soon after sharing news of the donated machines, Cuomo tweeted Oregon Gov. Kate Brown (D) is also sending a shipment of 140 ventilators to New York. The announced shipments come one day after President Donald Trump said he couldn’t assure New York that they would get the ventilators they badly need, saying the federal government has more states to worry about.  “No. They should’ve had more ventilators at the time. They should’ve had more ventilators, they were totally under-serviced,” Trump said Friday in response to a question from ABC’s Jon Karl. “We happen to think [Cuomo’s] well-served with ventilators, we’re going to find out. But we have other states to take care of.” .@jonkarl: Cuomo says NY may be days away from running out of ventilators. Can you assure NY that they will have the ventilators they need?TRUMP: "No. They should've had more ventilators at the time. They should've had more ventilators." pic.twitter.com/j2I94iiXas Cuomo, on the other hand, does not think Trump and the federal government are doing enough to help New York as their protective and health care equipment shortage has gotten increasingly dire. FEMA has sent about 4,000 ventilators to New York as of Wednesday, according to the New York Times. When the agency sent 400 ventilators to New York last month, Cuomo said it was not enough at a March 24 press conference. “What am I going to do with 400 ventilators when I need 30,000?” Cuomo said. “You pick the 26,000 people who are going to die because you only sent 400 ventilators.” Other governors have asked for thousands of ventilators and received a few hundred; Illinois Gov. JB Pritzker asked the federal government for 4,000 ventilators and received about 400 as of this week.  More recently, Cuomo had adopted the position that New York is essentially on its own — and that it will ensure it doesn’t just rely on the federal government for assistance. Cuomo added he did not think the federal government would deny New York ventilators if it had them stockpiled, but he is concerned there’s not enough equipment to go around for all the states. “I don’t think the federal government is in a position to provide ventilators to the extent the nation may need them,” Cuomo said on Thursday. “I know that the ventilator ability is just a problem for everyone — you have 50 states competing for it, you have the federal government trying to buy it. Our attitude here is we’re on our own; I will ask the federal government if we get to that point. I’ll do whatever I have to do to get ventilators from the federal government, but that’s why we’re also taking all those extraordinary measures ourselves.” The state’s ventilator stockpile is shrinking, and Cuomo signed an executive order on Friday that would allow New York state officials to seize ventilators from health care facilities that aren’t using them and give them to hospitals. He also called on New York companies to start manufacturing other basic protective equipment for doctors and nurses on the front lines of the coronavirus fight, and said the state would help companies pay for manufacturing costs. So far, however, New York appears to be finding more luck working with the Chinese government and other individual states to procure ventilators than it has with Trump and the federal government.      On Friday, President Donald Trump once again invoked the Defense Production Act (DPA) — which allows the federal government to dictate the production and delivery schedules of private companies — in order to prevent the export of protective medical gear overseas amid a deepening coronavirus pandemic.  In a statement, the White House announced that Friday’s use of the law was intended to prevent “wartime profiteering” and the hoarding of personal protection equipment (PPE), such as gowns, gloves, and N95 masks — a respirator considered an especially critical defense against the spread of the novel coronavirus — in order to resell them overseas. “Unfortunately, the outbreak of the virus has led to wartime profiteering by unscrupulous brokers, distributors, and other intermediaries operating in secondary markets,” read the White House’s statement. “This wartime profiteering is leading to hoarding and soaring prices for Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) like masks, gloves, and N-95 respirators, all of which are needed to protect American citizens, including our heroic healthcare professionals, battling on the front lines.” But American manufacturing company 3M, one of the few US-based manufacturers of N95 masks, has previously said that attempts to keep PPE — which is in short supply globally — in the US could have the opposite effect, depressing trade of such equipment among allied countries and leading to punitive measures by other nations’ governments. As instances of Covid-19 have increased in the United States — with nearly 300,000 cases confirmed across the country as of April 4 — hospitals have run low on critical equipment, with some medical workers resorting to using garbage bags as gowns and scarves as masks, or reusing equipment for days at a time. Friday’s order was intended to prevent people from taking advantage of this situation to hoard equipment in order to artificially generate demand, before selling it at high prices both in the US and abroad. And the Trump administration said the move will not affect manufacturers exporting goods, with the president telling reporters on Friday that “long-term orders” will still be permitted to go to countries where the novel coronavirus poses a serious problem. “If they have long-term orders and they’re in there and they want to get certain things, I’ve let them go out, in certain instances, because I think it’s only fair,” he told reporters. “They have problems that are proportionately or relatively bigger than our problems.” As Rebecca Heilweil has written for Vox’s Recode, N95 masks — so named because they filter 95 percent of airborne particles — are seen as a critical defense against the spread of the novel coronavirus, but have been in short supply as the virus has spread. In the face of such a shortage, the DPA has become something of a political catch-all: Democratic presidential contenders Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders have both called on the Trump administration to leverage the act in order to shore up stressed PPE supplies, while Trump had previously threatened to use it in order to pressure companies to keep medical equipment stateside. But companies and foreign leaders alike have suggested that poor application of the DPA might mean fewer, not more, masks for the American public — at a time when the Department of Health and Human Services estimates the US will need 3.5 billion masks to address the pandemic. In a statement, 3M said it had already been working to prioritize orders placed by the federal government and to increase the number of masks imported from its overseas factories, when the Trump administration used the DPA to direct it to ramp up production of respirators and ventilators Thursday.  The company said the White House had also requested that it stop exporting masks to Canada and Latin America, which 3M argued would have both “humanitarian implications” for health care workers in those countries, and possibly cause retaliatory measures against the US. “Ceasing all export of respirators produced in the United States would likely cause other countries to retaliate and do the same, as some have already done,” the company wrote in its statement. “If that were to occur, the net number of respirators being made available to the United States would actually decrease. That is the opposite of what we and the Administration, on behalf of the American people, both seek.” Justin Trudeau, the Canadian prime minister, also suggested that the implementation of this act would cause “blockages” in the exchange of medical supplies needed to fight the global pandemic. “These are things that Americans rely on, and it would be a mistake to create blockages or reduce the amount of back-and-forth trade of essential goods and services, including medical goods, across our border,” Trudeau said. The shortage of critical medical equipment, Heilweil argues, points to “a supply chain that’s been riddled with mismanagement and misinformation.” That’s not something that’s necessarily solved by firm executive action. Masks are difficult to manufacture, stockpiled by individuals and municipalities, and caught up in a global supply chain that is — like every other facet of the world’s economy — hindered by the very virus masks are designed to protect against. As a result, it seems that international cooperation, not antagonism, will be required to ensure that affected countries, including the US, get the equipment they need to fight a pandemic that has not yet reached its apex.For weeks, state legislators and health care providers across the country have called on the Trump administration to help with the lack of personal protective equipment (PPE) available to fight the coronavirus pandemic. The Trump administration has meanwhile argued it is the states’ responsibility to procure PPE, a stance that has led states to compete with one another for supplies — and that has led to confusion on the part of suppliers. Since March, US hospitals have faced shortages as the disease became widespread: Health care workers say they’re rapidly running out of masks, gowns, gloves, ventilators, and other protective supplies to treat Covid-19 patients, some of which are necessary to protect doctors, nurses, and providers on the front lines.  Some workers are wearing bandanas and scarves as an alternative to masks, fashioning gowns from trash bags, and rationing or even reusing medical equipment. The federal emergency stockpile is nearly depleted and “the supply chain for PPE worldwide has broken down,” a DHS official told the Washington Post. The situation is dire, and states, especially those with increasing numbers of coronavirus cases, are desperate for supplies. However, the federal distribution of supplies has occurred unevenly and several actions taken by the Trump administration will likely make it harder for hospitals to get the PPE and ventilators they need in the weeks to come. After President Donald Trump declared the coronavirus a national emergency in March, he instructed governors to order their own ventilators and other PPE, saying the federal government is “not a shipping clerk.” Trump added the administration will “help out wherever we can,” but state leaders say that current efforts aren’t enough — and that the Trump administration’s refusal to coordinate PPE distribution has forced them to compete with one another for supplies.  “It’s like being on eBay with 50 other states, bidding on a ventilator,” said New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo in a press briefing on March 31.  “We the states are trying to actively get every piece of PPE that we can. We’re bidding against one another, and in some cases, the federal government is taking priority,” Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer said on CNN’s State of the Union. A number of governors — including Massachusetts Gov. Charlie Baker — have said they’ve seen orders for masks and other needed equipment canceled because the federal government outbid them. This has led to some finding creative ways to disguise their orders to mask them from the Trump administration.  Baker’s administration worked with Patriots owner Robert Kraft, the Chinese UN ambassador, and other Chinese officials to secure a shipment of 1.2 million face masks to the state. The governor told reporters Thursday he worked with the Kraft family to create a “‘private humanitarian mission’ to keep the Feds from finding out” about the mask shipment and seizing it, according to reporter Adam Gaffin — and the masks came to the state on the Patriots’ team plane. Trump administration policy has left other states having to make similar extraordinary efforts to obtain PPE — for example, Illinois legislators rushed to deliver a $3.4 million check to a middleman at a McDonald’s parking lot so that the supplier he represented wouldn’t cancel the deal in favor of other, potentially more lucrative offers. They successfully handed off the check, and secured a shipment of 1.5 million N95 respirators from China. The goods states have received from the Trump administration haven’t always been helpful. Local governments, in some cases, have received broken or damaged PPE. Montgomery County, Alabama’s shipment of 5,880 masks had dry rot and were expired, although the county later received a replacement order. The city of Los Angeles was also given 170 broken ventilators, which had to be repaired before use.  And distribution of medical supplies from the stockpile also appears to be uneven, the Washington Post reported in late March. Massachusetts officials said the city of Boston has received 17 percent of the protective gear it requested, while the state of Maine got a shipment of 25,558 N95 respirators, or 5 percent of what it sought. On the other hand, Florida has received all the supplies it requested — two shipments for 430,000 surgical masks, 180,000 N95 respirators, 82,000 face shields, and 238,000 gloves.  The amount of supplies left in the federal stockpile is dwindling, and as Recode’s Adam Clark Estes reported, it appears that what the US currently has on hand isn’t close to meeting the overall demand that’s expected to last through the coronavirus pandemic. Critical medical supplies are being produced in the US, but instructions as to who will receive the products haven’t been made clear to suppliers — a situation that has reportedly left badly needed supplies sitting in warehouses. Manufacturers who are making PPE at the request of the Trump administration told CNN recently they have not yet heard whether they should ship their products to states, to FEMA for distribution, or elsewhere.  On March 24, the Advanced Medical Technology Association wrote a letter to FEMA, urging the Trump administration to decide “how to allocate these products in the most effective way” among state and local governments. “Some of these potential purchasers should have a higher priority than others based on the acuity of patient needs in their areas,” the letter read. “It is difficult for manufacturers to establish these priorities.” The solution to this would be for the federal government to make greater use of the  Defense Production Act, which would allow the Trump administration to coordinate production, procurement, and delivery. Trump, however, has made limited use of the act thus far, first to ask General Motors to manufacture ventilators, and later using the law to prevent the hoarding or exporting of critical medical gear like gloves and surgical masks — a move some in industry, like 3M, have warned “would likely cause other countries to retaliate and do the same.” As a result, 3M claimed, “the net number of respirators being made available to the United States would actually decrease.”  These policy choices ultimately mean there will continue to be delays in getting PPE into the hands of health workers, putting greater strain on hospitals and caretakers — and that local officials and hospital procurement officers will continue to have to take extraordinary measures to get PPE.     . President Donald Trump said Friday the CDC is advising that every person in the US wear a cloth mask or face covering in certain public settings to combat the coronavirus pandemic. Masks should be worn by all except infants “in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain,” such as grocery stores and pharmacies, CDC guidance reads. Masks are especially recommended in areas where Covid-19, the disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus, has shown significant spread from person to person. The new guidance is a big shift for the federal government, which previously declined, through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and surgeon general, to recommend that most of the public wear a mask. Authorities previously only recommended masks for those who are sick and people, such as health care workers, who frequently interact with the sick. The White House’s recommendation, based on new guidance from the CDC, only calls for people to use cloth masks, including homemade variants. The guidance is voluntary — and Trump immediately added at a press conference Friday that he would not be complying: “You can do it. You don’t have to do it. I’m choosing not to do it.” The recommendation does not mean you should go out and buy a traditional medical mask. Since there’s a shortage of personal protective equipment (PPE), including masks, for doctors and nurses, experts recommend that people don’t use the limited supply of medical masks, like surgical masks and N95 respirators, for themselves and instead leave those for health care workers. While the evidence is limited, research suggests that more mask use by the greater public could help stop the spread of Covid-19. Some studies in households and colleges “show a benefit of masks,” Raina MacIntyre, head of the Biosecurity Program at the University of New South Wales in Sydney, Australia, told me, “so it would be plausible that they would also protect in lower-intensity transmission settings such as in the general community.” 
    Related
   The PPE shortage makes this evidence a bit harder to act on. If doctors and nurses can’t get medical masks, that’s very bad news for all of us: We need as many health care workers as possible to stay healthy so they can treat and save people who are sick, not just with Covid-19 but with other illnesses too. “I am worried that telling people to wear masks will strain already weak supplies that are needed by doctors and nurses,” Jennifer Nuzzo, an epidemiologist at Johns Hopkins University, previously told me, before the federal government’s updated guidance. “If we are able to fix that supply chain, I’d feel less worried about this. But some of the shortages initially were due to members of public and medical staff raiding medical offices’ and hospitals’ supplies for home use.” Experts also worry masks can give people an exaggerated sense of security. Masks don’t make you invincible, and they absolutely can’t replace good hygiene — Wash your hands! Don’t touch your face! — and social distancing. Even in Asian countries where widespread mask use is common, good hygiene and social distancing have been necessary to combat Covid-19. Epidemiological models also suggest coronavirus cases will rise if social distancing measures are relaxed, potentially causing hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of deaths in the US alone. Still, masks do appear to help. It’s straightforward: Coronavirus appears to mostly spread when germ-containing droplets make it into a person’s mouth, nose, or eyes. If you have a physical barrier in front of your mouth and nose, that’s simply less likely to happen. But the best protection masks offer may be protection from the wearer. While the evidence is thin on how much masks protect the wearer from coronavirus — since it’s unclear if the virus spreads much through airborne droplets — it’s true that the masks stop people from spreading their own droplets: When you breathe, talk, laugh, sigh, yawn, sneeze, or cough in public, you’re less likely to get droplets on a checkout machine, dining table, or anywhere else if you have a mask on. That could stop people, even those who are asymptomatic, from spreading infection. 
    Related
   That’s especially important for Covid-19, since at least some spread happens when people are asymptomatic, when they have few symptoms, or before they develop symptoms. Universal mask use could stop these asymptomatic carriers — many of whom might not even know they’re sick — from inadvertently infecting other people. The CDC guidance stated that masks are primarily meant to prevent the spread of disease from the wearer to others. Some members of the general public would also benefit more. People who know they’re sick or interacting with someone who’s sick were already advised to use a mask. People who frequently interact with others as part of their jobs, like a first responder or a grocery store clerk, are more likely to get good use out of masks too. The logic is similar to why masks are so important for health care workers: Masks are most useful during prolonged, close interactions involving potentially sick people.  With the new guidance, the federal government is trying to walk a line between acknowledging the evidence for public mask use — as well as many people’s desires to take more action to combat the coronavirus — and avoiding further strain on available PPE supplies. So it’s limited its call to just cloth masks (which can be made at home) for now. The CDC also notes that “cloth face coverings should not be placed on young children under age 2, anyone who has trouble breathing, or is unconscious, incapacitated or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.” But for almost every American, that means the official guidance is to now wear some sort of cloth on the face while in public. Here’s the gist of the evidence on public mask use: Masks don’t offer full protection — but some protection is better than none.  Masks can’t replace all the other approaches needed to fight the coronavirus, like washing your hands, not touching your face, and social distancing. But when paired with all these other tactics — and when used correctly, which may not be as easy as you think — masks offer an extra layer of protection. The quality of the research on this topic is weak, with a lot of small, underpowered studies. “There’s not this overwhelming body of evidence that says that’s exactly what we should be doing right now,” Saskia Popescu, an epidemiologist focused on hospital preparedness, told me. “That’s why there hasn’t been an earlier push from public health agencies.” But the studies that do exist generally favor more people wearing masks. A 2008 systematic review, published in BMJ, found medical masks halted the spread of respiratory viruses from likely infected patients. In particular, studies on the 2003 outbreak of SARS — a cousin to the coronavirus that causes Covid-19 — found that masks alone were 68 percent effective at preventing the virus. By comparison, washing hands more than 10 times a day was 55 percent effective. A combination of measures — hand-washing, masks, gloves, and gowns — was 91 percent effective. A 2015 review, also published in BMJ, looked at mask use among people in community settings, specifically households and colleges. Some studies produced unclear results, but the findings overall indicated that wearing a mask protected people from infections compared to not wearing a mask, especially when paired with hand-washing. A big issue was adherence; people were often bad at actually wearing masks, which, unsurprisingly, diminished their effectiveness. But if masks were used early and consistently, the authors concluded, they seemed to work. Other studies have produced similar results, typically finding at least some protective value from masks as long as they’re used consistently and properly. There are some risks. If people start feeling like masks make them invulnerable and begin acting recklessly — ignoring social distancing or failing to wash their hands — that could actually make wearing masks worse than not wearing them. But if people take all the other precautions and add masks to their repertoire, as other countries’ experiences suggest people can do, then masks seem to help. There’s no good research on how masks affect people’s behaviors. “It could be good. It could be bad,” Popescu said. “But either way, we need to have that knowledge.” There’s also a risk of improper use actually exposing people to more illness. If people don’t put on the masks correctly, they won’t be as protective (though some barrier is likely better than none). If people touch the front of their masks and then touch other parts of their face, they can infect themselves with droplets their mask caught. If people reuse masks, they can breathe in virus-containing droplets from the masks while putting them on or taking them off. The results also vary depending on the type of mask. One kind of mask that’s been talked about a lot lately is the N95 respirator, which is a more complex, expensive mask meant to fit more tightly on the face. N95 respirators in theory outperform surgical masks (which are the more traditional, looser-fitting medical masks), but they’re genuinely difficult to fit and use properly — to the point that a 2016 review in CMAJ couldn’t find a difference among health care workers using N95 respirators versus surgical masks for respiratory infection, likely due to poor fitting. Given how difficult these are to use, and the extra layer of protection they can provide, experts argue these masks should, above all, be saved for health care workers. Cloth masks, meanwhile, are much less effective than the modern alternatives, as a 2015 study in BMJ found. And they can be extra risky, since they can trap and hold virus-containing droplets that wearers can then breathe in. But they still, in general, offer more protection than no mask at all, several studies concluded. Experts at the CDC also offered some advice for proper mask use, which differs somewhat depending on the type of mask: Wash your hands before and after taking off a mask — before to avoid getting anything on your face and mask, and after to get rid of anything that was on your mask. Don’t fidget with your mask while it’s on. If possible, throw away disposable masks after using them. And if you can’t throw a mask away, make sure to thoroughly disinfect it with ultraviolet light sterilizers — not something most people have around. Or, if using a cloth product, soap and water or laundering works. Based on the evidence, masks appear to help both the wearer and other people. The latter is particularly important for the coronavirus, since the disease can spread from those with few to no symptoms. So whether it’s for selfish or altruistic reasons, there could be a benefit to everyone, even the asymptomatic, wearing masks — as is standard and recommended by public officials in many Asian countries (including Taiwan and South Korea, both of which seem to have done a better job containing Covid-19 than the US). George Gao, director general of the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said as much in an interview with Science magazine:  The big mistake in the US and Europe, in my opinion, is that people aren’t wearing masks. This virus is transmitted by droplets and close contact. Droplets play a very important role — you’ve got to wear a mask, because when you speak, there are always droplets coming out of your mouth. Many people have asymptomatic or presymptomatic infections. If they are wearing face masks, it can prevent droplets that carry the virus from escaping and infecting others. But part of persuading people to wear masks in these countries was simply more people wearing masks in public, removing the stigma that only sick people wear masks and making masks more socially acceptable. That’s an argument for everyone wearing a cloth mask now — and medical masks once supply shortages are fixed — when we go out. Not only could that help protect ourselves and those around us, it might help instill a healthier norm for the rest of society too. The federal government, particularly through the CDC, had for months rejected calls for the general public to wear masks. Before the government announced its updated guidance, I tried to find out why — and the CDC didn’t seem like it was budging on the issue anytime soon. Why shouldn’t the public use masks if they provide some protection? “CDC does not recommend that people who are well wear a face mask to protect themselves from respiratory illnesses, including Covid-19,” CDC spokesperson Arleen Porcell responded. Okay, but why? “The science says that surgical masks won’t stop the wearer from inhaling small airborne particles, which can cause infection. Nor do these masks form a snug seal around the face.” Sure, masks don’t stop everything, but isn’t some protection better than none? I got no response after that. Since then, however, the federal government has shifted course — now recommending at least a cloth mask for every American in public when social distancing measures are difficult to maintain. That comes after the federal government’s messaging backfired: As health care workers have clamored for masks, it’s become harder to tell the public that masks wouldn’t benefit everyone else. By obfuscating and failing to fully explain the issue, experts told me, officials have likely sown distrust toward their guidance — and the public has rushed to buy masks anyway. I can’t explain the motives behind the federal government’s original stance and shift. But based on my conversations with other experts and officials, it seems many people are afraid of saying anything that could exacerbate the PPE shortage for health care workers or get members of the general public to think — incorrectly — that they could ease on social distancing if they just wear a mask. “I fear that if we tell everyone they should go out and buy masks, it will not only contribute to the PPE shortage,” Jaimie Meyer, an infectious disease expert at Yale University, told me, “but it will give a false sense of a ‘quick fix’ for protection, whereas people still need to be practicing social distancing strategies that are much more effective, though perhaps socially, psychologically, [and] logistically challenging.” So as tough as social distancing can feel, it’s, unfortunately, a requirement for now that just won’t be supplanted by masks. The PPE shortage is a real problem too. There are reports of doctors, nurses, and other health care workers using bandanas and scarves for masks and trash bags for gowns. Hospitals are considering do-not-resuscitate orders for dying Covid-19 patients out of fear that such intensive, close-up procedures could get doctors and nurses without PPE infected with the virus. The CDC, acknowledging the shortage, previously recommended homemade masks for health care workers when no other options are available. Different levels of government are racing to fix the PPE shortage, which is driven by both high demand as the coronavirus spreads and a lack of supply as countries, hospitals, and individuals hoard what they can find. Experts say the shortage reflects poor government preparedness for a pandemic, given that disease outbreak simulations repeatedly found PPE problems in the past. Whatever the cause, the shortage for health care workers is bad news for all of us.  As coronavirus has spread, experts have talked up “flattening the curve.” The idea is to spread out the number of coronavirus cases — through social distancing, testing, contact tracing, and other protective measures — to avoid overwhelming the health care system. Here’s what that looks like in chart form: The PPE shortage could make it harder to flatten the curve of new cases if doctors and nurses get sick. But the line representing health care system capacity also isn’t a constant. If we develop more capacity, it can handle more cases at once. If capacity falls — if doctors and nurses get sick because of a lack of protective equipment, or refuse to work without conditions that can ensure their safety — even a flatter curve will be hard for the system to handle. That’s why experts, even those who acknowledge that the public would benefit from using masks, say that doctors and nurses should get priority: This isn’t just about keeping people on the front lines safe; it’s about keeping all of us safe. So until the shortage is fixed, experts say that people should not compete with our health care workers for mask supplies. If you do have masks, consider donating them to hospitals and clinics (though most will only accept unopened packages). There’s also a new group, Project N95, trying to connect PPE suppliers and health care workers. Policymakers could also take steps to fix the shortage: sending out strategic reserves, funding more production, and, in President Trump’s case, using the Defense Production Act to better prioritize PPE for hard-hit states in the short term and mandating more production in the medium and long term. And individual companies could shift their production lines to produce more PPE, like some clothing and pillow companies are doing. For now, the federal government recommends cloth masks for the general public, echoing what other organizations had previously suggested. A “road map” on dealing with coronavirus by the conservative-leaning American Enterprise Institute, for instance, made a similar recommendation: “Personal protective equipment should continue to be reserved for health care workers until supplies are sufficient for them and abundant. For this reason, right now members of the general public should opt to wear nonmedical fabric face masks when going out in public.” Again, the research suggests cloth masks aren’t as effective as medical masks, but they offer some protection. If you want to make your own, people are increasingly offering tips for how to do so on social media.Jared Kushner would have you believe the Strategic National Stockpile of medical supplies wasn’t meant to be the main national resource in the event of a medical crisis — and now, the stockpile’s official website agrees. It’s an Orwellian twist that shows the lengths to which the Trump administration is going to tell states they need to fend for themselves as the number of coronavirus cases in the US continues to climb with no peak yet in sight. To back up: Kushner created quite a negative stir with comments he made during Thursday’s White House coronavirus task force press briefing characterizing the Strategic National Stockpile as “our stockpile” instead of “states’ stockpiles that they then use” — remarks at odds with language on the stockpile’s website that described it as a resource for “state, local, tribal, and territorial responders” to obtain “the right medicines and supplies ... during an emergency.” But within hours of Kushner making those widely decried remarks, language on the stockpile’s website was changed to be in line with the view he espoused about it belonging to the feds but not necessarily the states. “The Strategic National Stockpile’s role is to supplement state and local supplies during public health emergencies,” the website now says. “Many states have products stockpiled, as well. The supplies, medicines, and devices for life-saving care contained in the stockpile can be used as a short-term stopgap buffer when the immediate supply of adequate amounts of these materials may not be immediately available.” The change was first noted by journalist Laura Bassett: This is what the website for the federal stockpile said yesterday vs what it says today, after Kushner was caught lying about how states aren’t supposed to be using it. It was changed to say, “Many states have products stockpiled, as well.” https://t.co/kbNXiwaJbX pic.twitter.com/xAtPKIyHnA Kushner has been running a coronavirus task force operating in the shadow of the official one overseen by Vice President Mike Pence. His work so far has reportedly been unfruitful. On Tuesday, the New York Times quoted an unnamed senior administration official who described Kushner’s effort as “a ‘frat party’ that descended from a UFO and invaded the federal government” and reported that members of his task force used “the website FreeConferenceCall.com to arrange high-level meetings.” Thursday’s briefing represented a rare public appearance before the media for the president’s son-in-law. It did not go particularly well. Kushner’s opening statement was so replete with meaningless startup-style jargon that it resembled a Saturday Night Live cold open come to life. At one point, he said the word “data” four times in 20 seconds without ever detailing what all that “data” was being used for. Here's Jared Kushner going for the world record of most meaningless corporate buzzwords used in a single one-minute video clip pic.twitter.com/Vy1QJEhLQa During the Q&A portion of the briefing, it became clear that the point of Kushner being there in the first place was to contribute to President Trump’s ongoing effort to shift blame for scarcities of ventilators and personal protective equipment (PPE) for health care workers away from the federal government and onto states. “The notion of the federal stockpile was it’s supposed to be our stockpile. It’s not supposed to be states’ stockpiles that they then use,” Kushner said. JARED KUSHNER: "The notion of the federal stockpile was it's supposed to be our stockpile. It's not supposed to be states stockpiles that they then use." pic.twitter.com/9Q7j8QBCMv Kushner’s claim contradicted language on the HHS website detailing the purpose and history of the federal stockpile — but aligned perfectly with the administration’s overall response to the crisis. As Rep. Don Beyer (D-VA) pointed out on Twitter, however, the White House’s new line about the national stockpile appears to be at odds with with federal law stating that “the stockpile ... shall provide assistance ... to maintain and improve State and local public health preparedness capabilities to distribute and dispense medical ... products from the stockpile.” Thursday’s press briefing came amid reports that New York may as soon as next week run out of the ventilators the state needs to treat Covid-19 patients, forcing hospitals to ration care. And it isn’t alone — as the number of coronavirus cases continues to grow nationwide, states such as Washington and Michigan are also reportedly running low on ventilators. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo (D) has repeatedly pleaded with the federal government to do more to provide states like his with ventilators, as well as decrying the current system in which prices are driven up by states not only bidding against one another for medical supplies but also competing with the federal government. CUOMO: "How can we be in a position where you can have New Yorkers possibly dying because they can't get a ventilator, but a federal agency saying 'I'm going to leave the ventilators in a stockpile.' I mean, have we really come to that point?" pic.twitter.com/8XqAh99Bka Cuomo has said his state will need 30,000 ventilators to meet the demand, but he reportedly only has 2,200 in the state stockpile. But instead of using all the tools at his disposal to help, Trump has indicated that he doesn’t believe Cuomo actually needs that many. Though Trump later tried to walk back those comments, Kushner is apparently on the same wavelength. According to Vanity Fair’s Gabriel Sherman, Kushner described Cuomo as an alarmist during a recent White House meeting. According to an unnamed source who talked to Sherman, Kushner said during the meeting, “I have all this data about ICU capacity. I’m doing my own projections, and I’ve gotten a lot smarter about this. New York doesn’t need all the ventilators. ... I don’t believe you need 40,000 or 30,000 ventilators.” Kushner touched on that same I-know-best theme in his comments during Thursday’s briefing, saying at one point that “some governors you speak to, or senators, and they don’t know what’s in their state ... most governors didn’t know off the bat what they needed.” Trump echoed those comments, saying “the states should have building their stockpiles ... we’re a backup. We’re not an ordering clerk.” Despite what Kushner would have you believe, the entire purpose of the Strategic National Stockpile is to help states obtain resources they don’t have the means to acquire themselves during crises. The Washington Post’s Aaron Blake detailed the background: The Strategic National Stockpile was formerly known as the National Pharmaceutical Stockpile. In a description of what was then known as the NPS in 2001, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention acknowledged that states couldn’t be counted on to have sufficient supplies in situations such as biological or chemical terrorism and that’s why the federal stockpile was needed. “Few U.S. state or local governments have the resources to create sufficient pharmaceutical stockpiles on their own,” the report says. “The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, under U.S. Congressional mandate, has developed and implemented a National Pharmaceutical Stockpile (NPS) to address this need.” In other words, the program was designed to supplement the states and deliver supplies to them that, according to this U.S. government document, they won’t have because of budgetary constraints. Trump, however, has made abundantly clear he thinks it’s up to states like New York to fend for themselves.  “Long before this pandemic arrived, they should have been on the open market just buying,” he claimed on Thursday.  "Long before this pandemic arrived, they should have been on the open market just buying" -- Trump tries to shift blame for medical gear shortages to the states pic.twitter.com/vtw3xDC3o6 Thursday’s briefing came amid growing concerns that Trump is playing politics by being accommodating with requests for supplies made by Republican governors who support him but less so when requests come from people like Cuomo, whom he doesn’t see as on his side and who govern states that aren’t crucial to his reelection hopes. Judging from his performance on Thursday, Kushner’s role seems to provide an intellectual gloss on things. But to hear New York doctor Craig Spencer tell it, Kushner would be better served visiting an ICU like the one he works in instead of tinkering with models meant to prove that New York is asking for more than it needs. “If you’re not stepping foot in a hospital, if you don’t have a visual of what’s going on, then you can understand all the high-level modeling necessary to get the right amount of ventilators or the concerns about supply chains or PPE, but to stand by when [Trump’s] implication is that ‘maybe we don’t need all those ventilators,’ or ‘maybe the ICUs aren’t filling up’ ... that’s not our lived reality on a day-to-day basis,” Spencer told Vox on Tuesday, right after he finished his shift working at Columbia University hospital in Manhattan. “The first two patients I saw were [in] cardiac arrest from coronavirus. We couldn’t move one out of the room fast enough to get the other one in,” Spencer added. “That’s the reality.” The news moves fast. To stay updated, follow Aaron Rupar on Twitter, and read more of Vox’s policy and politics coverage. Despite an initial Democratic push for a bold infrastructure bill to infuse the economy with cash and jobs, the next coronavirus bill Congress may take up later this month could look very similar to the last one it passed. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi is already calling it “CARES 2.”  A fourth package could include more direct payments, extended unemployment insurance, health insurance for laid-off workers who lose theirs, and hazard pay for front-line health care workers and other essential employees like grocery store workers, truck drivers, and postal workers.  With an unprecedented 10 million people applying for unemployment benefits due to the coronavirus economic crisis, Democratic leaders on Capitol Hill are acknowledging the relief provisions in the $2 trillion bipartisan CARES Act simply may not be enough for the stark economic hardship many Americans now face.  Both Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer and Pelosi told Vox on separate press calls that Congress needs to take additional action to alleviate the financial hardship of workers and small businesses.  “I believe that we will need a Covid 4 [package] and I hope we’ll do it relatively soon,” Schumer told Vox on Friday. “And I think this is one of the big questions. Do we need more money? We probably will.” “I think now we need a fourth bipartisan bill, and I think the bill could be very much like the bill we just passed,” Pelosi told CNBC’s Jim Cramer Friday. “I’d like to go right back and say let’s look at that bill and update it for some other things we need, and again put money in the pockets of the American people.” Pelosi spent much of this week pushing the idea of a recovery infrastructure package to help get Americans back to work and give struggling state and local governments a boost. But on Friday, she shifted her message, saying infrastructure might be moved to a later bill.   “While I’m very much in favor of doing some of the things to meet the needs — clean water, more broadband, and the rest of that — that may have to be for a bill beyond this,” Pelosi said on CNBC. “Right now, I think we have a good model; it was bipartisan, it was signed by the president, but it’s not enough.” And they may have more luck working with Republicans on such a package than an infrastructure package; Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has also said a fourth bill may be necessary, but he wants to focus on making sure aid from the third package reaches Americans. It’s a tacit acknowledgment from Democratic leadership that the spiraling economic effects of the US coronavirus outbreak are much worse than anyone could have imagined — and may not end anytime soon.  “We’re still in the midst of the crisis; that is the difficulty in this,” a congressional aide told Vox. “Imagine it’s a hurricane — it’s not just moving along, it’s sitting on top of you.”  The bipartisan CARES Act cost a historic $2 trillion, but it may be just the beginning of the federal response.  Congress isn’t scheduled to return to Capitol Hill until April 20 at the earliest, but discussions about the next bill are underway. Though we’re nowhere near a bill draft yet, here are some of the ideas being talked about: Extending expanded unemployment insurance: Anyone who is on unemployment or signing up for unemployment benefits will get an extra $600 per week on top of their current state benefit until the end of July. But Schumer and Pelosi admitted that may need to be extended, depending on the state of the US economy this summer.  “Certainly, I would be willing, if the numbers continue to be bad, to expand the program,” Schumer told Vox. “We do not want to leave people behind,” Pelosi agreed. “Should we again do the $600? I certainly think so,” she told Vox. “So that the people have the purchasing power to help them meet their needs but also spend it, inject demand into the economy, help the stimulus as well as relief.” Hazard pay for health care and essential workers: The US Department of Labor defines hazard pay as “additional pay for performing hazardous duty or work involving physical hardship.” Schumer said he wants to see hazard pay for health care workers dealing with an influx of Covid-19 patients as well as other essential workers who cannot work from home, like grocery store and food delivery workers, truck drivers, postal service workers, and others.  Expanded OSHA regulations for health care and other essential workers: House Democrats want to include something in a bill requiring the Occupational Safety and Health Administration to put in regulations to protect health care workers and essential personnel from infectious diseases. “There is no legal requirement for health care facilities — not just hospitals, but nursing homes, mental health institutions, ambulatory care facilities, and others — to take necessary steps to protect front-line health care workers,” said House Committee on Education and Labor Chair Bobby Scott (D-VA) on a press call. “We introduced legislation requiring OSHA to adopt an emergency temporary standard and pushed to include it in the last Covid-19 bill, but it was blocked by the Senate and the administration.” More direct payments to Americans: Many Americans will see direct payments in the coming weeks and months from the CARES Act. Most adults making less than an adjusted gross income of $75,000 annually will receive a $1,200 one-time payment. Payments will go out to individuals whose income is as much as $99,000, but those bringing in more than $75,000 won’t receive the full amount. Pelosi on Friday said she could see more direct payments for Americans in a fourth bill.  Expanded health care access: As millions of Americans get laid off, many are also losing the health insurance they get through their employer. Democratic leaders are calling on the Trump administration to reopen the enrollment period for health care exchanges, so laid-off people can get coverage. The Trump administration has so far declined to do so.  “We haven’t gotten to the question of the uninsured,” Sen. Ron Wyden (D-OR) said on a press call. “I share [Schumer’s] view this is going to be essential.” Earlier this week, Pelosi and House committee chairs laid out the first pieces of a potential infrastructure bill — the “recovery” component of coronavirus relief. Democrats wanted to include expanding rural broadband and 5G capacity, building community health centers, and fixing up American water infrastructure. Democrats believe they can work with President Trump on an infrastructure bill; the president tweeted his support for the idea, calling on Congress to get to work on a bipartisan infrastructure bill as its “phase four” coronavirus stimulus and recovery. “It should be VERY BIG & BOLD, Two Trillion Dollars, and be focused solely on jobs and rebuilding the once great infrastructure of our Country!” Trump tweeted. But Senate Republicans may need more convincing. McConnell made it clear he didn’t want to start considering a recovery bill until Congress ensured resources from the CARES Act were actually getting to workers and businesses. “Well, look, the current law has not been in effect for even a week yet,” McConnell told Fox Radio. “The Treasury Department’s got a massive, complicated problem here in getting all of this money out rapidly. And the speaker is already talking about phase four. Well, we may need a phase four, but we’re not even fully into phase three yet.” While Democrats will likely continue to draft an infrastructure package in the background, it’s a more distant priority than continuing to get emergency money out as fast as possible. And it makes sense; this week ended with the realization that far more workers are being impacted by the coronavirus economic crisis than originally thought. As Vox’s Matt Yglesias wrote, the government’s unpredictable response to coronavirus makes it really difficult to know how long the public health crisis and aftershocks on the economy will last: Policymakers currently seem to be assuming that the economy is kind of like a light switch that they’ll be able to turn back on when the virus is under control. But that’s not really an idea the world has a lot of practical experience with, and it’s far from obvious that it will work in practice. All we really know is that the country is currently experiencing an unprecedented economic downturn and nobody can say when it will end. Staving off a prolonged spell of mass unemployment is going to require wartime-style mobilization efforts involving both enormous levels of government spending and a fully cooperative central bank. We’re in uncharted economic territory, and Congress’s next steps are crucial.Right now, New York’s hospitals are no longer operating as independent facilities. Under the plan announced this week by New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, there is effectively one big New York state hospital system fighting off the coronavirus. As one VoxCare reader who works in health insurance put it to me, “This verges on the socializing of the entire system.” To be clear, they were being descriptive, not pejorative — and while that is a little hyperbolic, it’s not as far off as you might think. Cuomo announced that he had met with New York hospital leaders and come up with a plan to, in effect, merge them into one operating system with many different locations. From Buffalo to NYC, hospitals will be sharing staff, patients, and supplies for the foreseeable future, with Albany overseeing the distribution of resources. “It’s not unusual for a time of an emergency for regulatory authorities to basically say, ‘Hospitals, you must do this.’ Usually there are provisions in state law that enable that to happen,” Susan Dentzer, a senior policy fellow at Duke University’s Margolis Center for Health Policy, told me. Hurricane Katrina is one recent example she gave. But the plan is still remarkable. There are about 200 hospitals in New York state, totaling 53,000 beds before Cuomo told them to double their capacity. About 20,000 of those beds are in New York City. It is a matter of necessity, as New York has already seen more than 100,000 Covid-19 cases and 1,500 deaths — with the peak still projected to be a week away, according to the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation’s estimates, requiring as many as 100,000 beds. “This is on a scale that has not happened in the United States ever, with the possible exception of 1918,” Dentzer said of the New York strategy. “Nothing on this scale has ever happened in at least 100 years.”  I asked Peter Viccellio, associate chief medical officer at the Stony Brook emergency department in Long Island, about the New York hospitals plan. I want to share his response in full: We’re in an almost apocalyptic crisis, which requires cutting through the bullshit. If hospital A has resources and hospital B doesn’t, it’s in the best interest of the patient that hospital A and B work together. Protective equipment should be available to all health care providers, not just those who work at a place with a better procurement officer. We ALL need the proper equipment to treat the patient, and adequate space. Fighting against each other for resources — this isn’t the time. Resources need to be distributed in a rational way. The current rugby scrum is nonsense. The top priority in Cuomo’s plan is moving staff from less affected hospitals to those buckling under a surge of Covid-19 cases. Doctors and nurses from upstate hospitals will be transferred to NYC facilities. Likewise, hospitals will try to send patients from overcrowded hospitals to those with available beds. Ventilators, which support critical patients’ breathing, could also be shuffled between hospitals based on need.  The New York state department of health will manage the movement of staff and resources, in conjunction with hospitals. It will set certain thresholds for the number of occupied ICU beds or ICU Covid-19 cases that would trigger some of these transfers. The state will also coordinate the distribution of the protective gear that helps keep doctors and nurses healthy and able to work from the various state and hospital stockpiles. (You’ve probably seen the news about the hospital ships and Central Park tents and Cuomo calling for medical volunteers, but the rest of the state has a lot of existing capacity that can be put to use without requiring new construction or traveling across the sea.) It is an unprecedented organizing challenge — but we are dealing with an unprecedented crisis. “My impression is that now more than ever, we need to recognize that health is a public good,” Karen Joynt Maddox, assistant professor at the Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine, said. “It’s not just an individual state of being. And it’s to everyone’s benefit to work together to try to get people healthy.” Joynt Maddox said that in St. Louis, the three big hospital systems have been holding frequent calls to share data on admissions and ICU transfers so they can better plan how to increase their capacity when and if cases surge there. This kind of coordination is relatively commonplace within a single hospital system that has multiple facilities. What’s unique here is the scale: an entire state merging all of its hospital systems into one. And that will present plenty of challenges both logistical (what happens when patients move from an in-network hospital to an out-of-network one?) and personal (are patients going to be moved far away from their families?). A few more questions, via the Kaiser Family Foundation’s Larry Levitt: What are the payment rates and who is paying? Do hospitals have to pay each other when one sends another resources? “I do think it’s going to be incredibly messy and complicated to sort out reimbursement of all this on the back end,” he said. Another one: Is Congress going to provide more funding to bail out hospitals in New York and elsewhere, which have taken a brutal financial hit as they cancel elective surgeries to free up more beds and staff to battle Covid-19? We’ll need answers to those questions. But the time for radical action is here. As Joynt Maddox put it, “If not now, when?” “This is the kind of organization we need in a pandemic, with very clear guardrails around the scenarios under which it’s put into place and under which it no longer applies,” she said. “I can see plenty of potential problems, but plenty of upside too.”  New York is the first state to take such a dramatic step as the coronavirus takes its toll there. But it may not be the last. This story appears in VoxCare, a newsletter from Vox on the latest twists and turns in America’s health care debate. Sign up to get VoxCare in your inbox along with more health care stats and news.  Get our newsletter in your inbox once a week. Are you interested in more discussions around health care policy? Join our Facebook community for conversation and updates.In times of crisis — from wars to natural disasters to recessions — Americans have looked to the federal government to step up and lead the national effort to confront the challenge. In the face of the coronavirus pandemic, our federal government, led by Donald Trump, has essentially abdicated its traditional role of spearheading a coordinated response. State and local governments have always provided the majority of front-line public services in the United States. And a relatively high level of decentralization has been baked into the American constitutional order for centuries, serving most of the time as a good way to cope with the inevitable challenges of governing a country that is both vast and diverse. But the federal government has unique resources and flexibility, as well as the ability to move things from one part of the country to another to ensure that capabilities are deployed where they are most needed. It can coordinate national-scale markets, mobilize money when things are tight for households and state governments alike, speak with a single voice abroad, communicate rapidly to the population as a whole, and mobilize a far higher level of expertise than any state or local government. Most of all, the places experiencing the greatest level of need at any point may not be the places with the most capabilities. The federal government can get organized, set priorities, and make sure important problems are being addressed in a timely and comprehensive way.   But while Donald Trump enjoys playing president on TV, he’s always been lazy about doing the actual job. So while he’s taking advantage of the crisis to stage daily extra-long episodes of the Trump Show with guest appearances from Mike Pence and public health officials, the executive branch of the federal government is mostly missing in action. David Schleicher, a Yale Law School professor who studies federalism and comparative issues, notes that “in most countries — as far as I can tell — the crisis has led to centralization of authority, both towards the national government and towards the chief executive,” which is the historical pattern in the United States. But now in America, while state governments have moved to centralize authorities rather than allow an uncoordinated response, the federal government has been absent.  Politico’s John Harris calls Trump “an authoritarian weakman” in contrast to someone like Hungary’s Viktor Orbán, who is using the outbreak to further neuter his country’s democracy.  But it’s not as if Trump is acting out of some high-minded opposition to self-aggrandizement. He’s made himself the star of the television version of the federal response, bragged about his ratings, and boasted that he is now “number one on Facebook” (in fact, Barack Obama has nearly 25 million more followers). Nor has he been above meddling in pursuit of partisan political objectives. Rather, as Schleicher says, the core to Trump’s approach is that he is “seeking to avoid responsibility and blame rather than assert control,” an instinct that’s reinforced by the conservative ideology of his top aides and major donors.  The result is a hollow core at the center of the national response. As Sen. Chris Murphy (D-CT), who was publicly warning of inadequate coronavirus preparation in early February, put it, “the administration has effectively declared surrender.” 1/ Hear me out:If you're criticizing Trump's Coronavirus response as ineffective, you're doing it wrong.The problem is - for all practical purposes - there has been NO RESPONSE. The Administration has effectively declared surrender. And 200,000 might die because of this. Rather than managing a public health emergency, they are managing a public relations crisis while leaving states to cope with the actual problem.  Nowhere has this absence been more glaring than in the administration’s dealings with the state hardest hit by coronavirus thus far: New York.  The epicenter of the outbreak is currently New York City and the surrounding suburbs. New York is arguably uniquely vulnerable to pandemic disease because so much international air travel goes through it. City officials also argue that its uniquely high population density and transit usage by American standards leave it vulnerable, though the success of Seoul, Taipei, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Tokyo at controlling the virus makes me doubt that.  It’s also clear that New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio (D) made some serious policy errors in early to mid-March. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo (D) eventually stepped in to fill the void, but in retrospect he waited longer than he should (and the governors of New Jersey and Connecticut seemed insufficiently attentive to the inevitable spillover into their states) and legitimately deserves some of the blame. But by stepping up, albeit belatedly, he improved the situation.  A desperate New York repeatedly turned to the administration for help, and the administration continually failed to step up. In a series of tweets Thursday morning, Trump explicitly stated his rationale, claiming that the federal government is nothing more than a “backup” for the states and not a first-line crisis responder. He also complained about governors’ “insatiable appetites” for medical supplies and blamed New York state for its “slow start,” while suggesting it has perhaps already gotten more help than it deserves.  ....have been stocked up and ready long before this crisis hit. Other states are thrilled with the job we have done. Sending many Ventilators today, with thousands being built. 51 large cargo planes coming in with medical supplies. Prefer sending directly to hospitals. Somebody please explain to Cryin’ Chuck Schumer that we do have a military man in charge of distributing goods, a very talented Admiral, in fact. New York has gotten far more than any other State, including hospitals & a hospital ship, but no matter what, always complaining..... This is gross as rhetoric, and the idea that the federal government is a mere “backup” in the middle of a historic global crisis is risible, an analysis straight out of the Articles of Confederation. But it also reflects a more fundamental truth about Trump’s approach to the crisis. There’s no systemic plan of action or objective standard. Instead, federal help is doled out sporadically and arbitrarily, bypassing governors he sees as potential rivals (“prefer sending directly to hospitals”) or whose states aren’t relevant to his Electoral College math, and portrayed as acts of beneficence from a feudal monarch rather than the obligations of a democratically accountable leader.  During impeachment hearings last November, Stanford law professor Pamela Karlan raised the possibility that a president who used foreign aid as leverage to extract personal political favors might do the same vis-à-vis governors with disaster relief money. Pamela Karlan: “What would you think if, when your governor asked the federal government for the disaster assistance that Congress has provided, the President responded, ‘I would like you to do us a favor.’ I’ll... send the disaster relief once you brand my opponent a criminal.” pic.twitter.com/J96FY30k3y And to the extent that there is any organizing principle to Trump’s actions, it’s precisely along these lines.  During a Fox News virtual town hall on March 24, Trump said assistance to states is “a two-way street. They have to treat us well also.” When governors comply with this demand to sing for their supper, it’s then turned into propaganda videos to boost the president’s political standing.  Great to hear! CA’s Gov Newsom about @realDonaldTrump“Let me just be candid with you. I’d be lying to you to say that he hasn’t been responsive to our needs, he has.""The fact is every time I've called the President he's quickly gotten on the line."pic.twitter.com/X8enylMUzO By contrast, Trump publicly labeled Washington Gov. Jay Inslee (whose coronavirus response seems to have been the most substantively successful of anyone in the country) a “snake” while suggesting that perhaps Pence should stop returning Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer’s calls. The incredibly slow response of Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, by contrast, has received no federal rebuke, since DeSantis is a close ally. And for whatever reason, the opaque system by which the federal government is doling out equipment led to Florida’s requests being fully met even as other states got only a fraction of what they say they need.  More recently, the Washington Post reported on Wednesday that while public health officials want to send new rapid Covid-19 tests from Abbott Laboratories to the hardest-hit communities, White House political officials prefer to prioritize “the south and low-density areas.”  Dating back to long before the crisis, Trump has always acted as the president of the people who supported him rather than as the leader of the entire country. And in the throes of the epidemic as the stakes rise, he’s continued to comport himself in this highly inappropriate matter. The United States is currently afflicted with a serious shortage of personal protective equipment for medical personnel, along with shortfalls of actual treatments like ventilators and hospital beds in some places. The president has the unique authority to use the Defense Production Act to increase the output of these supplies. And the federal government has the unique responsibility, in a time of shortages and needs, to assess where supplies can do the most good. In a major war, not every field commander can get everything he might want. The responsibility of political leaders is to simultaneously increase production to ameliorate shortages and make decisions about who gets what’s available in order to best achieve high-level goals and ultimate victory.  But Trump refuses to play that role. “The government’s not supposed to be out there buying vast amounts of items and then shipping. We’re not a shipping clerk,” Trump memorably said at a press conference last week. “As with testing, the governors are supposed to be doing it.” The result has been a competitive scramble between states to secure necessary equipment from private providers.  Lydia DePillis and Lisa Song report for ProPublica that New York is paying as much as 15 times the normal rate for desperately needed medical supplies. It happens to be the case that the hardest-hit state at the moment is also one with a large population and an above-average income.  But according to the Kaiser Family Foundation, the states that ultimately have the most vulnerable populations tend to be lower-income with either older populations, poor background health conditions, or both. What happens when Maine and Alabama are forced into bidding wars with less vulnerable but richer states like North Dakota and Virginia?  One could imagine a flexibility-based case for the decentralized approach if the federal government were currently filling state coffers with money, so every governor had a health budget with which to play this game.  But instead, the federal government is offering limited financial assistance to states even as their sales and restaurant tax revenues are collapsing. Some will be unable to buy what they need, others will be forced to adopt massive austerity measures to pay for masks and gowns, and fundamentally, resources will be allocated according to the happenstance of who has cash on hand rather than in furtherance of any coherent national strategy.  And that, of course, is because there is no strategy. Dr. Anthony Fauci told CNN on Thursday that he doesn’t understand why some states have yet to issues shelter-in-place orders. But he knows the reason is they haven’t received clear instructions — perhaps paired with carrots and sticks — from the federal government to do so. By saying this publicly, he is clearly trying to do his best to play the coordinating role that the president is abdicating, but there’s no substitute for leadership from the man who’s actually in charge. As many wags have noted online, the current patchwork solution is a bit like establishing a peeing section in a swimming pool.  Decentralization has its merits, of course. As recently as mid-March, Trump was comparing Covid-19 to seasonal flu and suggesting that stringent social distancing measures were unwarranted. Had he had the means or inclination to impose this view nationally, states like Ohio, California, and Washington that acted decisively would be much worse off today. If you take incompetence for granted, it may be better to pair it with absentmindedness and sloth than the opposite. But to climb out of this catastrophe is going to take something better than muddling through. Broadly speaking, the United States is undertaking a broad suite of restrictions that aim to get the virus under control. Once it is, we can expect some level of normalcy to begin to return at some pace, but it will still be a while until a vaccine exists and then some additional time before everyone can be vaccinated.  A natural question that a lot of people have: How is this all supposed to work, exactly? By what criteria will we decide that the virus is now “under control”? And when we begin to lift restrictions, which will be the first to go? Which places will try to lift them? When a vaccine exists and the first doses roll off the assembly line, who will get them?  Even if we don’t know the exact answers to these questions, it might be nice to at least know who will make the decisions. Right now the White House has no document or set of words that explain its strategy. But lifting restrictions in a haphazard, decentralized way risks disaster. If one state goes too far too soon and creates a new outbreak, it’s easy enough to surge in resources while shifting back to shutdown. But if 17 states make the same mistake all at once, there’s a huge risk of uncontrolled national spread.  Alternatively, if everyone gets so spooked that no governor wants to be the first to run the risk of opening things up again, the economy will keep spiraling downward. Only the president has the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National Institutes of Health at his disposal, and only the president has the authority to make guarantees about what help the federal government will and won’t provide.  It should be his job to map out how he wants this to work. But he’s not doing that, any more than he’s making decisions currently about where medical supplies should go. He’s tweeting, he’s grandstanding on television, and he’s even got the Secret Service back to lining his pockets by renting equipment at his golf courses. Far from articulating a failed response strategy, he’s not leading any kind of response at all. For health care workers, the N95 mask is an invaluable line of defense against the novel coronavirus. These highly protective respirators can keep doctors and nurses from getting infected by patients, but the world is quickly running out of them. While countries around the world scramble to find stockpiles of N95s and manufacture more of the much-coveted masks, it’s unclear how this shortage will resolve itself. The situation in the United States is increasingly dire. On April 2, President Trump invoked the Defense Production Act (DPA) to compel 3M, one of the only companies that manufacturers N95 masks in the US, to ramp up production. Many, including Democratic presidential primary candidates Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders, had pushed the White House to use the DPA more aggressively to deal with medical supplies shortages. The president later said in a tweet that 3M “will have a big price to pay” for exporting masks. 3M pushed back against Trump’s threats. In a Friday statement, the company emphasized that it had gained approval to import 10 million masks from its facilities in China. 3M also warned about the White House’s request to end its exports of N95 respirators, citing “humanitarian implications of ceasing respirator supplies to health care workers in Canada and Latin America.” If other countries retaliated by not sharing supplies, 3M argued, the US could soon end up with fewer masks than it had before the DPA order. Despite global production ramping up, the US shortage of N95 masks is so great that companies, unions, and even average people have been scrambling to fill the need by searching for stockpiles of existing masks and seeking out alternative suppliers. Another problem is that many of these respirators, including those made by 3M, are ending up in a somewhat lawless gray market, where they’re subject to hoarding and price-gouging. Accordingly, federal authorities are hard at work tracking down stashes of this desperately needed personal protective equipment and redistributing what they find to health care worker.  In another move to increase the supply of respirators, the Food and Drug Administration has also lifted restrictions on importing KN95 masks, which are similar — though not identical — to N95 masks, and are certified by China, according to BuzzFeed.  In New York, now the epicenter of Covid-19 cases in the US, Gov. Andrew Cuomo has called for New York and American companies to transition to making N95 masks, among other medical supplies, if they're able.  “It is unbelievable to me that in New York State, in the United States of America, we can’t make these materials, and that we are all shopping China to try to get these materials, and we’re all competing against each other,” he said during a Friday press conference. Referring to an N95 mask, he said: “It can’t be that we can’t make these.”  So while discoveries of hundreds of thousands — and even millions — of masks might sound like good news, the everlasting shortage also draws attention to a supply chain that’s been riddled with mismanagement and misinformation. The situation also raises the question of why companies, unions, and average people have taken it upon themselves to find masks for health care workers, as well as why the federal government didn’t do more sooner to get masks into the hands of people who need them most. Certified N95 respirators are special. Unlike a conventional surgical mask, N95 masks are built so that 95 percent of very small airborne particles can’t get through. These masks also need to be approved by the CDC’s National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health and, depending on the type, the Food and Drug Administration. In order to fulfill those requirements, N95 masks must be constructed so that they seal tightly around one’s mouth and nose, unlike surgical or cloth masks which are loose-fitting. The CDC recommends several measures to help prevent the spread of Covid-19:  Guidance may change. Stay informed, and stay safe, with Vox’s coronavirus coverage hub. The United States is now confronted with a shortage of N95 masks for a number of reasons. The masks themselves are difficult to make, in part because they require specialized equipment to meet stringent regulatory standards. Many of the companies that can make the masks are also in China. That supply chain wasn’t prepared for a pandemic, especially one that originated in the same country where many of these masks are produced. And as the novel coronavirus spread throughout China, the country’s government bought its domestically produced masks, ensuring they weren’t exported. That’s made the gap between supply and demand in the US much larger. In the absence of a pandemic, the US has typically not produced enough of these N95 masks to meet the needs of its own workers. 3M and Prestige Ameritech are the two primary companies that do end-to-end production of medical-grade N95 masks in the US, and both are both ramping up production. Another American company, Honeywell, recently started producing N95 masks at its Rhode Island and Phoenix facilities. Still, these three companies won’t solve our mask shortage.  Now that China appears to have slowed its own Covid-19 outbreak, overseas shipments of protective equipment are starting up again. Even if China exported the same number of masks that it did before the novel coronavirus outbreak, the US would still need a lot more since it’s now combating the highest number of confirmed cases of any country in the world. The US is also competing with many other countries eager to get hold of more N95 masks.  So front-line health care workers are sounding the alarm that there simply aren’t enough N95 face masks to keep themselves and their patients safe. A March survey conducted by the health care company Premier found that a shortage of N95 masks was hospitals’ top concern, and that many hospitals had less than 10 days’ worth of supplies. Facing limited supply, nurses have been forced to reuse masks and are turning to cloth and conventional surgical masks, which are not as protective. The struggle to equip health care workers with proper protection has left some looking toward the US government for help. So far, many are frustrated by a lack of preparation in the face of the coronavirus crisis and the government’s failure at ensuring that masks and other essential medical equipment get routed to hospitals and other places where it’s most needed. The Department of Health and Human Services has estimated that the country will need 3.5 billion masks over the course of tackling the pandemic. Disparate sources in private industry are showing up to help. Many companies and organizations are purchasing masks for the specific purpose of donating them to fight the Covid-19 pandemic. However, others are offering up N95 masks that were being kept in storage. Reasons vary as to why so many companies have these high-end respirators stashed away in warehouses.  Mark Zuckerberg, for instance, recently said that Facebook was donating 720,000 N95 masks that were purchased following the wildfires in California last year. He added that the company was “also working on sourcing millions more to donate.” Currently, California emergency regulations require that when air quality worsens by a significant amount, workplaces must take steps to ensure their workers have respiratory protection, like N95 masks, if other adjustments can’t be made. The change in regulation came following the catastrophic 2018 California wildfires. The same regulation suggests that a good number of other California employers also have N95 masks on hand. But wildfires aren’t the only reason companies have N95 masks in storage. Goldman Sachs donated some 600,000 masks after buying them during past public health crises, like the H1N1 pandemic. The National Cathedral similarly kept a stockpile of more than 7,000 N95 masks because of concerns about the avian flu and recently donated 5,000 of them to Washington, DC-area hospitals. Meanwhile, a spokesperson for Intel told Recode that it is donating 1 million items of personal protective equipment, including N95 masks, from its “factory stock and emergency supplies.” The list of sources for N95 masks keeps growing as officials keep seeking them out. A construction company in Columbus, Ohio, handed over its supply to local health officials, while some Habitat for Humanity workers in Atlanta gave nearly 1,500 N95 masks to their county health department. Both groups keep the masks for their everyday operations. Some masks have even come from the trash. A Maryland recycling company had saved 36,000 N95 masks that someone had previously tried to throw out. Now, those masks are being donated to health care workers.  There are also cases of discovered masks with more mysterious origins. For instance, the Service Employees International Union-United Healthcare Workers West (SEIU-UHW) announced in late March that it located a whopping 39 million respirators that could be sold to health care workers. But the union has thus far declined to name the distributor that had these masks, apparently out of concern that the company would be overwhelmed, and at least one hospital association appeared to walk away from the deal. Another intended recipient never received its order and said that the supplier never had the masks it promised, an allegation that has sparked a federal fraud investigation. It’s also unclear exactly where several major N95 donations from corporations are coming from. Apple CEO Tim Cook tweeted in late March that his company had “sourced, procured, and is donating” 10 million masks, though it’s not immediately clear why the company had access to so many masks. The day before Cook’s tweet, Vice President Pence said in a press conference that Apple would be donating 9 million N95 masks from its “storehouses.” Still, Apple would not comment on why the company had these masks in supply.  Even though millions of N95 masks have reportedly surfaced in the past month, health care workers will need millions more in the coming months. And to some extent, all of these recently discovered masks are adding to feelings of confusion. One big question that keeps popping up: Which stockpiled N95 masks are still usable? “You can find small pockets of available supplies as people realize, ‘Oh, yeah, we do have a warehouse.’ It is nearly impossible to find a large quantity,” Soumi Saha, senior director of advocacy at Premier, told Recode. She added that many of these products are now expired. “When you start seeing millions behind some of these finds, you really have to do so with a level of caution.”  These massive discoveries seem to be happening with some frequency. The most recently reported discovery happened in an Indiana warehouse, where government officials found nearly 1.5 million expired N95 masks. They had been part of the US Customs and Border Protection’s emergency supply, but according to the Washington Post, the Department of Homeland security is giving the masks to TSA workers instead of sending them to hospitals. It’s not clear whether the fact that the masks are expired played a role in how they’re being distributed.  While 1.5 million masks sounds like a lot, that load is just a fraction of the 21 million N95 respirators the state of California found in its emergency stockpile a few weeks ago. The state says that all of the masks “are expired but are usable” under updated CDC guidelines. Indeed, at the end of February, the CDC reported that “certain N95 models beyond their manufacturer-designated shelf life will be protective.” The San Francisco Chronicle explains that the issue with the expired masks isn’t the respirator itself; the elastic band that holds the mask on the wearer’s face can degrade over time, preventing a tight seal. One solution that could avoid the risk of using expired equipment might just be to keep reusing the disposable N95 respirators. The Food and Drug Administration recently approved an Ohio company’s disinfection system. This new machine can disinfect up to 80,000 N95 masks a day, though regulators are capping each device’s capacity at 10,000 masks.  At this point, it seems obvious that the question of how health care workers can get access to large numbers of functional N95 masks is complicated. It’s not always clear where the masks are coming from or whether they’re any good. “As the world scrambled to acquire [N95 masks] — for different reasons — it created a weird market dynamic between those who are looking to buy and those who are looking to provide,” Andrew Stroup, a co-founder of the medical equipment clearinghouse Project N95, told Recode. “That imbalance in the market happened, and then you saw a rise in secondary or open market individuals showing up saying they could supply it.” In other words, a gray market for N95 masks has emerged. As Vox recently reported, a growing number of individuals and organizations are raising money through websites like GoFundMe and working with suppliers in China to fill the gap in supply that the US government can’t or won’t properly address. These importers have to worry about not only expired N95 masks but also counterfeits and substandard products, which are increasingly being offered to US health care workers.  The number and breadth of sellers has grown drastically in recent weeks, adding to the general state of confusion in this crisis. Now, a troublesome class of middlemen is in the N95 mask business, and hospitals might find themselves dealing with anyone from legitimate distributors to criminal counterfeit rings. Meanwhile, prices for masks have spiked from just around $1 per mask to as high as $7, $8, or even $9 a mask. Michael Einhorn, president of the medical supplier Dealmed, says that despite 3M’s promise not to raise prices during the pandemic, these so-called diverters still find a way to intervene and profit from the pandemic.  Amazon has now effectively banned the sale of N95 masks to the public, and platforms like Facebook and Google have prohibited ads for Covid-19-related medical products (though that hasn’t necessarily stopped these ad from popping up).  Meanwhile, through suspicious accounts on platforms like Instagram and Twitter, there  appear to be unauthorized people advertising N95 masks, which may or may not be legitimate. Facebook, which owns Instagram, told Recode that it will remove “posts and accounts selling masks, hand sanitizer, surface disinfecting wipes, and Covid-19 test kits.”  A Twitter spokesperson told Recode that several accounts that appeared to be selling N95 masks have been removed for violating the company’s rules regarding platform manipulation and spam.  “Diverters are people who are able to get ahold of a 3M product, either from another distributor or somehow they were able to siphon off the supply chain, and they hold onto it and flip it,” Einhorn told Recode. “3M has a major problem. We’re an authorized 3M dealer, and we haven’t gotten masks in months.”  Einhorn added that philanthropists and companies looking to donate masks could end up buying from diverters on the gray market, and they might be “a little surprised to learn how expensive it is.”  The government’s Strategic National Stockpile, which has emergency supplies stored in secret locations around the country, contains millions of masks. Nevertheless, the Trump administration seems to be distributing medical supplies unevenly during this public health crisis. Michigan, whose governor has recently drawn the president’s ire, says that the 112,000 masks supplied by the federal government will still leave the state “in dire straits.” The governor of Florida, on the other hand, says his state has received everything it’s asked for. Not all states are getting what they’ve asked for.  To address the shortage, the president has turned to the DPA, which enables him to force private companies to produce needed medical supplies during an emergency. He’d previously used the law to manufacture much-needed ventilators. Denying health care workers access to essential equipment inevitably raises questions about the Trump administration’s ability to manage a supply chain that’s been consumed by disruption, misinformation, and profiteering. “I think the bigger and more important story around this,” Steve Trossman, the SEIU-UHW director of public affairs, told Recode, “is where in God’s name is FEMA and the federal government, which has the ability to pull all of the strands of a chaotic and fractured supply system together and aggregate the large supply of PPE that seems to be out there, stabilize prices, figure out distribution, etc.?”  Inevitably, the entire world needs many, many more N95 masks not only to keep health care workers safe but also to stop the spread of the coronavirus. As the search continues, US health workers might be forced to take whatever they can get. For some, that might mean the insufficient, loose-fitting cloth masks, even some that people are sewing at home. Some may just have to settle for face shields, which are now also being manufactured by volunteers. If the CDC does end up changing its policy and recommending that every American wear a mask in public, the shortage of N95 masks could very well worsen. So if you’re not a health care worker or someone with Covid-19, consider an alternative like a surgical or cloth mask. And if you happen to have any unused N95 masks, consider donating them to health care workers immediately. You could save someone’s life.  Update, April 3, 12:45 pm ET: This post has been updated with new information about the N95 mask shortage, including that President Donald Trump has invoked the Defense Production Act to push 3M to make more masks, as well as the company’s response.  Open Sourced is made possible by Omidyar Network. All Open Sourced content is editorially independent and produced by our journalists. Hosts Jane Coaston, Dara Lind, and Matthew Yglesias on the evidence for mask wearing, and a totally non-coronavirus white paper. Subscribe to The Weeds wherever you go your podcasts, including: Apple Podcasts, Google Podcasts, Spotify, and Stitcher.Just over a year after the terror attacks on September 11, 2001, President George W. Bush set up the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States — known more commonly as the 9/11 Commission — to look into the intelligence and preparedness failures that led to nearly 3,000 deaths. Now as the coronavirus sweeps across the United States, a former member of that body thinks a new independent commission should be formed to look into how America couldn’t contain a disease that it knew was coming — and has been estimated to kill about 200,000 people. “Clearly, the system that’s in place doesn’t work, and we’re going to need to figure out a way to change it,” John Farmer Jr., a senior counsel and team leader for the 9/11 Commission now at Rutgers University, told me. “There’s almost no excuse for the dilatory nature of this response.” Farmer isn’t alone. Calls for an impartial body to look into the coronavirus response failings are coming from members of Congress and filling up opinion pages. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi has even announced a new select committee to look into why the Trump administration didn’t take the threat seriously early on. But the former 9/11 Commission member isn’t looking for a political fight. He wants a body of experts to review how the US should prepare for the next pandemic, and what specific changes need to be made to the response system. He points to the idea of states as the primary responders in particular. “The federal government can provide resources and expertise if needed, but clearly that model doesn’t work in this circumstance. It just doesn’t,” Farmer said. President Donald Trump or his successor could simply set up such a body, or Congress may try to form one. Whatever the method, if the US doesn’t form this commission, then Farmer believes the country will remain vulnerable to another pandemic. By that point, even more hundreds of thousands of Americans will be at risk. Our interview, edited for length and clarity, is below. You’re calling for a 9/11-style commission to get to the bottom of why the Trump administration’s Covid-19 response was so slow and poor. What, exactly, would forming a commission do? The 9/11 Commission was a body that was able to take a step back from the way that the war [on terrorism] was being fought, look at how it started, and look at what caused the lapses in our response. It offered a dispassionate, nonpartisan way to analyze the situation and make constructive recommendations for policymakers going forward. That would be the point of any kind of inquiry. The difference in this context from 9/11 is I don’t think we have the luxury of waiting until this is over to make these assessments. The response is ongoing now, and it’s a failing response to date.  I think it’s important to do. Not necessarily [for] the people on the front lines, because it’s too late for them, but for others who could point out ways that the system might be improved.  The way the emergency system is set up is really geared toward states making the primary, critical, emergency response decisions. For 99 percent of crises that occur, that’s appropriate because they’re typically localized. But what we’ve seen in this pandemic is it doesn’t respect any of those political boundaries, and so what you have is the states all scrambling to acquire ventilators and other emergency equipment, essentially competing against each other.  Clearly, the system that’s in place doesn’t work, and we’re going to need to figure out a way to change it.  One of the main conclusions of the 9/11 report was that there was ample evidence of an attack coming and a government-wide failure in stopping it from happening. It seems we’ve already seen that government-wide failure here, and a new commission report might help illuminate what those issues were in order to provide recommendations to fix them. You need to have some kind of objective body looking at this, as it’s going on, to make constructive suggestions for how to adjust. That might include the legal authorities and the way that the chain of command works in a pandemic, because clearly the model is that the federal government is really a backup and the states have primary responsibility.  The federal government can provide resources and expertise if needed, but clearly that model doesn’t work in this circumstance. It just doesn’t.  So what’s the right model? That’s what you want an unbiased group of experts looking into. In that case, we’re talking about a 9/11 Commission-style body, but it’s probably looking into questions more akin to natural disasters. Right, this situation is more closely analogous to Hurricane Katrina than it is to 9/11. The 9/11 terror attacks took people by surprise and was a failure of imagination, as we said in the report.  Katrina, on the other hand, was something people anticipated and long prepared for: a massive storm hitting New Orleans. But the scale of it overwhelmed the preparations for it. It’s similar to the coronavirus case: We’ve done drills and we’ve done tabletops having to do with pandemics over the years. But I don’t think anybody really foresaw the scale of this, or how it would play out if there was a failure to contain the outbreak. After the US had a handle on the Zika and Ebola outbreaks, I thought, “You know, we really know how to do this now. We’ve got this.” This one, though, is on a whole different scale. I think when we look back, we’ll see that the critical failure probably came with the failure to contain it instantly when people started getting sick in China. Before they realized how serious it was, it was already out. We’ve been scrambling ever since. To that point: In your mind, was this a singular Trump administration failure or a broader, longer-term, systemic failure from multiple US administrations? I think it’s a combination. Clearly, the system that’s been set up in which the states take the lead, with the federal government as a backup, isn’t adequate for this circumstance. That’s a longer-term issue.  Where I think there’s also no question, however, is that the administration was slow to provide testing and slow to take this as seriously as it should have. It’s clear we just didn’t have adequate intelligence about the need for widespread testing early on so we could figure out exactly who needed to be shut down and why and when and where. We’re paying the price for that now by putting the economy into a self-induced coma.  You combine those two factors — a bad system no one fixed and the Trump administration’s slow response — and that’s why we are where we are. So if we had a 9/11 Commission-style review body in the future, what are the main issues you’d want them to look into? First, what is the right chain of command for dealing with a public health emergency that doesn’t respect political borders? The current system of the governors having primary decision-making authority really doesn’t work here, as I’ve said. Second, what is the fastest way to leverage resources so you can scale up the response? Just as they did in World War II, where many industries turned on a dime and produced tanks and airplanes, how can we have that happen again?  Third, does too much of our critical manufacturing exist abroad now? Are we too dependent on foreign manufacturers to handle a crisis like this within our own borders? What are the implications of that? Fourth, is our hospital system too disjointed, too fragmented to be able to handle something like this in a coordinated way? What do we need to do to ensure that we have adequate capacity in our hospitals? Fifth, how do you handle the pandemic of disinformation at a time like this? People are being bombarded with things that are half-truths and outright lies, and how do you discipline that process when you have to? In the normal course of things, in a free society, you don’t have to. But in a crisis like this, you don’t want people walking around misinformed, and a lot of people are.  Those are just some of the questions that I think need to be answered in a sober and constructive way to help the people who are actually on the frontlines fighting this thing. Do you think the US will remain as vulnerable as it is to pandemics until we have a 9/11 Commission-style review body? The bottom line is yes. Any kind of pandemic that overwhelms political boundaries is also going to overwhelm systems that are set up based on those boundaries, and that is the problem that we’re facing. Would you want this kind of inquiry to specifically call out who failed, and at what they failed? That’s a different kind of inquiry. In the 9/11 Commission, we were instructed to avoid that kind of language.  What the people need to know is what happened. They’re all going to make their own arguments and draw their own conclusions about who failed and why and whether there’s culpability with any given person or administration. That’s fine. That’s not the point of this kind of inquiry.  This kind of inquiry is to help fix the problem, and there will be other forums for that other kind of investigation. Congressional hearings are good at that. What I’m talking about, really, and what I think is most constructive, is to focus on fixing what’s wrong. If you focus on fixing it, blame becomes of secondary or tertiary importance. You’re clearly trying to lay out, as a professional, the case for a system-wide review by an impartial body. But you’re also just a person like all of us and a citizen of this country. So just as a person, are you mad at the way this has been handled? Exasperated, I would say. It’s hard to watch, this sort of slow-motion response to a rapidly escalating crisis. It’s just hard to watch. There’s almost no excuse for the dilatory nature of this response. If you go back to 2009, there was a PBS show about predicting pandemics, and even earlier shows about pandemic flu. We’ve known about these threats and these vulnerabilities for a long time. It’s not like this was completely unanticipated and unimaginable. It’s less understandable than the chaos of 9/11, in my opinion.“During this pandemic, everyone you see could possibly have Covid-19,” says Susan Puckett, a physician assistant at Boulder Medical Center in Boulder, Colorado. “Every patient I see, I should be wearing a mask.” But three weeks ago, her clinic gave her one N95 mask, and told her she should keep it until it breaks. N95 masks are supposed to be single-use: see a patient, throw it away.  She’s used her single mask ever since, shift after shift. “It’s very surreal. I dreamed last night I would wake up and someone would say it’s a big April Fool’s joke,” she says. What happens now that there are not enough masks and other personal protective equipment (PPE) — goggles, face shields, gloves, gowns, and other gear — for health care workers to protect themselves and others?  It has become an improvisational nightmare that goes against well established practices for infection control and heightens the risk of further spreading the virus. Medical staff all over the country are being asked to reuse their equipment, clean it with unproven methods, and use substandard materials — including trash bags — in the absence of adequate supplies.  As of early March, the US only had 12 million N95 respirators and 30 million surgical masks— just 1 percent of what is estimated to be needed during this pandemic. It’s a shortage with many causes, including a failure to stockpile supplies, confusion between state and federal agencies, and the lack of preparedness plans. And now the dire situation is endangering the very people who are working to save others.  An emergency room doctor from Pennsylvania, who didn’t want to be identified because he’d previously gotten in trouble with his hospital for speaking out about the need for more PPE, has been given one N95 mask per week, and told to wear a surgical mask on top, which he is allowed to change between patients. (Surgical masks don’t effectively block the virus, but the heftier N95 masks, when fit properly, do.)  His neighbors recently gave him some extra N95s, allowing him to cycle between masks. “Who would have ever thought getting 10 masks at your door would bring you to tears,” he says, “but that’s where we’re at.”  
    Related
   These shortages endanger medical personnel, as well as the non-medical staff who work alongside them, like custodians and stockers. One such worker, a janitorial contractor at a hospital in southern Kentucky who doesn’t want to be identified for fear of losing his job, hasn’t received any training about Covid-19. When he asked his boss what he should do to protect himself, her response was “just wear gloves.” “I’m terrified, to be honest with you,” he says. He is in charge of wiping down patient rooms, as well as cleaning a lab with biohazardous waste. He says he doesn’t have access to a mask, or paid sick leave. “All this for 11 dollars an hour,” he says. “Damned if you do, damned if you don’t.”  The PPE shortages have not only imperiled medical and facilities staff, they’ve also contributed to restrictions on non-Covid-related medical care. As services deemed “non-essential” get postponed or rescheduled in an effort to conserve PPE—including abortions, cancer treatments, and organ transplants—it contributes additional stress for both patients and their families, as well as medical staff. A health care worker in a south Florida hospital, who didn’t want to be identified, says “There are things you don’t think, at first blush, would impact your clinical operations, but they do,” she says. The clinic where she works has now canceled all but emergency cases.   Her clinic has also instituted a no-visitor rule and is requiring patients themselves to wear masks. She explains these changes have big impacts on the clinic’s diverse patient population, mentioning a recent patient in her mid-90s, who was sitting in a wheelchair in the lobby when she walked in. “She was crying into her respirator. She wasn’t even wearing it correctly. She was upset that her daughter wasn’t allowed inside to be with her—she didn’t speak good English, and her memory wasn’t great.”  
    Related
   “The new normal has shifted so much,” says the worker, who, as part of her job, accompanies doctors on rounds to see patients. As recently as early March, a supervisor laughed at her for wearing a mask when she was recovering from a cold. “She said she didn’t want me causing pandemonium,” she recounts. “This was a week before mask-wearing was mandatory.” She is now given one surgical mask a day, and does not have access to N95s. She says she understands the clinic’s predicament, though. In her clinic, she says, they “are doing the best they can.”  Even if they had the proper protective gear, many frontline health care workers have received scant training for using it. In a recent survey of 8,200 nurses from around the country by the National Nurses United, a professional nurses association, as of mid-March, less than half had received training about Covid-19. And only 63 percent report having received critical training on safely putting on and taking off PPE in the previous year.  To add to the lack of equipment and training, there’s also a dearth of information about how to best make do during this dangerous equipment shortage.  As medical professionals scramble to try to find best practices for reusing PPE in decidedly not-best kinds of situations, researchers at Stanford University’s School of Medicine published a report in response to the coronavirus-driven mask shortage, suggesting some methods of cleaning and sterilizing PPE are better than others.  
    Related
   “We’re in uncharted territory,” says Larry Chu, professor of anesthesiology at Stanford University School of Medicine, stressing the general danger of reusing masks. “A used N95 mask is considered biohazardous waste.” Although he says that people should follow their hospitals’ policies, and that they are not advocating specific approaches, “Our aim is to provide evidence to allow people to make the best decisions they can based on evidence.” In general, Chu wrote in the report that, for things like N95 masks, “to be useful, a decontamination method must eliminate the viral threat, be harmless to end-users, and retain respirator integrity.”  Along with Amy Price, a senior research scientist at Stanford, Chu found that many methods of attempting to clean or sterilize masks may destroy the virus — like alcohol or bleach — and also damage the mask. Microwaves generally just make masks melt. Soap and water are ineffective on masks (but great for hands). Ultraviolet radiation appears to work, but can be difficult to deploy adequately, as UV frequency and coverage has to be exact, and repeated use breaks down the mask’s filtration capacity and fit. Hydrogen peroxide also degrades masks with repeated use.  “My personal choice of methods,” Chu says, after testing five models of N95s from three different manufacturers, “is dry heat, because it did the least damage to the mask over multiple cycles, and the fit was preserved.”  Specifically, they tested masks at 158 degrees Fahrenheit in a hot-air oven for 30 minutes. An alternative method of applying heat effectively, he says, is using hot water vapor from boiling water for 10 minutes. But, “it’s really important not to bring anything you suspect of being contaminated into your own home to disinfect in any way,” says Price, because of the risk of further spreading infections.  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has just issued crisis standards for decontamination and reuse of N95s, for hospital-based industrial decontamination. Chu and Price note that regardless of the sterilization method used, health care workers should request their own masks be returned to them, both for issues of fit and to reduce the possibility of cross-contamination.  But these methods of best practices in the worst of times haven’t yet made it to hundreds of thousands of medical staff currently being asked to reuse PPE.  One oncologist nurse at an outpatient unit in New York City, who was worried about repercussions of being identified, says she’s given one N95 mask per week and told that if it gets dirty, she should take it home and wash it in the sink.  “Even vapors from your mouth break down the integrity of that barrier, so washing it kind of defeats the whole purpose,” she says. She doesn’t have access to face shields, but she does have goggles, “like the ones you wear in chemistry class,” that she wipes down at night. She adds that while she’s been asked to reuse masks, she feels safer than colleagues at other New York City institutions, where she’s heard of nurses forced to resort to wearing Hefty trash bags due to shortages of gowns.  Even basic supplies, like disinfectants, are hard to come by now. “We have to go around every night and lock the Purell away,” she says. On any given day, patients and families steal about half of the sanitizer bottles from exam rooms.  She still can’t believe that the situation in New York has gotten so bad. “If you’d told me a month ago we wouldn’t have enough PPE, I would have told you that you were nuts,” she says. “I had a lot of faith in institutions.”  The repercussions of PPE shortages are already here: Although the CDC is not publicly reporting how many health care workers have tested positive for Covid-19, this week, there were at least 31 cases just in Oregon. At least two health care workers in Georgia, two in New York, and an emergency room physician in New Jersey have already died. Some hospitals, like Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago, are so worried that intensive procedures could infect health care workers without PPE, they are contemplating do-not-resuscitate orders for dying Covid-19 patients.  
    Related
   These dire straits are unlikely to change soon. The chief operating officer of Medicom, a Canadian company that makes masks, recently told the New York Times that they are at full capacity, and increased production “will take anywhere between three to four months.”  The ER doctor in Pennsylvania, who is also a spokesperson for the American College of Emergency Physicians, doesn’t mince words. “It’s a total clusterfuck. There’s no leadership at the top. States are having to outbid each other for supplies because the federal government has refused to take a role, or is taking a role too little or too late.” He begged for a coordinated federal effort using the Defense Production Act, to kickstart production of PPE supplies. The lack of federal direction has allowed gross price gouging. Even when basic equipment, such as gloves and surgical masks, are available to purchase, they are marked up many times their standard price, putting further strain on already-stressed states and health systems. ProPublica reports that New York state is now buying masks at 15 times the normal price.  In the meantime, it is not just infection that is threatening to waylay health care workers facing a shortage of PPE. A doctor in Bellingham, Washington, who pleaded for better protections for his staff, was recently fired. Other health care professionals, the New York Times reports, are being threatened for wearing PPE they procure on their own.  For the Pennsylvania ER doctor, the crisis is personal. His wife, who is also a doctor, is pregnant. “I come home, my wife is sitting there, and I’m paralyzed by fear. Did I get it? Am I passing it on to her? What’s it going to do to my kid? These are the fears everyone — doctors, nurses, janitors cleaning the room after a Covid-19 patient — has right now. In the ER, we see the worst aspects of humanity, and yet this trumps everything.”  This weekend, he started coughing and developed a fever. He went to get tested April 1, but says due to backlogs, he won’t know his results until the weekend, at the earliest. “Don’t call us heroes,” he says.  “Just help us be prepared — keep us safe.” Lois Parshley is a freelance investigative journalist and the 2019-2020 Snedden Chair of Journalism at the University of Alaska Fairbanks. Follow her Covid-19 reporting on Twitter @loisparshley.  Testing to see who has the Covid-19 coronavirus has become one of the most crucial elements of slowing the global pandemic. And it may also hold the key to a return to normal. “Everyone staying home is just a very blunt measure. That’s what you say when you’ve got really nothing else,” Emily Gurley, an associate scientist at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, told NPR. “Being able to test folks is really the linchpin in getting beyond what we’re doing now.” In particular, serological tests, also known as “immunity tests,” for antibodies to the virus could reveal the true extent of the pandemic and help scientists answer basic questions about Covid-19 and the virus that causes it, SARS-CoV-2: How many people have been infected with the virus? Who may have spread it without knowing it? Why do some people have mild illness while others become gravely ill? How deadly is the disease? What tactics are actually working to slow its spread? Serological tests could also potentially allow people who have immunity to return to work. That could be a huge boost to front-line health workers who may have been exposed to the virus but are desperately needed back in action.  Countries are now racing to acquire more of these tests. The United Kingdom ordered 3.5 million serological tests. Germany is considering using these tests to issue immunity certificates to people who have survived Covid-19.  In the US, the Food and Drug Administration on April 2 granted first approval to a serological test for Covid-19, with an Emergency Use Authorization. The test, made by Cellex, can generate results in as little as 15 minutes. Other companies and labs are jostling to develop serological tests in the US as well. 
    Related
   But scientists are also still learning how long immunity from Covid-19 can last and whether there is a chance that people could be reinfected. Filling in these blanks will be critical to the recovery from the Covid-19 pandemic. Let’s walk through what we know.  In patients who have recovered from Covid-19 or may have carried the virus without realizing it, a serological test can show who carries antibodies, even if the virus is no longer present. Antibodies are proteins that help the immune system identify and eliminate threats. Once they’re made, they help the body neutralize future infections from the same threat. Establishing who is immune is important for figuring out who can safely return to work. For example, health workers are facing staffing shortages as Covid-19 spreads through their ranks, and serological tests may soon become necessary to keep hospitals and clinics running. These tests are also a forensic tool, tracing the spread of the virus through a population. This can solve some of the unknowns of the Covid-19 outbreak and help scientists get ahead of the next pandemic. Countries like China and Singapore have already used serological tests for contact tracing to see how the virus has spread. Serological tests use blood serum, the liquid part of blood, excluding cells and clotting proteins. Even though SARS-CoV-2 isn’t typically present in blood, an infection causes white blood cells to make antibody proteins that help the immune system identify viruses and stop them, or mark infected cells for destruction.  Although these proteins can be detected in the bloodstream and blood serum, it can take several days for someone to make these antibodies after an infection. So a serological test isn’t always useful for finding an active infection — and can yield a false negative, showing that someone doesn’t have the virus when they actually do. The results of these tests can also be trickier to interpret than results from the more common RT-PCR tests used to diagnose Covid-19, which detect the virus’s genetic material.  But antibodies can linger long after an infection has faded. That’s why serological tests for antibodies can identify past cases of the virus.  “That’s a great screening tool to figure out what proportion of our patient population had it or what proportion of our hospital staff has been exposed to it,” said David Pride, associate director of microbiology at the University of California San Diego.  Researchers are also studying how to use antibodies collected from previously infected patients to treat current cases of Covid-19. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is now allowing doctors to use blood plasma from recovered patients that contains antibodies to treat emergency cases of the disease, and serological tests can identify potential antibody donors. (Potential donors can sign up here.) Serological tests are also cheaper to run than RT-PCR. An RT-PCR test costs about $50 at Medicare rates. A serological test can be less than $10.  It’s faster, too, using techniques like ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay). Here, a tiny piece of the virus is stuck to a plate. If an antibody to the virus is present in a blood sample, it will attach to the virus on the plate. Then a second antibody with an enzyme attached will stick to the virus antibody. The enzyme then accelerates a reaction that changes the color of the solution, indicating that the patient has at some point mounted an immune response to the virus.  There are other serological testing systems in development as well, including a fingerstick test that can deliver results in as few as 10 minutes. Meanwhile, RT-PCR tests can take several hours to run, and if samples have to be shipped to an outside lab, it can take days to get results. (The FDA recently approved a new rapid genetic test that can give a positive result in five minutes.) However, as with RT-PCR tests, serological tests are also facing supply shortages and bottlenecks. And right now, the main task for combating the Covid-19 outbreak is figuring out who currently has the virus, which makes RT-PCR tests the priority. But as the US heads deeper into the pandemic, serological tests will become essential to finding a path out.  If serological tests are deployed even more broadly, health officials can trace the spread of the illness. Coupled with widespread RT-PCR tests to find active cases of Covid-19, scientists could identify hot spots, and governments can more precisely target their tactics. Rather than blanket shelter-in-place orders, officials could see which cities, neighborhoods, and people are most at risk and start to relax quarantines, curfews, and other control measures in some areas.  Widespread testing alongside social distancing can slow the spread of the virus and eventually help restart idled economies and bring countries closer to where they were before the pandemic.  
    Related
   But there are some caveats.  To safely return to work, a patient would have to ensure that they have immunity and that they are no longer spreading the virus. Since a serological test can only confirm the former, a patient may still need an additional RT-PCR test to establish the latter. That is, they need to test positive for immunity and negative for the virus itself. SARS-CoV-2 is also a new virus, so researchers aren’t certain how long immunity will last. The virus could mutate and render past immunity ineffective, although scientists have found that it is mutating slowly, indicating that the protection from a past infection is likely to be effective for a while.  “You’re going to have some degree of durable immunity,” Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told the Doctor Mike YouTube show. “It may not be 50 years, but it’s certainly going to be a matter of a few years.” Resolving these questions about immunity is essential to determining whether it’s safe to go back to work, particularly in health care. “We need to check to make sure the protection is real before doing that on a large scale, but I do think [serological testing] will be an important part of the strategy because we’ll need to keep health care workers in action,” said Marc Lipsitch, a professor of epidemiology at Harvard University.  The possibility of protection from the pandemic — and a test to show it — should also not be an incentive to try to get infected in the hope of building immunity. Covid-19 is a dangerous illness. While older people are generally most at risk, people of all ages have become seriously ill and have died from it. Infected people can also spread the virus to others more at risk, even if the infected person has no symptoms.  And there are still not nearly enough materials for either widespread RT-PCR or serological testing. There are also critical shortages in protective equipment for medical staff conducting these tests. That’s making hospitals and clinics think carefully about who needs to be tested right now and moving serological tests for people who aren’t sick anymore to the back burner. Getting the amount of testing needed to end the pandemic is also no trivial task. It would demand an extraordinary coordinated effort of not just deploying tests but training a workforce to do them. In addition, people would have to maintain strict social distancing measures until all the requisite testing is completed, which could take months. “It would take a sort of moonshot-level effort,” wrote Vox’s Brian Resnick.   As manufacturers ramp up production to meet the surging testing demand, these supply shortfalls will likely fade. But in the meantime, some difficult decisions lie ahead.  “In the US, we’re not accustomed to being in a resource-limited environment, but when it comes to testing for Covid, we still are in a resource-limited environment,” Pride said.  Ultimately, the threat will fade when enough people are immune to the virus that it can no longer spread easily, or if pockets of Covid-19 are contained until they burn out. Getting immunity from exposure is a costly and dangerous approach, so the best strategy remains not getting infected in the first place and buying time until researchers can develop and deploy a vaccine. And in the meantime, test, test, test.  Over the last two weeks, nearly 10 million Americans have filed unemployment claims — meaning the coronavirus crisis has already resulted in the US economy shedding more jobs than the entire Great Recession. In light of that grim reality, it’s worth remembering comments Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross made about the coronavirus in January that reveal the Trump administration’s minimizing approach to the crisis early on.  For those who don’t remember, during an interview on Maria Bartiromo’s Fox Business show on January 30 — 10 days after the first US coronavirus case was recorded — Ross made a case that the virus, which at that time was mostly hurting China, would ultimately be a good thing for the American job market. “I don’t want to talk about a victory lap over a very unfortunate, very malignant disease,” Ross began. “But the fact is, it does give business yet another thing to consider when they go through their review of their supply chain. It’s another risk factor that people need to take into account. So I think it will help to accelerate the return of jobs to North America.” Secretary Wilbur Ross says coronavirus will be good for [checks notes] American jobs: "I think it will help to accelerate the return of jobs to North America." pic.twitter.com/Y4SbDIcTi4 As I wrote at the time, Ross’s economic analysis was obviously flawed — the SARS pandemic, for instance, wiped nearly $40 billion off world markets in 2002 and 2003. More importantly, from a moral standpoint, reducing a disease that had already at that time killed nearly 200 people to a money-making opportunity was a window into the type of thinking that often carries the day in the Trump administration. Little could viewers have known at the time, however, how spectacularly wrong Ross would end up being. While you’d be hard-pressed to find a take that has aged worse than Wilbur Ross arguing that the coronavirus would be good for US jobs, it’s worth noting that he was far from the only Trump administration official to make such rosy comments about the coronavirus. The remarks were criticized at the time they were made and look even more boneheaded now. For instance, as the coronavirus spread across the country in the crucial period between late February and early March, both Trump economic adviser Larry Kudlow and senior counselor Kellyanne Conway told reporters that the coronavirus was “contained.” Kellyanne Conway, March 6: “It is being contained.” pic.twitter.com/H4nsvpG1Tp On the same day as Conway’s remarks, Kudlow — who has made many wrongheaded predictions about major economic developments in the past 20 years but was appointed to a top administration job by Trump anyway — went on CNBC and urged investors to “buy the dip.” (The Dow is down more than 4,000 points since then.) Kudlow: Buy on the dip, on COVID-19 "this is contained", "relatively contained." pic.twitter.com/iF4Nheem4i Of course, nobody in the administration worked harder to downplay the situation than Trump himself. Eight days before Ross’s infamous Fox Business comments, Trump made his first public comments about the coronavirus in an interview with CNBC in which he claimed that “we have it totally under control. It’s one person coming from China. It’s going to be just fine.” Trump asked in January about whether or not he's worried about a pandemic: "No. Not at all. And we're -- we have it totally under control. It's one person coming in from China, and we have it under control. It's, uh, gonna be just fine." pic.twitter.com/sTuK85dFZY Not only did Trump turn out to be completely wrong about having the coronavirus “under control,” but he was way off about its economic impact, too. On February 24 — the day before the CDC warned of the coronavirus that “disruption to everyday life might be severe” — Trump tweeted that the “stock market is starting to look very good to me.”  The Coronavirus is very much under control in the USA. We are in contact with everyone and all relevant countries. CDC & World Health have been working hard and very smart. Stock Market starting to look very good to me! The Dow has fallen more than 6,000 points since then. Now, of course, Trump is trying to pretend that he took the coronavirus seriously from the beginning and has done as much as could’ve been expected from any president to stop its spread. He’s gone from saying that the coronavirus would go away on its own to suggesting that if 200,000 Americans die from Covid-19, it’ll be evidence he’s done “a very good job.” Meanwhile, Ross is reportedly working remotely these days from his estate in Palm Beach, Florida. Not only has the coronavirus been a disaster for US jobs, but, in an ironic twist, it has made it harder for the man who offered that woefully misguided take on America’s economic prospects to do his. The news moves fast. To stay updated, follow Aaron Rupar on Twitter, and read more of Vox’s policy and politics coverage. President Donald Trump’s frustration with Democratic governors who have the temerity to criticize his administration’s flailing response to the coronavirus isn’t just leading him to post sour tweets about them. It’s also reflected in disparities surrounding which states are receiving the medical resources they need to keep patients alive and health care workers healthy. It’s a situation at least one woman, Stanford law professor Pamela Karlan, saw coming, and warned about during Trump’s impeachment trial. In hindsight, her comments look remarkably prescient. That trial, you might recall, was all about Trump’s abuses of power as it pertained to his efforts to leverage foreign aid to Ukraine into investigations of his domestic political foes. While the details underpinning that scandal may have seemed obscure to many Americans, Karlan in December sounded an alarm about what Trump’s behavior could entail in the event of a domestic crisis like the one the country now faces. Referring to Trump’s effort to use congressionally appropriated foreign aid as a quid pro quo for political favors, Karlan asked members of Congress to think about what it would look like if Trump subjected governors to similar treatment. “Imagine living in a part of Louisiana or Texas that’s prone to devastating hurricanes and flooding,” Karlan said. “What would you think if you lived there, and your governor asked for a meeting with the president to discuss getting disaster aid that Congress has provided for. What would you think if that president said, ‘I would like you to do us a favor. I’ll meet with you, and I’ll send the disaster relief, once you brand my opponent a criminal.’ Wouldn’t you know in your gut that such a president had abused his office?”  The professor’s point was that while Trump using his public office to try and force the Ukrainian government may not seem like an obvious abuse of power to some Americans, it clearly would in a hypothetical situation where he dealt with their elected officials in the same manner.  Pamela Karlan: “What would you think if, when your governor asked the federal government for the disaster assistance that Congress has provided, the President responded, ‘I would like you to do us a favor.’ I’ll... send the disaster relief once you brand my opponent a criminal.” pic.twitter.com/J96FY30k3y Unfortunately, less than four months after Karlan uttered those words, the hypothetical she outlined has come uncomfortably close to reality. But instead of wanting Democratic governors to investigate the Bidens, Trump is demanding they refrain from saying bad things about him. During an interview with Fox News last Tuesday, Trump responded to Democratic governors like Andrew Cuomo (NY), Gretchen Whitmer (MI), and Jay Inslee (WA) criticizing the inadequacy of the federal coronavirus response effort by describing his relationship with blue state leaders as “a two-way street.” “They have to treat us well, also. They can’t say, ‘Oh, gee, we should get this, we should get that,’” Trump added. Last Friday, Trump took things up a notch by telling reporters he had directed the official running the White House’s response effort, Vice President Mike Pence, to not call Inslee and Whitmer — even as hospitals in each of their states approached the point of being overwhelmed by coronavirus cases — because they aren’t “appreciative” enough of his efforts. “When they’re not appreciative to me, they’re not appreciative to the Army Corps, they’re not appreciative to FEMA,” Trump said. “It’s not right.” This is more than just rhetoric. On Wednesday, the Washington Post reported that while staunch Trump ally Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis (R) “promptly” received all of the supplies he asked for from the federal government, states with Democratic governors such as Wisconsin and Illinois (not to mention New York and Michigan) were not having the same luck. It’s not clear that Trump’s political grudges are driving that disparity, but the Post reported some officials are “wondering whether politics is playing a role in the response.” Asked about his disparate treatment of Florida (a state that’s crucial for his reelection hopes) and Massachusetts (a state he won’t win in 2020) during a news conference on Monday, Trump dodged. REPORTER: Florida has reportedly had 100% of their requests for supplies from the national strategic stockpile filled but Massachusetts has not. Why is that?TRUMP, dodging: "I was on the call yesterday with the governors & they were happy with the job we are doing" pic.twitter.com/5PHJG25C7m Tellingly, on Thursday, Trump took to Twitter to attack New York for allegedly getting off to “a late start” in its coronavirus response efforts. But Trump has had no such criticism for DeSantis, who belatedly issued a state-at-home order on Wednesday — nearly two weeks after Cuomo did — as coronavirus cases in his state exploded. Nor has he criticized any Republican governor in the way he’s gone after Democratic ones. Ideally, the president of the United States would carry out his duties regardless of whether or not he views people impacted by them as on his political team. This president, however, seemingly can’t help himself from using official acts to advance his own ends. Karlan tried to warn the nation about this in December. Ultimately, Republican senators didn’t listen. And now, Americans in blue states that could really use some lifesaving help from the federal government are living with the consequences. The news moves fast. To stay updated, follow Aaron Rupar on Twitter, and read more of Vox’s policy and politics coverage.  The $2.2 trillion stimulus package passed by Congress and signed by President Donald Trump on March 27 is probably best known for the $1,200 checks it authorizes for most American adults. Its second-most prominent component might be the $600-per-week increase it provides to unemployment insurance. But bigger than either of those programs in dollar terms is the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) the stimulus package creates. That program, costing about $349 billion, offers loan guarantees for small businesses, offered through the Small Business Administration (SBA) and its partner banks. Specifically, it lets businesses take out loans totaling 250 percent of their average monthly payroll in 2019. If they spend at least 75 percent of that money to pay their workers, they’ll be eligible to have the loans fully forgiven at federal expense. The application is a simple two-page form, plus documentation. That is a big deal, and it’s a program that’s drawn comparisons with Denmark’s approach of simply having the government pay companies’ payrolls for the duration of the crisis. But it’s important to be clear about the bill’s design and its limitations. First and foremost, not every American works for a small business. As of 2016 — the most recent year for which data is available — only about 47.3 percent of employees worked for businesses covered by the SBA. Generally, the SBA covers business locations with 500 or fewer employees. People working for, say, a McDonald’s franchise, or a hotel company that has locations with 500 or fewer employees, could be covered. But many others will not be. Moreover, each business’s loan is capped at $10 million, which might not be enough to cover the payroll expenses of some larger small businesses. Second, the design is rather awkward. The Danish government is making direct grants to businesses to pay their workers. Out of a desire to get money distributed quickly through the SBA, the US program is designed as loans that could be forgiven later. But there are strings attached to the loan forgiveness aspect, leading to the possibility that some businesses will take out large loans that aren’t forgiven later, leaving them in debt. “I have a PhD in economics, and I think this is a headache,” Adam Ozimek, chief economist at freelancing platform Upwork and the owner of a bowling alley/restaurant in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, tells me. Most significantly for businesses looking forward, the loans are supposed to last only eight weeks. A senior aide to Sen. Marco Rubio (R-FL), who helped write this section of the stimulus bill, explains that the budgeted amount for the program is meant to cover eight weeks of payroll and operating expenses for all businesses under the SBA’s ambit. But the bill also allows others, like sole proprietors and contractors, to apply for the loans, and when the budgeted amount runs out, the program’s done. Some states like Virginia have already announced stay-at-home orders that extend beyond that eight-week window. To cover operating expenses beyond that would require additional legislation from Congress authorizing more money for the program. In the meantime, Rubio’s office and others are urging small-business owners to contact their banks as soon as possible to apply for the program. “The way most banks are treating this is that they’re building a wait list of interested businesses,” the Rubio aide explains. If you think this program could help you and your workers, the time to act is now. While the PPP has many relevant differences with the famed Danish approach to coronavirus unemployment, the rationale is the same. The government has forced many businesses to shut down with little or no warning, and the government should cover the costs of that decision. The SBA has put out an admirably brief, and clear, explanation of how to apply for the program. It is run primarily through lenders who are part of SBA’s 7(a) loan program, its primary means of providing financial assistance to small businesses (you can see a list of the biggest 7(a) lenders here). For people who don’t get them forgiven, the loans have an extremely low interest rate of 0.5 percent; interest payments are deferred for the first six months after the loan is taken out. If not forgiven, the loan must by paid in full within two years. The window to apply is short: Applications open on Friday, April 3, and close on June 30. For independent contractors and the self-employed, they open slightly later, on April 10. The loans are available to a surprisingly long list of businesses. Firms with 500 employees or less, which are SBA’s usual clientele, are eligible, as are sole proprietorships, contractors, and the self-employed. Nonprofits are eligible if sufficiently small, and there are special circumstances in which locations with more than 500 employees can be eligible for SBA loans. The loans also draw a distinction between firms with 500 or fewer employees and locations. For certain industries, specifically restaurants and hotels, the stimulus bill specifically allows locations with under 500 employees to apply for loans even if they belong to a large national chain. Hilton, for instance, is hardly a small business: It has about 173,000 employees worldwide. But an individual Hilton hotel could have fewer than 500 employees, making it eligible for paycheck protection. Ozimek tells me he’s been trying to navigate the application process for his small business: Decades, a bar/restaurant/bowling alley/arcade in Lancaster, Pennsylvania. The eligibility requirements are laxer than normal for an SBA loan, but still considerable. Employers must submit their last 12 months of payroll reports from the IRS, including detailed information on gross wages, state/local taxes, vacation pay, and more. The idea is to ensure employers aren’t exaggerating their normal payroll costs to get a larger loan. When it comes to forgiving the loans, several restrictions apply. Businesses cannot be forgiven for loans covering payroll above $100,000 per person; it’s not clear if this is inclusive or exclusive of benefits like health care. Businesses must have spent 75 percent or more of the loan on payroll costs to qualify for forgiveness, and the forgiveness amount will be reduced if payroll costs are lessened through layoffs or wage cuts. The loans are generally capped at $10 million each, which might limit their usefulness for particularly large locations or firms. The biggest question mark about the legislation is money. The loans are designed to cover eight weeks of expenses. Let’s say a business wants to use the loan to cover expenses starting this week. Eight weeks gets you to the week ending Friday, May 22. It’s far from clear that the coronavirus crisis will be over then. In Virginia, most notably, the government is asking businesses to shut down for at least two and half weeks after that point. That means there will be more payrolls the program has to cover, and for longer. Columbia economist Glenn Hubbard and American Enterprise Institute economist Michael Strain, who estimated that the demand for this kind of loan could easily exceed $1 trillion, have proposed a $1.2 trillion relief program. This means the $349 billion currently appropriated could dry up rapidly, especially if there’s a mad rush. Hubbard, who was George W. Bush’s chief economist, is hardly some big-spending liberal; economists across the spectrum are warning that we need more small-business support, now. Ozimek, the economist and small-business owner, says this kind of uncertainty is making it hard for him and similarly situated business owners to plan. When the coronavirus hit, he laid off servers and cooks at his restaurant and encouraged them to go on unemployment, which is newly generous after Congress added $600 a week across the board to checks. Then it became clear that paycheck protection loans would be available. Ozimek now faces a choice. He could hire back all of his staff for eight weeks using the PPP money. But then he’d have to either lay them off again or continue to pay them after the loan money runs out, if stay-at-home orders are still in place. That might wind up costing the business more, and may also be worse for workers depending on the unemployment they’re getting. What he can’t do is just take out a PPP loan to cover his mortgage and basic operating expenses while the restaurant’s shut down — he wouldn’t be using 75 percent of the loan to cover payroll, which means the amount couldn’t be forgiven. “First the state shuts down your business and you want to get your workers on UI as much as possible,” Ozimek recaps. “Then the Senate starts discussing a bill that seems like it will pay based on whether you’ve retained your staff. It sets off an early panic where it seems like it’s too late. Then you hear it includes a rehiring provision: As long as we rehire by June 30, we’re fine. We can borrow money, use it to cover operating expenses, and then we rehire by the 30th and everything’s fine. “Then in the last 24 hours, Treasury puts out their guidance and says actually, you have to use 75 percent of this for payrolls. So now our plan to rehire by June 30 and use a lot of this on operator expenses, mortgage rent, and utilities — you can’t do that anymore.” Ozimek and the Economic Innovation Group’s John Lettieri have proposed a small-business loan program with less stringent spending requirements and long-term repayment of up to 20 years to give companies a longer period to recover. But that solves a different problem than paycheck protection does. PPP is meant to both help small businesses remain solvent and to pay everyone on their payroll. To the latter end, the restrictions on using the money for things besides payroll limit the program’s effectiveness at maintaining small businesses’ solvency, which might be less relevant for firms whose workers would benefit from emergency $600-a-week unemployment. The bottom line is that the paycheck program does some good, but it’s too small and, arguably, too inflexible. It was already clear that Congress would need to act again. For its “phase four” stimulus, it should be clear about the goal: whether to help people who are out of work primarily through their old employers or through unemployment insurance, in addition to whether to bail out small businesses so that they persist into the future, above and beyond bailing them out so they can pay workers. Trying to do both appears to be creating knotty interactions between programs — and leaving small-business owners in a place of uncertainty.The coronavirus pandemic is leading people to buy way, way more guns — and that will likely translate into more gun violence in the long term. Based on newly released FBI data, March was a record month for background checks in the US. The National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) carried out roughly 3.7 million background checks in March — 12 percent higher than the previous record of 3.3 million in December 2015, Daniel Nass reported for the Trace. This doesn’t tell us the exact number of gun sales, since background checks can be done for things that aren’t gun purchases (like permit applications), the checks can cover multiple gun purchases at once, and some gun purchases don’t involve a background check at all. The firm Small Arm Analytics and Forecasting used the FBI data to estimate the actual number of gun sales in March. It concluded that March 2020 was a record month: There were nearly 2.6 million likely firearm sales, up 85.3 percent from March 2019. The firm attributed the spike in purchases to fears about Covid-19, the disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus. Typically, increases in gun sales follow mass shootings — as people fear for their own safety and about the prospects of new restrictions on firearms making them harder to acquire. It remains unclear how the coronavirus and related measures are affecting gun violence right now. There are reports of more domestic violence as people stay in their homes. But there’s also a possibility that fewer people out in the streets will lead to fewer non-domestic shootings over time. In the longer term, though, the massive increase in gun purchases will likely translate into more gun violence: The research consistently shows that where there are more guns, there are more gun deaths. The logic is straightforward: People all over the world, since the beginning of time, have gotten into arguments, feuds, and fights. When there’s a gun around, though, it’s simply much easier for those fights to escalate into deadly violence. This is one of the primary reasons America, which has the highest rate of civilian gun ownership in the world, has more gun deaths than any other developed nation. A 2018 study in JAMA found the US’s civilian gun death rate is nearly four times that of Switzerland, five times that of Canada, 35 times that of the United Kingdom, and 53 times that of Japan. Based on the research, the high rates of civilian gun ownership are a primary cause. The fears around coronavirus, then, stand to make America’s gun problem even worse. It comes down to two basic problems. First, America has uniquely weak gun laws. Other developed nations at the very least require one or more background checks and almost always something more rigorous beyond that to get a gun, from specific training courses to rules for locking up firearms to more arduous licensing requirements to specific justifications, besides self-defense, for owning a gun.  In the US, even a background check isn’t an absolute requirement; the current federal law is riddled with loopholes and hampered by poor enforcement, so there are many ways around even a basic background check. And if a state enacts stricter measures than federal laws, someone can simply cross state lines to buy guns in a jurisdiction with looser rules. There are simply very few barriers, if any, to getting a gun in the US. Second, the US has a ton of guns. It has far more than not just other developed nations but any other country, period. In 2017, the estimated number of civilian-owned firearms in the US was 120.5 guns per 100 residents, meaning there were more firearms than people. The world’s second-ranked country was Yemen, a quasi-failed state torn by civil war, where there were 52.8 guns per 100 residents, according to an analysis from the Small Arms Survey. Both of these factors come together to make it uniquely easy for someone with violent intent to find a firearm, and potentially carry out a shooting. This is borne out in some statistics, which show America has far more gun violence than other developed nations. The US has nearly six times the gun homicide rate of Canada, more than seven times that of Sweden, and nearly 16 times that of Germany, according to United Nations data for 2012 compiled by the Guardian. (These gun deaths are one reason America has a much higher overall homicide rate, which includes non-gun deaths, than the rest of the developed world.) If having so many guns around actually made the US safer, as the National Rifle Association and pro-gun politicians claim, America would have one of the lowest rates of gun violence in the world. But the statistics suggest that, in fact, the opposite is true. Research compiled by the Harvard School of Public Health’s Injury Control Research Center is also pretty clear: After controlling for variables such as socioeconomic factors and other types of crime, places with more guns have more gun deaths. Researchers have found this to be true not just with homicides but also with suicides (which in recent years were around 60 percent of US gun deaths), domestic violence, violence against police, and mass shootings. As a breakthrough analysis by UC Berkeley’s Franklin Zimring and Gordon Hawkins in the 1990s found, it’s not even that the US has more crime than other developed countries. This chart, based on data from Jeffrey Swanson at Duke University, shows that the US is not an outlier when it comes to overall crime: Instead, the US appears to have more lethal violence — and that’s driven in large part by the prevalence of guns. “A series of specific comparisons of the death rates from property crime and assault in New York City and London show how enormous differences in death risk can be explained even while general patterns are similar,” Zimring and Hawkins wrote. “A preference for crimes of personal force and the willingness and ability to use guns in robbery make similar levels of property crime 54 times as deadly in New York City as in London.” This is in many ways intuitive: People everywhere get into arguments and fights with friends, family, and peers. Every country has extremists and other hateful individuals. But in the US, it’s much more likely that someone who’s angry or hateful will be able to pull out a gun and kill someone, because there are so many guns around and few barriers to getting the weapons. Researchers have found that stricter gun laws could help. A 2016 review of 130 studies in 10 countries, published in Epidemiologic Reviews, found that new legal restrictions on owning and purchasing guns tended to be followed by a drop in gun violence — a strong indicator that restricting access to guns can save lives. A review of the US evidence by RAND also linked some gun control measures, including background checks, to reduced injuries and deaths. A growing body of evidence, from Johns Hopkins researchers, also supports laws that require a license to buy and own guns. That doesn’t mean that bigots and extremists will never be able to carry out a shooting in places with stricter gun laws. Even the strictest gun laws can’t prevent every shooting. Guns are also not the only contributor to violence. Other factors include, for example, poverty, urbanization, alcohol consumption, and the strength of criminal justice systems.  But when researchers control for other confounding variables, they have found time and again that America’s loose access to guns is a major reason the US fares so much worse in terms of gun violence than its developed counterparts. So America, with its lax gun control laws and abundance of firearms, makes it rather easy for people to commit gun violence.  And due to fears about coronavirus, more of these deadly weapons are out there now — likely setting the stage for more gun violence in the long term. For more on America’s gun problem, read Vox’s explainer.The Democratic National Committee is officially delaying the party’s presidential nominating convention from mid-July until August 17, as the US continues to respond to the coronavirus pandemic. The Democratic National Convention was originally scheduled to take place in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, from July 13-16, but uncertainty about rising coronavirus cases across the country and how long this outbreak will last raised questions about possibly delaying the gathering of over 5,000 party officials, delegates, and journalists. The new date means the DNC will now take place one week before the Republican National Convention, which is still scheduled to happen from August 24-27 in Charlotte, North Carolina, as initially planned.  “In our current climate of uncertainty, we believe the smartest approach is to take additional time to monitor how this situation unfolds so we can best position our party for a safe and successful convention,” Joe Solmonese, Democratic National Convention Committee CEO, said in a statement.  Although questions had been accumulating for weeks about delaying the convention and the DNC had told Vox they were monitoring the situation and following public health guidelines, the decision to postpone only came two days after the presumptive nominee, former Vice President Joe Biden, weighed in. During an MSNBC appearance on Tuesday, the former vice president, who’s currently leading the delegate count, said it was “hard to envision” the event occurring in July given the current outbreak.  DNC leadership is evaluating the situation to determine if more adjustments, like crowd size, will have to be made to ensure that the event will take place safely and in line with public health guidelines later this summer.  “Ultimately, the health and safety of our convention attendees and the people of Milwaukee is our top priority,” DNC Chair Tom Perez said in a statement.  Democrats’ convention is just the latest in a slew of election-related events that are being postponed or adapted to respond to the coronavirus crisis. As Vox’s Sean Collins reported, over a dozen states including New York, Pennsylvania, and Ohio have delayed their primary elections because of coronavirus, and the DNC has urged those states that have yet to vote to expand vote-by-mail options.  At this point in the primary, Biden has established a strong lead, with Sen. Bernie Sanders currently trailing him by more than 200 delegates.    President Donald Trump’s failure to respond to the coronavirus pandemic didn’t begin with the administration’s inability to send out the millions of test kits and the protective medical gear for health care workers that experts say are needed to tackle the crisis. It didn’t start with Trump’s bungled messaging downplaying the crisis even as it’s worsened, nor with his mid-March insistence that social distancing measures could be lifted by Easter (he later backpedaled). It began in April 2018 — more than a year and a half before the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the disease it causes, Covid-19, sickened enough people in China that authorities realized they were dealing with a new disease.  The Trump administration, with John Bolton newly at the helm of the White House National Security Council, began dismantling the team in charge of pandemic response, firing its leadership and disbanding the team in spring 2018. The cuts, coupled with the administration’s repeated calls to cut the budget for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and other public health agencies, made it clear that the Trump administration wasn’t prioritizing the federal government’s ability to respond to disease outbreaks.  That lack of attention to preparedness, experts say, helps explain why the Trump administration has consistently botched its response to the coronavirus pandemic. The administration has in recent weeks taken steps to combat criticisms about its slow and muddled response to the coronavirus. Trump has been appearing on TV a lot more, starting with an Oval Office address and recently with daily press briefings. He declared a national emergency, advised Americans to social distance, vowed more testing for patients and medical equipment for health care workers, and promised more economic relief to those affected by the crisis. But experts say a lot of the damage has been done: The federal government is still only playing catch-up, as thousands of new cases of coronavirus are confirmed and the death toll steadily increases every day. The first sign of a massive failure came with testing. South Korea, which has been widely praised for its response to coronavirus, tested more than 66,000 people within a week of the first community transmission within its borders. By comparison, the US took roughly three weeks to complete that many tests — in a country that is much more populous and, now, is on track to have a much worse outbreak than South Korea and other nations. Testing is crucial to slowing epidemics. First, it lets public health officials identify sick people and subsequently isolate them. Second, they can trace that sick person’s recent contacts to make sure those people aren’t sick and to get them into quarantine as well. It’s one of the best tools we have for an outbreak like this. It’s also something that the federal government has done well before — recently, with H1N1 and Zika. “It’s been surprising to me that the administration’s had a hard time executing on some of these things,” Ashish Jha, director of the Harvard Global Health Institute, previously told me. But it’s the kind of thing that the Trump administration has screwed up, while instead trying to downplay the threat of Covid-19. Trump himself has tweeted comparisons of Covid-19 to the common flu — which Jha describes as “really unhelpful,” because the novel coronavirus appears to be much worse. Trump also called concerns about the virus a “hoax.” He said on national television that, based on nothing more than a self-admitted “hunch,” the death rate of the disease is much lower than public health officials projected. And Trump has rejected any accountability for the botched testing process: “I don’t take responsibility at all,” he said last month. Jha described the Trump administration’s messaging so far as “deeply disturbing,” adding that it’s “left the country far less prepared than it needs to be for what is a very substantial challenge ahead.” Even as the Trump administration has tried to escalate its efforts to combat the pandemic, Trump has continued to downplay concerns. Recently, he’s suggested that social distancing measures — asking people to stay home and keep their physical distance from one another — could be lifted within weeks, instead of the months experts say is likely necessary. “What a great timeline that would be,” Trump said. This kind of downplaying has previously worked for Trump, who successfully, at least politically, fended off concerns about his handling of Hurricane Maria, the opioid epidemic, and a host of self-inflicted crises, from his travel ban to the crisis at the US-Mexico border. But in the current pandemic, the approach has left the Trump administration unprepared for the challenge ahead, whether it’s in the failure in testing or the administration’s inability to calm the public and markets as the novel coronavirus spreads. And all of this can be traced back to the Trump administration’s decision in the spring of 2018 to deprioritize the federal government’s ability to respond to pandemics. The White House did not respond to a request for comment. When Bolton became Trump’s national security adviser in 2018, he quickly moved to disband the White House National Security Council’s Directorate for Global Health Security and Biodefense, which President Barack Obama set up after the 2014-2016 Ebola outbreak to lead federal coordination and preparation for disease outbreaks. In April 2018, Bolton fired Tom Bossert, then the homeland security adviser, who, the Washington Post reported, “had called for a comprehensive biodefense strategy against pandemics and biological attacks.” Then, that May, Bolton let go the head of pandemic response, Rear Adm. Timothy Ziemer, and his global health security team. The team, the Directorate for Global Health Security and Biodefense, was never replaced. At the time, the Trump administration and Bolton argued the cuts were needed to streamline the National Security Council. But, according to experts, the work of a global health security team, or something like it, is crucial to responding to any disease outbreak. Since the federal government is sprawling and large, it helps to have centralized leadership in case of a crisis. That leadership could ensure all federal agencies are doing the most they can and working toward a single set of goals. But it’s important to have this kind of agency set up before an outbreak. Setting up an agency takes time; it requires hiring staff, handing out tasks and expected workloads, creating internal policies, and so on. A preexisting agency is also going to have plans worked out before an outbreak, with likely contingencies in place for what to do. That’s why it was so important to have this agency in place even during years, like 2018, when disease pandemics didn’t seem like a nearby threat to everyone. “The basic systems need to be in place for global, state, and local responses,” Jen Kates, a senior vice president and director of global health and HIV policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation, told me. “When you don’t shore those up, you’re not starting from scratch, but you’re catching up every single time.” The Trump administration has since put Vice President Mike Pence in charge of handling the coronavirus pandemic, building out a team that includes well-respected experts like Deborah Birx. But this is in reaction to the epidemic, instead of something that a preexisting agency within the administration was working on for years. Even some officials within the Trump administration have voiced concern about the team’s dismantling. “It would be nice if the office was still there,” Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases at the National Institutes of Health, said during a congressional hearing. “We worked very well with that office.” The cuts are part of Trump’s broader policy agenda, focused largely on trimming the size of the federal government. He has repeatedly proposed cuts to agencies, like the CDC and NIH, on the front lines of the federal response to disease outbreaks. Trump’s most recent budget proposals asked for similar cuts — and the administration has stood by them. (But Congress has generally denied such proposals.) In the months before the coronavirus outbreak, the administration cut a public health position that was meant to help detect disease outbreaks in China, where the pandemic began, Marisa Taylor reported for Reuters. Even without such cuts, experts and advocates argue the US generally underfunds disease outbreak preparedness and public health programs more broadly. Further cuts just deepen the risks of pandemics. By repeatedly undercutting outbreak preparedness, Jha said, the Trump administration signaled “to the government and all the agencies this is not a priority. And that means that even other agencies end up not putting as much attention and energy on it. So I think this has been a longstanding problem of the White House.” Trump, for his part, has defended his record, arguing, “I’m a businessperson. I don’t like having thousands of people around when you don’t need them. When we need them, we can get them back very quickly.” But experts argue that’s not how pandemic preparedness should work. “You build a fire department ahead of time,” Tom Inglesby, director of the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, told the Washington Post. “You don’t wait for a fire.” Even after it became clear that the coronavirus outbreak was becoming a global threat in January, the Trump administration has been slow to prepare and react. The common refrain among experts is that other countries’ actions, such as China’s draconian measures, gave the US a bit of time to do something, but the federal government has failed to get even the basics right in that time. That begins, first and foremost, with testing. But as report after report has confirmed, the US has done a bad job in this area — falling behind its developed peers in Europe and Asia. While the US has dramatically scaled up testing in recent weeks, health care workers and patients still complain that they still sometimes can’t obtain tests even when symptoms are present. Not all of this is necessarily the Trump administration’s fault. When the CDC rolled out its tests, a component in them turned out to be faulty. That was unfortunate, but it put a big spotlight on the CDC’s decision to use its own test kit instead of test kits other countries have used, reportedly in an effort to create a more accurate test. Since then, as Olga Khazan explained at the Atlantic, the Trump administration consistently failed to make things better, with reports of infighting making it harder for the administration to get its act together. But this is exactly the kind of situation that proper preparedness, well, prepares federal agencies for. If the Trump administration had prioritized outbreak prevention before the coronavirus pandemic, it might have used the time prior to Covid-19’s appearance — or even January and February, when the global threat was increasingly clear — to establish contingencies in case something went wrong. “These kinds of things are what you prepare for, why you do preparedness planning, so this kind of thing doesn’t happen,” Kates said. “Right now everyone’s playing catch-up to try to address these gaps, and every day matters. A good preparedness plan would be addressing that from the outset.” This is, after all, something the federal government has done before for outbreaks, from H1N1 to Zika. A big difference from then to now is that Trump is in charge. Recognizing the criticisms, the Trump administration has promised to try to boost testing output, including a partnership with the private sector. But while things are improving, the full rollout of tests will likely take weeks — eating up crucial time that could have gone to actually using the tests to stop the spread of the coronavirus. One of the problems is Trump has consistently downplayed the coronavirus, comparing it to the common flu and claiming that his administration is doing a “GREAT job” and keeping things under control. Even when announcing his administration’s goal to get 5 million test kits out, Trump said, “I doubt we’ll need anywhere near that.” Some of that may be political. Politico reporter Dan Diamond told NPR host Terry Gross that, based on his own reporting, Trump “did not push to do aggressive additional testing in recent weeks, and that’s partly because more testing might have led to more cases being discovered of coronavirus outbreak, and the president had made clear — the lower the numbers on coronavirus, the better for the president, the better for his potential re-election this fall.” Some of it could also be a result of too much optimism. Trump in February said of the coronavirus, “One day it’s like a miracle, it will disappear.” (As of March 25, the US has more than 55,000 confirmed cases, up from fewer than 100 at the beginning of March, according to Johns Hopkins University.) In mid-March, as Trump more openly acknowledged the threat of coronavirus, he suggested that the country could pull back on social distancing efforts by Easter — in just a couple weeks. When pressed on why he chose that date, he did not cite any evidence or data. Instead, he said that Easter “is a beautiful time. It would be a beautiful timeline.” That timeline did not last long. Trump initially focused his response to coronavirus on travel restrictions, first against China and most recently against Europe. While this likely bought the US a little time with China, the Trump administration didn’t use that time properly.  And in the case of Europe, the restrictions will likely do little to nothing. There’s one simple reason for that, Kates told me: “The virus is already here.” Since the coronavirus is already spreading within communities, the concern is no longer the virus coming in from outside the US. Even conservatives have been critical of Trump’s response. The National Review editorial board wrote earlier this month: [Trump] resisted making the response to the epidemic a priority for as long as he could — refusing briefings, downplaying the problem, and wasting precious time. He has failed to properly empower his subordinates and refused to trust the information they provided him — often offering up unsubstantiated claims and figures from cable television instead. He has spoken about the crisis in crude political and personal terms. He has stood in the way of public understanding of the plausible course of the epidemic, trafficking instead in dismissive clichés. He has denied his administration’s missteps, making it more difficult to address them. In the face of all these criticisms, Trump has, at least in public, seemingly taken the crisis more seriously. He held an Oval Office address. He’s led daily press briefings. A White House task force released guidelines advising people to avoid public spaces and larger gatherings. His administration has, in light of declaring a national emergency, promised to take all sorts of actions to shore up coronavirus testing, health care capacity, and a tanking economy. At the same time, Trump has continued to do things that conflict with what experts are saying. He’s hyped up an anti-malaria drug, chloroquine, that experts say we simply don’t have enough evidence for as an anti-coronavirus treatment. He’s downplayed experts’ warnings that social distancing may be necessary for months, instead suggesting that it may just be weeks. And instead of using press briefings to convey clear, actionable messages and let his own experts speak, Trump often uses his time at the podium to brag about unrelated issues and criticize the media as “fake news.” Meanwhile, the actual policy response continues lagging behind. Beyond the lack of testing, experts often cite a shortage of medical equipment, such as ventilators, masks, gloves, and goggles. While the administration has said it’s using federal authorities and tapping into its stockpiles to get more of this gear to the places that need it, health care workers on the ground complain that they still don’t have enough — forcing them to reuse possibly contaminated equipment and choose between working in unsafe conditions or not show up to work at all. All of this at a time when the country needs to, according to experts, boost health care capacity. “Even with the infusion of supplies from the strategic stockpile and other federal resources, there will not be enough medical supplies, including ventilators, to respond to the projected COVID-19 outbreak,” a March 21 letter from the American Medical Association, American Hospital Association, and American Nurses Association stated. “We have heard of health care providers reusing masks or resorting to makeshift alternatives for masks.” Again, this reflects on the lack of preparedness: A shortage of medical equipment is one of the many problems government simulations and exercises warned about before the current outbreak. But Trump simply didn’t prioritize pandemic preparedness beforehand. “The US … was not prepared,” Kates said. “A good preparedness plan would have helped address this and had things in place to allow for that increased need to be met.”  But the Trump administration didn’t quickly prioritize such efforts, even after it got warnings in January and February based on how coronavirus cases took off in China. In the background of all of this, the Trump administration has continued to push for several policies that, while not obviously related to the coronavirus, experts caution could have a negative impact on the pandemic. For one, Trump has continued pushing for the repeal of the Affordable Care Act, as well as efforts to reel back Medicaid with work requirements. With the outbreak growing, the US’s lack of universal health care has become an even more obvious problem: If people can’t get testing, they’re less likely to find out they have Covid-19 and take precautions to avoid spreading the virus. If they can’t get treatment in case of complications, they’re more likely to suffer, potentially spread the disease, and die.  The Trump administration seems aware of this problem, working with insurers to eliminate copayments for testing, stop surprise medical billing, and help expand coverage related to the coronavirus. But in many ways, the administration is working against problems that it’s also helping create by pushing to worsen access to health care. The pandemic is “bringing to the fore the underlying challenges that we have in our health and social support system in the United States,” Kates said. Another example: The administration has pushed forward on measures that will kick people off food stamps. This will not only lead people to suffer if they lose their jobs as a result of a coronavirus-caused recession, but it could lead to sick people going to work and spreading the disease, because they won’t have a safety net if they don’t bring in a paycheck. “If you ask people who are very marginal and barely had enough money to put food on the table, if you ask them to not work and therefore not get paid, and choose between that and having to go to work and put themselves or others at risk, that’s a terrible choice,” Jha said. “And a lot of people are going to make ‘the wrong choice,’ and you’d understand why. This is not about just helping people economically; this is about fighting the virus.” The Trump administration, for its part, appears to understand part of the problem here. He has signed a bill that’s providing economic relief to affected workers and Covid-19 patients — including paid leave, more food aid, and free testing — with more to come.  But his administration has also stuck to its other efforts to kick people off food stamps. Experts also pointed to the “public charge” rule, which effectively discourages immigrants from seeking public services, including health care, by threatening their immigration status if they are “likely to be a public charge” by relying on those services. “With an outbreak, that’s a recipe for potential disaster,” Kates argued. “You don’t want individuals to feel frightened about seeking the care that they need because they’re fearful of not being able to stay in the country or with their families. That would threaten the public’s health.” Even if the administration doesn’t want to permanently back off these policy proposals, it could, Kates said, consider a moratorium. But so far, that’s not happening. That reflects the lack of priority the Trump administration has given to the coronavirus pandemic, even as it rapidly worsens. If stopping the pandemic was the top priority, Trump could halt, even just temporarily, policies that could potentially worsen the crisis. But he’s not. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Amazon began banning the purchase of N95 and surgical masks by the general public on April 1, saying it would restrict the sale of those goods and other medical supplies to hospitals and government organizations combating the Covid-19 coronavirus. In a notice posted on a forum for Amazon sellers, the company said the ban would also include “facial shields, surgical gowns, surgical gloves, and large-volume sanitizers.” Hospitals and governments interested in purchasing these items through Amazon need to fill out a form to qualify, and Amazon said it would eliminate the commission it normally takes from sellers who sell these items during this time “to encourage our selling partners to make additional inventory of these products available at competitive prices to these customers with the greatest need.” The move is the latest drastic change Amazon has made to its business practices amid the global pandemic that has upended billions of lives and economies across the globe. Amazon has become a lifeline to essential goods during this time for millions of customers ordered to stay at home and those fearful of shopping in stores during the crisis. In mid-March, faced with merchandise shortages in the United States and Europe due to the pandemic, Amazon instituted sweeping changes on which products it will store and ship from its warehouses, in a move it said was aimed at keeping essential items in stock and speeding up orders. At the time, Amazon said it would be “temporarily prioritizing household staples, medical supplies, and other high-demand products coming into our fulfillment centers so that we can more quickly receive, restock and deliver these products to customers.”  By “prioritizing,” Amazon meant it will no longer accept new shipments to its warehouses for discretionary items through at least April 5. During that time, Amazon will continue to sell all types of products on its websites, but sellers listing discretionary items will have to store and ship them on their own if they aren’t already in, or on their way to, an Amazon warehouse. The company said most of the products it was still accepting from third-party sellers and wholesale vendors fall into one of six categories: baby products, health and household, beauty and personal care, grocery, industrial and scientific, and pet supplies. The messages were sent to third-party sellers who store goods in Amazon warehouses through the Fulfillment by Amazon program, as well as wholesale vendors who sell goods directly to Amazon, which then resells those goods to customers.  “We are seeing increased online shopping, and as a result, some products, such as household staples and medical supplies, are out of stock,” an Amazon spokesperson said in a statement. “We understand this is a change for our selling partners and appreciate their understanding as we temporarily prioritize these products for customers,” the spokesperson added. With governments across the globe recommending and even mandating that people stay inside during the pandemic, more shoppers are turning to Amazon to stock up rather than visiting brick-and-mortar stores. But the rush of shopping in select categories has meant frequent out-of-stock messages for items ranging from hand sanitizer and hand soap to face masks, as well as sellers taking advantage of low supply by attempting to price-gouge customers. This restriction on which items it will store in warehouses — coupled with Amazon’s announcement that it was hiring 100,000 warehouse workers to keep up with surging demand — highlights the level at which consumers are relying on online shopping during the pandemic. At the same time, it’s also a realization that even the endless digital aisles of Amazon’s Everything Store, and Amazon’s logistics prowess, were not built to fully sustain the change in consumer behavior that the pandemic has forced essentially overnight. On Amazon’s message board for third-party sellers, the warehouse news was greeted with panic. “Amazon just put tons of businesses out of business,” one seller wrote on Amazon’s forum. “Destroyed thousands of jobs amidst a crisis. Horrible joke. Absolute joke. No warning. Expect major lawsuits coming from sellers who now will go bankrupt.” “It is not doable,” another wrote. “Most of us do not have the infrastructure in place. We do not have the boxes or packing material to do this.” In the notice to sellers, the company said, “We understand this is a change to your business, and we did not take this decision lightly.” Others who make a living off of Amazon favored the warehouse decision. Will Tjernlund, CMO of Amazon seller consultancy Goat Consulting, said he believes many sellers already have enough inventory in Amazon warehouses to last until April 5 and that the move was the right one. “I am happy Amazon is focusing on fulfilling essential items over figuring how to ship couches or flatscreen TVs,” he said. Over the past few weeks, as the outbreak has spread from Asia to Europe to the US, Amazon has struggled to keep the most in-demand items in stock and to stop the price-gouging the shortages have caused. At times, two-packs of Purell hand sanitizer have been selling for hundreds of dollars, causing outrage from customers and politicians alike. In response, Amazon restricted who can sell certain in-demand items and said it pulled more than 500,000 high-priced listings and banned more than 2,000 sellers. Amazon has also struggled to make room for the in-demand stock it can get its hands on. Items marked as Prime-eligible are showing delivery dates that vary from a few days away to several weeks out; during normal times, Amazon Prime shipments typically take two days to arrive at most. Again, Amazon will still sell nonessential items that are already in their warehouses or on the way, or which sellers are willing to store and ship on their own. But for sellers who make a living by selling more discretionary goods on Amazon — and who planned to ship more to Amazon warehouses soon — they will need to make big changes. One option is to store and ship products on their own, directly to customers. The other is to try to quickly get approval to sell through other e-commerce marketplaces such as eBay or Wish. Updated, April 2, 11:15 am ET: This post was updated to include new details about Amazon’s restrictions on selling certain medical supplies to the general public.“Team 700 to B4.”  Before Covid-19 took over our hospital, I may have heard this page — which summons a medical team because a patient’s heart has stopped — once or twice a week. In the past couple of days, I’ve lost count of how many times I’ve heard it.  One recent page stands out: It was the afternoon of March 23, for a man in his early 30s with no medical problems. We had maxed out on his ventilator settings, yet his lungs couldn’t deliver the oxygen his body needed, so his heart had naturally stopped.   Over the past week, the hospital in Elmhurst, Queens, where I’m a resident in emergency medicine has been inundated with coronavirus patients needing ventilators. On a typical day, we are one of the busiest emergency departments in the country. We take pride in serving one of the most diverse and vulnerable patient populations in the world. Esoteric and rare diseases are common occurrences here. Our sheer volume and diversity also meant that we were uniquely susceptible to a pandemic.  When the first case made its way to New York City, we suspected it was only a matter of time. However, we didn’t expect that we would become a “ground zero” hospital for Covid-19.  
    Related
   Initially, we just had one patient with a high clinical suspicion for Covid-19, but over time, patients with relatively low or no clinical suspicion without fevers were turning out positive. We learned that the virus’s symptoms vary: Some presented with cholera-like diarrhea with profound dehydration that then progressed to respiratory distress, whereas others had mild headaches with muscle aches.  This taught us one of many valuable lessons early on. As other hospitals around the country prepare for the pandemic to arrive in the coming days, we hope that our firsthand experiences can help them avoid the same mistakes and pitfalls.  Here are six of the most important lessons we’ve learned so far:  At the beginning of the pandemic, we underestimated the number of asymptomatic carriers who were admitted for unrelated reasons. We didn’t test these patients, as it wasn’t considered clinically indicated. A lack of testing kits compounded the problem. And the lack of early, widespread mobilization of personal protective equipment (PPE) made it even worse.  
    Related
   The scarcity of PPE meant that we were judicious in using it only for “persons under investigation” (PUI) for Covid-19. This soon proved to be a disastrous and futile policy.  We weren’t using protective equipment for unknown asymptomatic carriers and likely became reservoirs of transmission. It meant that nurses and doctors likely transmitted the disease silently, but to what extent remains largely unknown. The only way to prevent this transmission is by either testing all providers and patients each day or using PPE for every patient. The latter strategy was far more practical.  We tried to isolate PUI into our intensive care units (ICUs), but as the hospital became overwhelmed with PUIs, the policy had once again proved to be futile. This, coupled with a large turnaround time to get test results, meant we weren’t able to appropriately triage patients to Covid-19 and non-Covid-19 areas of the hospitals.  Though this may change with the availability of rapid-turnaround tests, the lack of sensitivity of the test made us cautious about sending patients to a non-Covid-19 unit. We thus came to a grim realization: The only way to minimize some transmission was to once again use our PPE for any and all patients.  
    Related
   Over the next several days, as we were coming to grips with our reality, we started seeing a staggering number of patients who needed ventilators. At the beginning of the pandemic, we had predicted that older patients or patients with chronic conditions would likely be affected more. Though that has largely been true, we also started increasingly seeing young patients with no medical problems in respiratory arrest, needing a ventilator.  For us, it meant hospital floors that weren’t equipped to manage ICU patients suddenly became mini-ICUs. Sections of the “fast track” in our ER were carved off into ICUs with vented patients. At one point, it even meant transferring patients to nearby hospitals with ICU beds.  Needless to say, that was short-lived as every hospital in NYC soon became inundated with Covid-19 patients. Frankly, we have even explored the option of turning operating rooms into ICUs. Just when we thought we had enough ICU beds, we needed more. My advice is to prepare for the worst and hope for the best.  As all the patients in the ICUs required multiple blood draws, titration of medications, and adjusting ventilator settings on an hour-by-hour basis, the staff had to find ways to minimize our overall exposure to the virus. Early on, we decided to place the ventilator as well as the IV poles outside of the patient rooms while also consolidating all of our critical care procedures in one sitting.  For us, it meant every vented patient had multiple peripheral IV accesses, a central venous catheter as well as an arterial line. This enabled the nurses and doctors to minimize their overall exposures.   Expanding the physical space and bridging the equipment and testing shortages was one feat, but the unexpected shortage of clinicians and nurses trained in intensive care medicine was another. The sheer volume of patients coupled with nurses and doctors who fell ill to Covid-19 made this a penultimate issue.  In our hospital, training non-ICU nurses and non-intensive doctors in critical care medicine was simply not an option but a necessity. It meant training cardiologists on complex vent management. Needless to say, when the ER doctors and intensivists fall ill, having a safety net of clinicians trained in parts of intensive-care medicine will be crucial for patient care.  As we were inundated with critically ill patients, we also saw an exponential rise in “worried-well patients” requesting an evaluation. Some hospitals have adopted telemedicine where doctors take turns answering questions from patients and triage them on whether they should be sent to the ER. This has proven to be effective in decompressing the ER, likely preventing patient-to-patient and clinician-patient transmissions.  However, in a hospital that serves some of the poorest patients like mine, telemedicine is simply not an option. For these hospitals, testing tents outside the hospital have proven somewhat effective, but still not enough to keep up with the demand. Even with the best of these measures, as of April 1, 1,374 New Yorkers have lost their lives to Covid-19, more than 376 of them in Queens. One-third of the city’s total cases (45,672 as of April 1) are in Queens, too.  As the code team runs to the bedside, the team leader assigns members their roles. They press on the patient’s chest and push all the necessary medications to rescue his heart. After several minutes, just when we felt defeated, the patient’s heart started beating again. We sighed with a sense of relief and looked at each other, knowing that it was only a matter of time until our next code. Suresh Pavuluri is a resident physician with the department of emergency medicine at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.The Trump administration has reportedly declined to reopen enrollment under the Affordable Care Act so that people without health insurance — including some newly laid-off workers — can enroll in coverage during the coronavirus pandemic. Trump administration officials had initially said they were considering creating a special enrollment period on Healthcare.gov for the pandemic after insurance companies and Democrats asked them to, but ultimately ruled against it, telling Politico they were “exploring other options.” There are concerns of a significant increase in the uninsured rate after mass layoffs over the last month, as health insurance in the US is largely employment-based. Three million people filed initial claims for unemployment two weeks ago, according to Department of Labor data released last Thursday. Many of those people whose jobs did offer benefits now face losing their health insurance on top of everything else. They, at least, will be able to enroll in a new insurance plan through the exchanges if they so choose: Though open enrollment for ACA plans ended on December 15, losing previous coverage is a qualifying life event that allows people their own special enrollment period. But many who lost their jobs but not health coverage — including if they didn’t have any because their employers didn’t offer it — can’t purchase health insurance. If their household income drops low enough, they may qualify for Medicaid in the following month, but it’s not guaranteed.  “The administration has broad authority under the ACA to set the timing and length of open enrollment periods and qualifying factors for special enrollment periods,” Kaiser Family Foundation executive vice president Larry Leavitt told Vox. “Insurers are usually the constituency opposing broader enrollment periods, and they are supporting it, so it’s hard to see the administration’s opposition as anything but ideological opposition to the ACA.” The administration’s decision will only affect people in the 38 states for which the federal government administers the health exchange. Other states have created their own exchanges and can choose to reopen their markets if they wish — New York, California, and several other states, along with the District of Columbia, have already done so. The coronavirus pandemic is not confined to those states, however. There are confirmed cases in each of the 50 states in the US, and with people less likely to seek medical help if they are uninsured, the lack of coverage could present a risk to public health. The decision follows a long-established pattern by the administration to weaken and discourage enrollees to the ACA at nearly every turn possible. Administration officials also signaled Monday that they would be proceeding with supporting a federal lawsuit scheduled for oral arguments this fall at the Supreme Court which could potentially end the ACA altogether. That would result in millions of people getting thrown off their ACA health insurance plans. But in the meantime, the country is struggling to manage critical care for Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, and major disruptions in the insurance system could deepen the crisis. Workers laid off because of the pandemic face a hodgepodge health insurance system that isn’t designed to ensure that everyone can be covered and options mainly depend on an individual worker’s circumstances. Most workers who previously had employer-sponsored health insurance can either continue their previous coverage under COBRA, which can be extremely pricy, or choose to enroll in an ACA plan, even without a national special enrollment period. Some of them could also qualify for Medicaid. But many of the workers who will take the brunt of the layoffs are likely to come from industries that don’t generally offer employee health insurance, as explained by Vox’s Dylan Scott: The workers most vulnerable to losing their jobs from Covid-19 were more likely to work in the service or retail industries, and they were more likely to be low-wage workers. Survey data from the Kaiser Family Foundation indicates cooks, waiters and waitresses, sales workers, and cashiers are some of the jobs with the highest uninsured rates in the US. The food service industry has the most workers on Medicaid, according to KFF, with about 1.4 million already covered by the government program. These jobs don’t pay particularly well, and the businesses that employ these workers are less likely to offer health insurance at all. About one-third of retail firms provide health benefits, and the service industry also ranks behind most others in providing health coverage. So because of our fractured system, which depends on employers to cover health benefits for a lot of workers, the people who lost their jobs as the coronavirus economic panic set in were already at more of a disadvantage when it comes to getting covered. Those workers face more obstacles to obtaining health insurance in the time of coronavirus. Some who are completely out of work may qualify for Medicaid, but those facing reduced hours or partial employment may not be eligible, especially if they live in one of the 14 states that currently have not expanded Medicaid coverage. It’s those folks, who were already uninsured before getting laid off and aren’t eligible for Medicaid, who will be hurt the most by the Trump administration’s decision not to reopen the ACA marketplace. That’s why New York, California, and other states have decided to do so in their own marketplaces. Though the CDC told Vox that the agency has the authority to cover testing and treatment specifically for Covid-19, stories have begun popping up of individuals with the virus getting turned away for lack of insurance or getting hit with large bills. With an already strained health care system, the country’s makeshift health insurance system could become an impediment to public health during the pandemic. Additional reporting from Dylan Scott.President Donald Trump revealed a grim projection in the coronavirus pandemic on Tuesday: Even with the social distancing the US is doing now, 100,000 to 200,000 Americans will likely die as a result of the ongoing outbreak. “When you see 100,000 people, that’s a minimum number,” Trump said.  It’s a horrifying figure. That’s more people than ever died in a single year from HIV/AIDS, drug overdoses, gun violence, or car crashes in the US. It’s more than American casualties during the entire Vietnam War. But it’s also a horrifying number, in part, because much of it was likely preventable. If the US — including the Trump administration — had better prepared for pandemics, the country likely could have avoided ever talking about 100,000 to 200,000 deaths. The estimated death toll “was not inevitable,” Céline Gounder, an epidemiologist at New York University, told me. “If we’d jumped into contract tracing and testing, social distancing, and health system preparedness as soon as we heard reports from China, we’d be in a very different situation now.” Under Trump, the US had years to prepare. With warnings from President Barack Obama’s administration and activists like Bill Gates, it was always clear that America was vulnerable to a pandemic. (Vox did a whole episode about it for Netflix.) For many, the 2014-’16 Ebola outbreak exposed the threat; Jeremy Konyndyk, who worked in the Obama administration during the Ebola outbreak, told me he “came away from that experience just completely horrified at how unready we would be for something more dangerous than Ebola,” which, thankfully, was relatively hard to transmit. In the years leading to the coronavirus outbreak, though, Trump did not take the concerns seriously. His administration shut down the White House office, set up after the Ebola outbreak, that oversaw disease outbreaks and pandemics. It repeatedly proposed cuts to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and other public health agencies (although Congress largely rejected those cuts). The administration cut a public health position that was meant to help detect disease outbreaks in China, where the coronavirus outbreak began. By the time it became clear that the world was facing a serious threat in January and February, Trump and his administration were again slow to act. Despite declaring a public health emergency, the administration failed to establish the infrastructure for nationwide testing — holding up private testing labs with bureaucratic and regulatory hurdles while sending out its own faulty test kits. The administration did nothing of substance to really scale up the production of personal protective equipment (PPE) for health care workers, allowing a shortage to take root. Trump still hasn’t leveraged the full might of the Defense Production Act to get medical supplies to hospitals and clinics that need them to fight the outbreak. The failure on testing alone is massive — one that remains today. As Johns Hopkins University epidemiologist Jennifer Nuzzo told the New York Times, “Had we had done more testing from the very beginning and caught cases earlier, we would be in a far different place.” The result is an outbreak that looks very different in the US than in the few countries, like South Korea and Taiwan, that have better contained Covid-19, the disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus. This isn’t solely on Trump. Some of it comes down to chance — that the coronavirus is popping up now and is so deadly and contagious is obviously not under any president’s control. Konyndyk’s experience under Obama shows the previous administration wasn’t ready for a pandemic either. Experts and advocates argue that pandemic preparedness, along with public health more broadly, is notoriously underfunded not just in the US but around the world. Some local and state officials, such as in New York City and Florida, have also underreacted to the crisis, making it worse. But Trump, perhaps more than any other president, had plenty of warning about what was to come. He squandered all the opportunities given to him to do better, leaving much of the aggressive action that has reduced the death toll — down from the millions the White House and experts say is possible without interventions — to local and state officials who simply don’t have the reach of the federal government. So now 100,000 to 200,000 Americans are likely to die. Every step of the way, the Trump administration failed to take the threat of a pandemic seriously. The threat was long well-known, including to the federal government. Government simulations and exercises before the outbreak revealed that there were a lot of problems, from the lack of sufficient PPE to simple confusion between the cities, states, and many federal agencies about who’s in charge during a crisis. Trump reacted to the risks by deprioritizing pandemic preparedness. In 2018, then–National Security Adviser John Bolton fired Tom Bossert, a homeland security adviser who, the Washington Post reported, “had called for a comprehensive biodefense strategy against pandemics and biological attacks.” Then Bolton let go the head of pandemic response, Rear Adm. Timothy Ziemer, and his global health security team. The team, the Directorate for Global Health Security and Biodefense, was the main group within the White House for pandemic preparedness — and it was never replaced. At the time, the Trump administration and Bolton said the cuts were needed to streamline the National Security Council. But what it did, experts have told me, is leave the US unready for a crisis of the magnitude it’s facing now. “The basic systems need to be in place for global, state, and local responses,” Jen Kates, director of global health and HIV policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation, previously told me. “When you don’t shore those up, you’re not starting from scratch, but you’re catching up every single time.” Even once it became clear that the coronavirus pandemic was a real threat, Trump downplayed the outbreak. He compared the novel coronavirus to the seasonal flu, when the coronavirus is in fact much deadlier and more contagious than the flu. He called concerns about the virus a “hoax.” He said on national television that, based on nothing more than a self-admitted “hunch,” the death rate of the disease was much lower than public health officials projected. Even after his administration invoked social distancing guidelines, Trump talked up the idea of doing away with them by Easter to allow for “packed churches.” Ashish Jha, director of the Harvard Global Health Institute, described the administration’s early messaging as “deeply disturbing,” adding that it’s “left the country far less prepared than it needs to be for what is a very substantial challenge ahead.” Trump’s tone has changed in recent weeks. He ultimately extended his task force’s social distancing guidelines through April. On Tuesday, he went after the claim — that, again, he repeatedly made before — that coronavirus is like flu: “It’s not the flu. It’s vicious,” he said. But however Trump may feel now, his administration’s failure to take this threat seriously early on left the country in a much worse place. A recent investigation by the New York Times exposed how the Trump administration failed to scale up testing. The CDC developed its own test for coronavirus — seemingly to make a more accurate test than what was available from other places — but the test turned out to be faulty, and the CDC took weeks to provide a fix. Meanwhile, the administration put up all sorts of regulatory hurdles that prevented private labs from rolling out their own tests. The result: The US was only testing about 100 samples a day by mid-February, according to the Times. The Times concluded, “Across the government, [experts] said, three agencies responsible for detecting and combating threats like the coronavirus failed to prepare quickly enough. Even as scientists looked at China and sounded alarms, none of the agencies’ directors conveyed the urgency required to spur a no-holds-barred defense.” This failure alone doomed the US to a much bigger outbreak, forcing Americans to rely far more on social distancing and suffer many more deaths. That’s because testing is crucial, especially in the early stages, to curtailing an outbreak: First, it lets public health officials identify sick people, isolate them, and trace their recent contacts to make sure those people aren’t sick and get them into quarantine as well. Second, testing lets officials detect which places are hardest hit and, therefore, require the most attention and help. Yet, even today, testing remains a problem. Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan (R) said this week that Trump’s claim that testing is no longer a problem is “just not true” and states are still “flying blind” due to insufficient testing. Testing is only one example among many. The country is also experiencing a shortage of PPE for health care workers and ventilators for treatment. Both problems were repeatedly raised in pandemic simulations, but the federal government failed to replenish its Strategic National Stockpile and failed to scale up domestic production and supply chains. Even now, Trump has refused to use the full powers of the Defense Production Act, which would allow the federal government to demand more domestic production of these goods (although it’d likely take at least weeks for this production to scale up). The lack of medical supplies is one reason experts worry the US won’t have the health care capacity to deal with a flood of Covid-19 patients, leading to sickness, suffering, and death due to insufficient treatment. Again, a lot of this goes back to poor preparation in the years before the Covid-19 pandemic — and, indeed, the years before Trump was in office — but Trump and his administration failed to prepare even once the threat of the coronavirus became clear. These outcomes weren’t inevitable. Other countries that were more aggressive earlier seemed to reduce their potential death tolls. Just take a look at this chart comparing Covid-19 cases between different countries and places:  The US’s trajectory in this chart is exponential: The number of cases is clearly rising every single day. But while US cases seemed to explode about two weeks after the 100th case, a few places — like South Korea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong — managed to flatten their curves with early, aggressive action around the same time. South Korea did this, as Max Fisher and Choe Sang-Hun reported at the New York Times, with a lot of testing. While the US was still doing at most 100 tests a day, South Korea was pumping them out in the thousands, if not tens of thousands, a day. This allowed officials in South Korea to detect where outbreaks were happening and contain them — particularly by getting people to isolate and quarantine, along with some restrictions on movement, travel, and socializing — before things got too out of control. The US is obviously not South Korea. It’s much bigger, more sprawling, and more populous. But the South Korean experience shows that aggressive testing, as one example, could help contain coronavirus. The US, due largely to the Trump administration’s failures, just didn’t have the capabilities South Korea did here. There’s plenty of other evidence that early, aggressive action can help contain epidemics. During the 1918 flu pandemic, some US cities took quick, decisive action while others didn’t. A 2007 study in PNAS exposed the different outcomes in St. Louis, which quickly imposed restrictions to force social distancing, and Philadelphia, which didn’t, in this telling chart: The study concluded that “cities in which multiple interventions were implemented at an early phase of the epidemic had peak death rates ≈50% lower than those that did not and had less-steep epidemic curves. Cities in which multiple interventions were implemented at an early phase of the epidemic also showed a trend toward lower cumulative excess mortality, but the difference was smaller (≈20%) and less statistically significant than that for peak death rates.” If Trump had acted sooner, the US could have had a better chance at replicating the results from St. Louis in 1918 or South Korea in 2020. But that moment has passed — and Americans are now facing the deaths of potentially hundreds of thousands of their friends, family, and peers as a result.The Bureau of Prisons (BOP) announced late Wednesday that, due to Covid-19 concerns, all of those incarcerated in federal facilities will be under quarantine for the next 14 days.  The guidelines come as a growing number of incarcerated people and prison employees have begun testing positive for and displaying symptoms indicative of the novel coronavirus, and represent the BOP’s latest effort to reduce the rate of transmission in federal facilities.  But while the new guidance is certainly better than taking no action, critics of the policy argue there are better ways to curb prison-based coronavirus cases: namely, improved sanitation and commuting sentences to reduce the number of people in prison.  While all 146,000 federally incarcerated people will be confined to their cells for two weeks, the BOP said they will be allowed into communal areas on a limited — and, as much as is possible, socially distant — basis to eat, do laundry, bathe, access the internet, and use the phone. Incarcerated people will also still have normal access to educational and mental health services. New prison arrivals will be reduced during the quarantine period.  Federal prisons have already begun to see confirmed Covid-19 cases. The first was announced on March 21 — since then, an additional 28 incarcerated people have tested positive for the virus, and 30 federal prison employees have confirmed cases.  As is the case with the population at large, it isn’t clear how many cases there actually are. And this fact, coupled with the fact that conditions in prisons are generally crowded and access to the sanitation measures public health officials have advocated for is nonexistent, makes prison populations particularly vulnerable to the coronavirus.  William Brewer Jr., the father of a man serving a sentence in a facility in Virginia, told the New York Times he is particularly concerned about hand-washing at his son’s facility.  “Even as a visitor,” Brewer said, “If you want to wash your hands, you’ve got to walk out and go into another building to do it.” A representative for the union that represents federal prison employees told Reuters his members were frustrated the BOP has denied requests for masks for prison guards.  These conditions have critics of the bureau’s new policy arguing that it does not go far enough: that being confined to cells will help limit exposure somewhat, but that it does not solve the underlying issues of guards being potential sources of community spread, nor does it address sanitation concerns.  “Keeping people in their cells for 14 days straight is NOT the same thing those of us elsewhere are going through,” Chris Geidner of the Justice Collaborative tweeted Wednesday. “Most of us have a supply of soap and hygienic bathrooms in separate rooms from where we eat, for starters.” How incredibly short-sighted, contrary to the advice of any experts, and inhumane. https://t.co/diGQCPa9bv In response to criticism like Geidner’s, Justice Department officials have said they plan to begin releasing elderly and ill prisoners. “There are particular concerns in this institutional setting. We want to make sure that our institutions don’t become Petri dishes and it spreads rapidly through a particular institution,” US Attorney General William Barr said Thursday. “We have the protocols that are designed to stop that and we are using all the tools we have to protect the inmates.”  In a memo to the BOP, Barr directed bureau officials to identify “at-risk inmates who are non-violent and pose minimal likelihood of recidivism and who might be safer serving their sentences in home confinement.” Like the BOP’s new policy, however, Barr’s plan has also been sharply critiqued by criminal justice advocates, like those at the Marshall Project. They argue a large part of the federal prison population will be excluded from consideration for home release because the plan bars anyone convicted of a violent crime from participating in the program — and because the system the BOP will use to adjudicate risk (an algorithm called Pattern) is heavily biased toward white people, according to a DOJ review.  While the majority of the federal prison population — 58.6 percent — was white, as of March 2020, an even larger share, 83.3 percent, was incarcerated for crimes that make them ineligible for home release, including drug charges, sexual offenses, and other violent crimes. And advocates note that most of those convicted for these crimes are people of color, as are those convicted of immigration crimes, a group that makes up 5.9 percent of the federal prison population and one also ineligible for home release.  Essentially, they argue, just a small number of white-collar criminals — a group mostly composed of white incarcerated people — will be released. It simultaneously is revealing of larger inequalities in the justice system and means the populations of federal prisoners are unlikely to be reduced in any meaningful way by Barr’s order. Also at issue is the fact that the DOJ and BOP do not have jurisdiction over the state prisons at which the vast majority of the United States’ 2.3 million incarcerated people are housed. Cities and states have largely been left to their own devices in determining how to adjust their prison policies in reaction to the coronavirus crisis, and have not rolled out plans at a uniform pace.  Some state and local officials have instituted policies similar to Barr’s. New York City has responded to a growing spate of Covid-19 cases in its jail system by releasing 900 incarcerated people so far — all accused of nonviolent crimes. At least 132 people imprisoned in the city’s jails and 104 jail employees have tested positive for the virus — a number New York’s incarcerated people have said they fear could grow, even with the city’s efforts to stop the spread.  Other places are still weighing early release plans. For instance, following positive cases in their prison systems, North Carolina and Georgia are investigating early release proposals, and have instituted plans to reduce exposure risk, with North Carolina instituting a quarantine similar to the BOP’s.  These state quarantines have the same issues as the BOP’s and, similarly, early release plans aren’t guaranteed to reduce population numbers enough to ensure incarcerated people and prison staff are able to socially distance in the manner recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). So while they — and the new federal policies — will certainly help a number of the incarcerated limit their exposure risk, it isn’t clear they address the overarching issue of reducing the prison population in a broadly effective way. Barr has argued “many inmates will be safer in BOP facilities where the population is controlled and there is ready access to doctors and medical care,” but not all incarcerated people agree.  Steven Jones, who is serving a sentence at a federal prison in Colorado, told Reuters, “If the virus gets in here, and we are all expecting it to, we are doomed.”   The White House delivered Americans grim news during a press conference Tuesday evening: Even with mitigation strategies, the United States could see between 100,000 and 200,000 coronavirus deaths.  President Trump, who has previously downplayed the coronavirus, called the infection “vicious.”  The White House projections are based on what’s happening across the United States — and they could still change, as the country isn’t expected to reach its peak in cases for at least another two weeks. The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in the United States stands at about 190,000 as of April 1.  Around the world, positive coronavirus cases are closing in on 900,000. Italy has extended its nationwide lockdown until at least April 13, even as there are some signs the country is beginning to wear under the stress of the restrictive measures. It is not the only country under strain, and United Nations Secretary General António Guterres has called the coronavirus pandemic the world’s biggest challenge since World War II. Here’s what you need to know today. Just last week, President Donald Trump and some of his supporters were suggesting that the country could ease social distancing measures by Easter. That tone has shifted dramatically, as the White House has extended its mitigation guidelines until April 30, and has now warned that the next two weeks are going to be deeply painful for the country. At a press conference Tuesday evening, the White House’s health experts presented horrifying data projections showing that the US could see at least 100,000 deaths, but as many as 200,000 deaths. “As sobering a number as [100,000 deaths] is,” Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said Tuesday, “we should be prepared for it. Is it going to be that much? I hope not ... We need to prepare ourselves — it is a possibility that that’s what we’ll see.” The projections are based on what’s happening on the ground in the United States, and how the disease has played out around the world. These, again, are estimates — they could very well change, depending on how closely Americans abide by shutdown orders, stay home, and try to stop the spread.  The death toll in the United States — which stands at about 3,900 as of April 1 — is expected to peak in the next two weeks. “This is going to be a very painful, very very painful two weeks,” Trump said. The Italian government has extended the country’s nationwide shutdown until at least April 13, putting the country under strict measures for almost a full month. Health minister Roberto Speranza said on Wednesday that the measures are beginning to show results, as the rate of infection is starting to slow in Italy.  But, he cautioned, “We must not confuse the first positive signals with an ‘all clear’ signal. Data shows that we are on the right path and that the drastic decisions are bearing fruit.” Though there are positive signs that the rate of infection is slowing, Italy is still seeing about 800 deaths each day. The country has the highest reported coronavirus death toll in the world right now, at more than 12,000 as of April 1.   And the lockdown is taking its toll, as the economic uncertainty and strain is starting to settle in. This is especially true in southern Italy, which hasn’t been hit as hard by the coronavirus, but also was a bit more economically precarious before the start of the crisis.  United Nations Secretary General António Guterres said Wednesday that the coronavirus pandemic is presenting the globe with its biggest challenge since World War II, and the formation of the United Nations itself. He warned that the virus could usher in a recession “that probably has no parallel in the recent past.” Guterres’s remarks come as the United Nations put forward a plan to counter the socio-economic impacts of the coronavirus, including calling for governments to focus on the most vulnerable by providing health and social safety nets to those facing economic uncertainty and hardship. According to the United Nations International Labour Organization, the world could lose between 5 and 25 million jobs and between $860 billion to $3.4 trillion in labor income as a result of the pandemic.  With New York City at the center of the US’ coronavirus crisis, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo has gotten a lot of visibility.  His handling of the crisis has gotten pretty high marks, both from New Yorkers who normally love to hate, though not exclusively, their governor, and from those out-of-state who see his straightforward, fact-based press conferences as an antidote to the president’s freewheeling ones.  City & State, a news outlet which covers New York politics, wrote a joke dating profile for the governor after he confirmed his break up with longtime partner Sandra Lee last fall. The site said they updated it last week because it had become one of the most-read articles on the site. What has instigated this fandom? Is it his press appearances on the CNN show hosted by his brother Chris, full of their sometimes awkward Italian-sons’ sibling rivalry? Is it the governor’s incredible talent for Powerpoint? We can only guess, but it might have something to do with this new theory floating around, which is basically: Wait, does Andrew Cuomo have his nipples pierced? I thought this tweet was a joke but now I’m genuinely curious + really need to scrub my search history https://t.co/lEVujXKni7 pic.twitter.com/P7vWXVSiBN So... Is the NY State unemployment site not working for everyone else too, or is it just me. I assume it's just me for making fun of Cuomo's nipple piercings in this photo. pic.twitter.com/DvIWJvE2uw A senior aide, asked whether the rumors of the governor’s body piercings were true, told the New York Post, “Of course not, sorry internet,” but internet conspiracy theories are rarely cowed by facts. And maybe this is a distraction New York needs right now, at least until the day when we can start blaming Cuomo for the subways again.   Last week, Harris County Judge Lina Hidalgo, who oversees the area of Texas that includes Houston, issued an order requiring “all individuals currently living within Harris County ... to stay at their place of residence except for Essential Activities” (in Texas, the title “county judge” refers to the chief executive of a county government).  Like many similar orders handed down by state and local officials throughout the United States, which are intended to slow the spread of the coronavirus pandemic, Hidalgo’s order closes most businesses within the county and shuts down most places where people gather in large groups. Although it allows faith leaders to “minister and counsel in individual settings, so long as social distance protocols are followed,” it requires worship services to “be provided by video and teleconference.” That restriction on in-person worship services has sparked a lawsuit, filed by three Texas pastors and Steven Hotze, a medical doctor and anti-LGBT Republican activist whose political action committee was labeled a hate group by the Southern Poverty Law Center. These four men ask the Texas Supreme Court to strike down Hidalgo’s order, claiming, among other things, that it violates the “religious liberty” of pastors who wish to gather their parishioners together during a pandemic. The case is named In re Hotze.  Under existing precedents, the petitioner’s arguments in Hotze are not strong. They rely heavily on older US Supreme Court decisions that were effectively overruled by the Supreme Court’s later decision in Employment Division v. Smith (1990) (although it’s worth noting that Smith is very much out of favor with judicial conservatives and could, itself, be overruled by the Court’s current majority).  The Hotze petitions also essentially ask the Texas Supreme Court to place the temporary interests of a few pastors before the county’s interest in combating a deadly disease. The US Supreme Court has long held that the government may take targeted action to protect especially compelling interests — even when doing so implicates constitutional rights. Yet, while there is little legal support for the Hotze petitioners’ arguments, the Texas Supreme Court is notoriously conservative — all nine of its members are Republicans — so there is, at least, some chance that the Hotze petition succeeds. It is at least as likely, however, that the Texas justices will recognize that they need to place some limits on the religious liberty doctrine. Unlike other high-profile lawsuits about religious exemptions to generally applicable laws, Hotze does not pit a Republican interest group (such as business owners with conservative religious views) against a group associated with Democrats (such as LGBTQ people).  Hotze places the public health of an entire community against the interests of a handful of pastors (and, potentially, parishioners) with an idiosyncratic view of the pandemic. The Hotze petition mingles legal arguments with Trumpian rhetoric and familiar Republican Party talking points. One subsection of the petition argues, falsely, that the coronavirus is less dangerous than the flu. An entire section of the petition suggests that Judge Hidalgo’s order is invalid because it “picks winners and losers.” The petition also makes some fairly basic legal errors. It argues, for example, that the First Amendment’s clause protecting the “free exercise” of religion requires courts to strike down Hidalgo’s order unless that order is supported by a “compelling government interest.” But the Supreme Court rejected this reading of the First Amendment in Smith. Under Smith, “the right of free exercise does not relieve an individual of the obligation to comply with a valid and neutral law of general applicability on the ground that the law proscribes (or prescribes) conduct that his religion prescribes (or proscribes).” That is, so long as Hidalgo’s order does not single out places of worship for inferior treatment that it does not impose on similar organizations, the order does not violate the First Amendment. That said, there is a case pending before the US Supreme Court right now that asks the justices to overrule Smith. And the argument against Smith is likely to receive a very sympathetic audience from the Court’s Republican majority. The Texas Constitution also contains strong language protecting religious freedom, and the state’s highest court is free to interpret that language differently from the US Supreme Court read of the First Amendment in Smith. So it is not that much of a stretch to say that Texas pastors enjoy strong constitutional protections against a government order regulating how they conduct worship services. Yet, even the Hotze petitioners admit that these protections are not unlimited. Rather, they concede that the government may take actions that limit religious freedom if such actions are “narrowly tailored” to advance a “compelling interest.” This test, which is also known as “strict scrutiny,” is the same test the US Supreme Court applies to laws that restrict speech or that discriminate on the basis of race. But, even in the context of censorship or race discrimination, strict scrutiny is not insurmountable. A study by UCLA law professor Adam Winkler, for example, found that federal courts applying the compelling interest test upheld 22 percent of free speech restrictions and 27 percent of laws that engaged in discrimination between 1990 and 2003. The government interest at stake in Hotze, moreover, is protecting human life from a disease that threatens to kill millions. And Hidalgo’s order is narrow in that it does not ban worship services. It simply requires them to be temporarily held online until the pandemic passes. Until fairly recently, the Supreme Court recognized that there must be some practical limits on a religious objector’s ability to seek exemptions from generally applicable laws. As Justice Antonin Scalia wrote for the Court in Smith, “to make an individual’s obligation to obey [the] law contingent upon the law’s coincidence with his religious beliefs, except where the State’s interest is ‘compelling’” is to permit that individual “to become a law unto himself.”  Accordingly, the Court typically had been reluctant to grant religious liberty exemptions to a law when granting such an exception could harm third parties. And it was especially reluctant to give religious liberty exemptions to businesses. As the Court explained in United States v. Lee (1982), “when followers of a particular sect enter into commercial activity as a matter of choice, the limits they accept on their own conduct as a matter of conscience and faith are not to be superimposed on the statutory schemes which are binding on others in that activity.” Nevertheless, in Burwell v. Hobby Lobby (2014), the Supreme Court held, for the first time, that religious objectors may sometimes wield those objections to limit the rights of third parties — Hobby Lobby held that business owners who object to birth control may refuse to include contraceptive coverage in their employee’s health plans. Thus far, however, the Court’s latest line of religious liberty cases has largely pitted conservative religious groups against laws favored by liberals, including laws protecting birth control access and laws prohibiting anti-LGBTQ discrimination. Hotze is different because the pandemic impacts Democrats and Republicans alike. Indeed, if the pastors behind Hotze get their way, the biggest losers are likely to be their parishioners, who will be at immediate risk of infection. Hotze, in other words, potentially offers the courts an ideal vehicle to draw limits around the new “religious liberty” doctrines advanced by cases like Hobby Lobby. It’s hard to imagine a more compelling interest than preventing a deadly disease from spreading unchecked through the population. And Hotze shows that everyone, liberal and conservative alike, benefits from a society with universal laws.President Donald Trump signed a $2 trillion coronavirus relief bill last week that promises to mitigate the impact of the crisis on workers — but it leaves out many immigrants.  The bill, known as the CARES Act, delivers direct payments to most taxpayers, vastly expands unemployment benefits, and makes testing for the virus free, among other provisions. But although unauthorized immigrants are no more immune from the effects of the current crisis, the stimulus bill conspicuously leaves them out in the cold — potentially putting them at greater economic and health risk, and impeding public health efforts to stop the spread of coronavirus. The unauthorized worker population is particularly vulnerable to the virus due to inadequate access to health care. Noncitizens are significantly more likely to be uninsured compared to US citizens, which may dissuade them from seeking medical care if they contract the virus. Compounding matters are the Trump administration’s hardline immigration policies — including wide-scale immigration raids and a rule that can penalize green card applicants for using Medicaid — which have made noncitizens afraid to access care. These factors pose a problem for America’s efforts to slow the spread of the virus, which has killed more than 3,400 in the US as of March 31. “We’re operating in an environment where we’re constantly having to reassure patients that they can access services,” Jim Mangia, CEO and president of St. John’s Well Child and Family Center — a network of community health centers in the Los Angeles area that serve about 32,000 undocumented immigrants annually — said in a press call. “It’s a constant struggle and in the midst of a pandemic, it’s even more difficult and more dangerous.” While many immigrants are continuing to work in essential fields, ranging from medical care to cleaning to grocery stores, they may take an economic hit like many other workers who are facing layoffs, furloughs, and pay cuts. And absent financial relief for the population of unauthorized immigrants workers in particular, many may try to continue going to work despite public health warnings to stay home, which could further spread the virus and pose a risk to public health.  “Those who cannot obtain relief are likely to continue going out and trying to earn a living, at the risk of themselves and spreading the virus to others,” Theresa Cardinal Brown, director of immigration and cross-border policy at the Bipartisan Policy Institute, told Vox. “The cost of providing this benefit to them has to be weighed against the need to keep up the restrictions to stop the virus spread.” Here’s one thing the bill does offer to unauthorized immigrants: free coronavirus testing at government-funded community health centers through a $1 billion federal program. But some community health centers have already reported shortages of tests; Mangia said St. John’s only had 39 tests last week when almost 900 patients presented with symptoms of Covid-19, the illness caused by the novel coronavirus.  There is also a larger, state-level testing program funded through Medicaid, but that’s only available to Medicaid-eligible immigrants — green card holders who have lived in the US for at least five years, immigrants who come to the US on humanitarian grounds such as asylum, members of the military and their families, and, in certain states, children and pregnant women with lawful immigration status. Those groups, however, make up only a small proportion of immigrants living in the US.  US Citizenship and Immigration Services has announced that it won’t consider use of free testing services when evaluating whether immigrants will likely end up relying on public benefits under the “public charge” rule, which went into effect in February. That rule gives immigration officials much more leeway to turn away those applying to enter the US, extend their visa, or convert their temporary immigration status into a green card if it is deemed they would likely use public services now or in the future.  The agency also said it won’t weigh Covid-19 treatment or preventive care, such as a vaccine if it is eventually developed, under the rule — even if those services are covered under Medicaid. It’s a welcome loosening of standards for a Trump administration rule that has taken aim at legal immigration.  The importance of widespread testing, including among immigrant populations, can’t be overstated, as my colleague Julia Belluz writes:  Once one person with the disease is identified, they can be treated in isolation so as not to spread the disease further. Family members and other contacts can be notified and placed under self-quarantine in case they are already infected but have yet to show symptoms. But without adequate testing, that’s not happening. But the centerpiece provisions of the bill — the expanded unemployment benefits and up to $1,200 in cash payments to taxpayers — won’t be accessible to millions of immigrants.   “Immigrant workers and families who are paying taxes have been cut out from receiving a single dollar,” Marielena Hincapié, executive director of the National Immigration Law Center, said in a statement.  The bill increases unemployment benefits by $600 for all workers for up to four months, on top of what they would get from unemployment insurance. As my colleague Dylan Matthews writes, this is a huge increase from January, when the average UI check was $385 per week.  But only immigrants who can show that they’re authorized to work in the US can file for unemployment, including green card and temporary visa holders. For visa holders who have been laid off during the crisis, they will only be eligible for unemployment for as long as their visa stays valid. That’s a period of 60 days for those on H-1B skilled worker visas, unless they find another job in that time — an unlikely prospect given that many businesses have already instituted hiring freezes.  Only some states, including California and Texas, allow beneficiaries of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program, which offers work permits to some 700,000 unauthorized immigrants who came to the US as children, to file for unemployment. Unauthorized immigrant workers more broadly — who number some 7.6 million, according to the Pew Research Center — are also typically ineligible for unemployment, but policies differ by state.  Under the stimulus bill, the government will also start sending out checks to most taxpayers starting in April. The amounts range based on income, but they’re phased out for individuals making more than $99,000 and couples making $198,000.  Only immigrants who have Social Security numbers can receive those checks, including green card holders and “resident aliens” who have lived in the US long enough (usually five years) to file taxes as residents. Temporary visa holders, DACA recipients, and beneficiaries of Temporary Protected Status —  which the US has historically offered to citizens of countries suffering from catastrophes such as natural disasters or armed conflict — could therefore qualify.  But there is a big exclusion for those in households with people of mixed immigration status, where some tax filers or their children may use what’s called an Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN). The IRS issues ITINs to unauthorized immigrants so they can pay taxes, even though they don’t have a Social Security number. If anyone in the household uses an ITIN — either a spouse or a dependent child — that means no one in the household will qualify for the stimulus checks, unless one spouse served in the military in 2019.  The stipulation could impact an estimated 16.7 million people who live in mixed-status households nationwide, including 8.2 million US-born or naturalized citizens.  This also includes those with deportation protections under the Obama-era DACA program, children and young adults whose parents often don’t have legal status. They’re left wondering how they can help support their families so that their parents don’t have to go to work, where they risk getting sick, and how they can help cover the costs of their parents’ medical care should they need it, Sanaa Abrar, advocacy director at the immigrant advocacy group United We Dream, told Vox.  “With the national health crisis and what’s becoming a national unemployment crisis, folks are concerned about how they’re not only going to stay healthy and safe but also how they’re going to keep their jobs and how they’re going to find means of financial support,” she said. When Paige Alexandria found out she was pregnant, she wanted a medication abortion. But she lived in Austin in 2016, three years after Texas passed abortion restrictions that drove more than half the state’s clinics out of business. While many clinics were still open in Austin, they were so busy serving patients from other parts of the state that Alexandria couldn’t get an appointment for three weeks. Alexandria called the clinic every day, hoping someone would cancel so she could get an earlier appointment. “For any person who is pregnant when they don’t want to be,” she told Vox, “every day feels like a year.” Now, countless Texans are having a version of Alexandria’s experience, wanting an abortion but uncertain when — or if — they’ll be able to get one. Last week, Gov. Greg Abbott announced that abortion did not qualify as essential health care during the coronavirus pandemic and ordered all procedures postponed unless the life of the pregnant person is threatened. The state was one of at least five to essentially ban abortion during the pandemic — a move that anti-abortion groups have championed but that abortion-rights groups have characterized as a ploy to exploit a public health crisis for ideological gain. Abortion-rights advocates have been fighting the bans in court, but on Tuesday, a court ruled that the Texas ban can go into effect, for now. That leaves Texas patients with a choice: Delay the procedure for an uncertain amount of time, or try to travel out of state during a pandemic to end their pregnancies. Even if they’re able to travel, the current crisis has placed serious new obstacles in their way. In many states, an abortion requires multiple visits to a doctor — which could mean multiple exposures to the coronavirus in waiting rooms and other facilities. Meanwhile, the enormous economic toll of the pandemic has made it even harder for many low-income people to afford the procedure.  “For our callers, expenses like groceries and rent are already difficult to obtain,” Cristina Parker, communications director at the Lilith Fund for Reproductive Equity, which funds abortions in Texas, told Vox in an email. “But with the added instability of our economy — and with so many losing their jobs virtually overnight — paying out of pocket for an abortion can be next to impossible.” For Alexandria, the daily calls paid off. She was able to get an abortion after two weeks instead of three. But it was still too late for her to get a medication abortion; she had to get a surgical procedure, which was more expensive and required more time away from her two children. And today, she feels for those who are trying to end their pregnancies but are faced with fear, uncertainty, and delays. “Abortion is essential,” she says, “even during a pandemic.” As coronavirus sweeps the country, many areas are placing restrictions on businesses and services deemed nonessential, as well as pushing back nonemergency medical care. In the midst of such moves, officials in several red states — including Texas, Ohio, Alabama, Iowa, and Oklahoma — categorized abortion as nonessential and ordered that clinics postpone procedures until the crisis is over.  “No one is exempt from the governor’s executive order on medically unnecessary surgeries and procedures, including abortion providers,” said Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton in a statement last week. “Those who violate the governor’s order will be met with the full force of the law.” Abortion opponents argue that abortion is an “elective” procedure and that providers should stop offering it and donate their masks and other protective gear to the coronavirus response. “Somebody needs to tell the abortion industry there’s a pandemic going on,” Mark Harrington, president of the anti-abortion group Created Equal, said in a statement last week. “Abortion is an elective procedure or they wouldn’t call it a ‘choice.’” But providers and abortion-rights advocates say abortion is just as necessary now as it ever was. “Abortion is essential health care,” Dr. Ashley Brant, an OB-GYN in Ohio and fellow with the group Physicians for Reproductive Health, told Vox in an email.  “Many of my patients are experiencing fear,” Brant said. “Fear of contracting Covid-19, fear of losing their jobs and income, and fear of not being able to support their families. They should not have to fear losing access to reproductive health care, too.” Abortion-rights advocates say that opponents, and governors of states like Texas, are just using this moment to score political points. “I can’t emphasize enough how shameful it is to take advantage of this pandemic to just further shame women seeking abortion care,” Kelsey Ryland, director of federal strategies at the abortion-rights group All* Above All, told Vox. After Texas and other states announced bans, clinics had to cancel or postpone appointments for many patients, as Ema O’Connor reports at BuzzFeed. Planned Parenthood, the Center for Reproductive Rights, and other groups supporting abortion rights filed suit in five states to allow abortions to go forward. And on Monday, federal judges in Texas, Ohio, and Alabama ruled in their favor, meaning that clinics in those states could stay open. But Texas appealed the ruling to the Fifth Circuit, which on Tuesday allowed the state’s ban to take effect, at least for now.  That leaves Texas patients in limbo, facing the possibility that abortion may be banned in their state for weeks, months, or even longer.  Since abortion becomes more expensive later in pregnancy — and since some states, including Texas, ban it after 20 weeks’ gestation — the delay is likely to have serious repercussions for many. Some are already trying to travel out of state for the procedure, said Alexandria, who now works at the clinic where she got her abortion in 2016. Traveling at this time is especially difficult — some public transit routes have been reduced due to the pandemic, and contact with others during travel could increase patients’ chances of exposure. Even if patients can get to a clinic, they face a host of obstacles and concerns when they arrive.  Many states require multiple in-person clinic visits for an abortion, even by medication. “This means that patients have to travel for care, sit in waiting rooms, and interact with multiple health care providers,” Brant said. “This endangers families and communities and promotes spread of the virus.” In order to mitigate those risks, a group of 21 attorneys general is asking the Trump administration to lift restrictions on medication abortion so that it could be prescribed by telemedicine around the country. Given the administration’s past embrace of restrictions on abortion, however, it is unlikely to agree. And the pandemic will only worsen obstacles that many people already face when seeking abortions, many reproductive rights advocates say. “Things that were already hard like getting to the clinic for multiple visits, getting child care, could be nearly impossible right now,” Ryland of All* Above All said. People who are low-income — the majority of abortion-seekers in America — may be facing job layoffs and more difficulty paying for an abortion than ever, she said. The Hyde Amendment already prohibits the use of federal funding for most abortions, and Republicans insisted on Hyde Amendment language in the recent coronavirus stimulus bill to ensure that states and localities couldn’t use the stimulus funds to help pay for abortions. As someone who had an abortion, Alexandria knows what it’s like to have to delay the procedure. For her, it wasn’t just the added cost of the surgical abortion. Because she didn’t have a ride to the clinic, she wasn’t able to be sedated for the procedure, increasing her discomfort. “It was really just hard not being able to access care when I needed it,” she said. But now, as a patient counselor at a clinic, she says she also sees the ways that advocacy groups are trying to help people get abortions during this time, whether it’s sending money to abortion funds in states affected by bans or booking hotel rooms for people who need to travel to get the procedure. “Even though access looks really hard right now,” she said, “there are so many people fighting right now to make sure that access remains a reality.”On Tuesday, the White House’s coronavirus task force presented grim statistics: Under the best-case scenario for mitigation of the Covid-19 pandemic, there may be between 100,000 and 200,000 deaths in the United States, with the number of deaths peaking in the next two weeks. The White House’s numbers, presented in a sobering press conference, are based on statistical models drawing on the best available data that attempt to predict the number of cases and deaths.  “When you see 100,000 people — that’s a minimum number,” President Trump said during the press conference. That’s notable coming from Trump, who, in the early days of the outbreak, downplayed the threat and repeatedly compared it to the flu. By Tuesday, it seemed the abundant evidence that Covid-19 is much worse than the flu had finally sunk in. “It’s not the flu; it’s vicious,” Trump said.  Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, also emphasized that the outbreak and its toll are going to get worse before they get better. “As sobering a number as [100,000 deaths] is,” he said, “we should be prepared for it. Is it going to be that much? I hope not ... We need to prepare ourselves — it is a possibility that that’s what we’ll see.” 
    Related
   Fauci said the models that predict how the death toll will rise are based on data on how the outbreak is unfolding in New York and abroad. The estimates could change if the situation on the ground begins to look different. But the truth is that there are currently more than 180,000 cases of Covid-19 in the United States, and there have been more than 3,000 deaths. And its spread has clearly not yet peaked. Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus response coordinator, citing projections from the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington, said deaths are expected to peak in the next two weeks. “This is going to be a very painful, very very painful two weeks,” Trump said.  Epidemiological modeling is useful in helping the public think through what’s possible with the disease. It also can help hospitals understand how much staffing and equipment they’ll need (and where they are likely to fall short).  Independent experts say the models the task force is using are sound. 100,000 to 200,000 deaths “certainly seem to be within the reasonable framework,” said Bill Hanage, associate professor of epidemiology at Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, in a call with reporters Tuesday morning. “I would not be particularly surprised by them, I wouldn’t be surprised if they were higher, I wouldn’t be actually surprised if they were lower. One of the things that’s difficult for those of us who’ve been involved with modeling this is communicating the amounts of uncertainty that we have.” Modeling is not an ironclad prediction of the future. “Unlike the weather, which we’re all accustomed to and incorporating forecasts into decision making, with pandemics we actually influence the outcome,” Caitlin Rivers, a professor at Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, told Vox. Collective actions — continuing to social distance, self-isolating if you’re sick, supporting health care workers around the country, raising the capacity of the health care system — over the next few weeks will affect whether the models are updated for better or for worse.  “I think it’s key not to get fixated on the exact numbers,” Dominique Heinke, an epidemiologist in Massachusetts, recently told Vox. “You can look at a range of models and say, we can expect it to be at least this bad.”  And the baseline numbers from the White House are sobering: 100,000 to 200,000 deaths is awful, especially because many could have been prevented with better screening and testing in February. Also, you don’t need models to see that the Covid-19 pandemic is a crisis: Thousands have died in the US. The economic crisis in the pandemic’s wake is crippling, too.  The stark numbers are also a reminder that we need to keep our interventions going. The outright lockdowns of movement in some cities, as well as the less severe policies in place across the country, can slow the spread of the pandemic.  
    Related
   The impacts of social distancing lag in case-count data and may take a few weeks to show up. Right now, there are infections out there, in the public, that were seeded long before these orders came into effect. It can take 10 days or more between when a person is infected and when they show symptoms — during which they can spread the virus to others. “In the next several days to a week, we will continue to see things go up,” Fauci said Tuesday. “We cannot be discouraged by that — the mitigation is working and it will work.”Governors in several of the hardest-hit states put out calls on Monday for health care workers from other states to help treat patients suffering from Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus. In perhaps the most striking example, Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer posted a video to Twitter on Monday, saying, “If you’re a health professional anywhere in America, Michigan needs you. We’re calling on doctors, and nurses, and respiratory therapists, and other health professionals to sign up and help us fight Covid-19 and save lives,” she said, while announcing that the state had relaxed interstate medical licensing requirements to make it easier for personnel from other states to assist with Michigan’s burgeoning outbreak. If you’re a medical professional anywhere in the United States, Michigan needs you. Please visit https://t.co/WZ51AQdAZw to volunteer to help the residents of our state fight #COVID19. pic.twitter.com/Nl7Gp9uls4 Joining Whitmer was New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, who implored out-of-state doctors and nurses to come help treat patients with Covid-19, especially those in New York City, which has become the nationwide epicenter of the pandemic. “Help New York. We are the ones who are hit now,” Cuomo said Monday at a press conference at the Jacob K. Javits Center, which has been converted into a temporary hospital. As of March 30, over 7,700 people in New York City alone have been hospitalized with Covid-19. A temporary field hospital has been constructed in Central Park as area hospitals are overrun with coronavirus patients. While New York and Michigan have been among the hardest hit, confirmed cases of Covid-19 have now been found in all 50 states. That — plus the fact that the US was already facing a shortage of health care professionals before the crisis started — could limit the number of personnel available to assist in areas with high infection rates. There are a couple of reasons the US health care system is running short on professionals to treat Covid-19, the influx of patients being most obvious. Compounding that is a shortage of personal protective equipment (PPE). Doctors and nurses in areas dealing with widespread infections are in near-constant contact with the virus; without appropriate PPE, they’re at increased risk for contracting it. In Spain, about 14 percent of those infected were doctors or nurses; in Italy, nearly one in every 10 people infected were medical professionals. This puts a strain on hospital staffing in areas like New York City. Most states have put orders in place to stop non-essential surgeries and are encouraging telemedicine for as many non-Covid-19 afflictions as possible in order to preserve PPE and free up personnel to treat coronavirus patients. But as Vox’s Dylan Scott, Umair Irfan, and Jen Kirby explained, the US was already facing a critical shortage of medical personnel before the coronavirus pandemic hit its shores. The pandemic has only deepened the staffing crisis: Overall, US hospitals employ as many people or more per capita as our economic peers. But staffing is disproportionately tilted toward administrative work in the United States. If you focus on health care professionals specifically, US hospitals trail behind most European countries and Canada. Our hospitals employ almost as many administrative staff as medical staff, according to estimates from the Peterson-Kaiser Health System Tracker. And US hospitals were already at risk of being overrun if the number of Covid-19 cases explodes before fears about staffing shortages fully set in. America has about 924,000 hospital beds, about 98,000 of which can be used for people who need intensive care, according to the American Hospital Association. The number of Covid-19 cases that will require ICU care could expand far beyond what the US is currently capable of providing. As officials in New York and Michigan scramble to fill personnel gaps, there is another potential solution besides borrowing doctors from other states that might need them. While much of the federal response has focused on managing the country’s PPE shortfall, the government has also taken steps toward easing the personnel shortages in the hardest-hit areas. On March 18, Vice President Mike Pence announced a new Department of Health and Human Services regulation allowing doctors to practice medicine across state lines. In response to the recent critical shortage, Cuomo also put out a call for retired health workers to return and care for Covid-19 patients. About 40,000 responded as of March 25, according to Wall Street Journal reporter Jimmy Vielkind. The state also allowed medical and nursing students to jump directly into the workforce to assist with pandemic care, provided they can get the proper certifications. Other countries have turned to foreign health workers to find enough medical staff to manage the pandemic. In the United Kingdom, the government recently announced it would automatically extend visas for foreign health workers already working in the country, a significant decision as the country finalizes Brexit to further limit immigration. Additionally, Chinese, Russian, and Cuban doctors have flown to Italy to help handle the country’s coronavirus emergency. But the US is unlikely to see a similar rush of foreign health workers without significant changes to current immigration law. Foreign doctors and nurses face a nearly impossible maze of immigration hurdles to practice in the US, as Vox’s Nicole Narea explained: Every year, roughly 4,000 foreign doctors come to the US on J-1 visas for residencies at teaching hospitals, which rely on Medicare funding to pay their salaries. While most of those doctors would like to stay in the country after they complete their training, only about 1,500 of them are ultimately able to do so, [Greg Siskind, an immigration attorney who represents doctors] said. That’s because they are required to return to their home countries for at least two years upon completing their training in order to be eligible for an H-1B skilled worker visa or a green card, unless they can obtain one of a few sought-after waivers. The Conrad 30 program, for example, offers waivers to 30 doctors in every state who agree to practice where the government has designated a health care worker shortage, mostly in rural areas. Doctors can also obtain waivers through the Department of Health and Human Services by conducting medical research in [a] field that is of interest to the agency or by practicing in underserved areas designated by the agency. But even for those who are able to obtain waivers, the process of applying for a green card can involve long waits, particularly for immigrants from India, which produces about a third of all foreign doctors training in the US. That’s because there are per-country caps on the number of green cards issued annually, and India gets the same number of green cards as any other country despite being among the most populous nations in the world. (A bill that would have eliminated these country caps recently failed in the Senate.) “Indian doctors are looking at a 20-year wait for a green card,” Siskind said. “When these Indian doctors are finishing up their training in the US, they’re seeing that they can get a green card in Australia, Canada, and UK immediately and a fast-track to citizenship. It’s a mess.” Not only does the current system make it exceedingly difficult for doctors to stay in the US long-term, but it also severely restricts where in the US they can go. Under the terms of both J-1 and H-1B visas, doctors can’t just change jobs. They usually can’t even moonlight at another hospital and take on extra hours. At a time when doctors need flexibility to go to areas of the country that are hard-hit by coronavirus, that’s a huge obstacle. Most nurses come to the US on green cards, but they, too, face long wait times due to the same backlogs that are hurting Indian doctors. Many of them also come from India, as well as the Philippines, where they get the ... same kind of training that they would in the US. The United States is facing a daunting shortage of lifesaving ventilators due to the coronavirus pandemic. And President Trump isn’t making things any easier. In late March, the president issued a series of conflicting and misleading statements about the country’s ventilator supply and his plans to increase it. In an attempt to transfer blame for the shortage, Trump has done everything from accusing hospitals of hoarding ventilators to suggesting that the US doesn’t even need more of them.  Despite the disorder in the Trump administration, ventilator companies are teaming up with car manufacturers in an effort to produce thousands more than would otherwise be possible. There’s even a crowdsourced effort to make functional ventilators out of readily available parts. But it’s not certain that anyone will produce enough ventilators or make them soon enough to fill the demand in time. General Motors (GM) has teamed up with Ventec Life Systems, a Washington state-based company that makes ventilators, to try to scale up its capacity using GM factories and increasing the supply chain for ventilator parts. According to the New York Times, however, uncertainty from the federal government and a series of attacks from Trump have hampered those efforts. Last week, President Trump expressed doubt about the need for ventilators and used the issue to attack Democratic state governors, including New York’s Andrew Cuomo. The president’s controversial statements about ventilators follow several weeks of urgent debate about the global shortage of these lifesaving machines in the face of a disease that attacks the lungs. Because of this, some companies that make other products have stepped forward to possibly fill the shortage by using their factories to make ventilators. The White House was set to announce a deal with Ventec and GM on March 25, according to the New York Times. The car company would produce Ventec ventilator systems in one of its factories, throwing its manufacturing might behind addressing the nation’s shortage. But that announcement was put on hold once the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) learned it would cost more than $1 billion, with both the number of ventilators the joint venture could actually produce and the number of ventilators that will be needed still unknown.  Most medical experts agree we will need more ventilators than we currently have — any additions to the supply could mean the difference between life and death for thousands of Americans — but according to the Times, some government officials were afraid of being left with an “expensive surplus” of the machines if they bought too many. On March 27, President Trump blamed GM for the holdup, saying the company initially claimed it could produce 40,000 ventilators but had to revise those estimates down to 6,000, which would take at least a month. He also implied that cost was, indeed, an issue. As usual with “this” General Motors, things just never seem to work out. They said they were going to give us 40,000 much needed Ventilators, “very quickly”. Now they are saying it will only be 6000, in late April, and they want top dollar. Always a mess with Mary B. Invoke “P”. Trump’s tweet followed an interview with Sean Hannity, during which the president downplayed the need for more ventilators, even as many public health experts and governors have expressed an urgent need for them. Gov. Cuomo said on March 24 that New York, the current epicenter of the outbreak in the US, needs 30,000 ventilators in the next two weeks as the coronavirus outbreak reaches a peak in the state.  “I have a feeling that a lot of the numbers that are being said in some areas are just bigger than they’re going to be. I don’t believe you need 40,000 or 30,000 ventilators,” Trump said, doubting Cuomo. “You go into major hospitals sometimes, and they’ll have two ventilators. And now all of a sudden they’re saying, ‘Can we order 30,000 ventilators?’” Hours after his March 27 tweets about GM, Trump announced that he was using the Defense Production Act (DPA) to force GM to carry out federal contracts to make ventilators and give those contracts priority over any other orders. He also lashed out at Ford, telling the car company to “GET GOING ON VENTILATORS, FAST!!!!!!” Ford’s vice president of communications tweeted a statement saying the company has been working “flat-out” to produce ventilators with GE Healthcare. Trump was more conciliatory toward GM a couple days later, saying it was doing a “fantastic job.” But the president also accused states of requesting ventilators they didn’t need, and hospitals of “hoarding” them — refusing to lend them to other hospitals that needed them more. He did not provide any evidence to back up those claims. The DPA is only effective when orders are placed. According to the New York Times, the federal government hasn’t told Ventec/GM how many ventilators it wants nor how much it wants to pay for them. Executives at Ventec and GM, which spent the week before Trump’s statements working through the logistics of producing ventilators in a car factory and getting the needed parts and equipment to do so, were reportedly “stunned” by Trump’s attack.  In the absence of federal government orders, the joint effort is still working toward producing ventilators, because it knows there will be customers around the world for them. Ventec and GM issued a joint press release on Friday saying they plan to ship ventilators “as soon as next month” — presumably, April — and believe they can “ramp up” to a manufacturing capacity of more than 10,000 ventilators per month. While this may make more ventilators available sooner, it still doesn’t guarantee that America will have enough ventilators by the time patients across the country need them.  Ventilators, simply put, are machines that help people breathe when they can’t breathe on their own. Air is delivered through a tube in the patient’s windpipe into the lungs, mimicking the way we breathe naturally.  Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, targets the lungs and can cause complications like pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome. Severe cases will require a ventilator to be able to deliver enough oxygen from the lungs to the rest of the body. Without one, the patient could die.  A ventilator shortage, then, will mean some patients are denied lifesaving care. And, as has already happened in Italy, doctors may have to choose which patients get ventilators, and therefore live, and which ones don’t and die. Hospitals in America are already preparing for this possible future: A draft letter from Michigan’s Henry Ford Health System leaked on social media last week outlined Henry Ford’s possible policy if it has to choose which of its patients get ventilators in the case of a shortage — and which ones don’t. Henry Ford said the letter was not yet an active policy. According to the New York Times, there are about 170,000 ventilators in the US while the American Hospital Association estimates 960,000 people will need them over the course of the pandemic — which is why public health experts continue to recommend that people do whatever they can to slow the spread of the virus so that not all patients need ventilators at the same time.  “In a worst-case scenario, in which there is an exponential surge in Covid-19 cases, the need for ventilators could greatly outstrip the number available,” Dr. Tom Frieden, former head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and current CEO and president of Resolve to Save Lives, told Recode.  There are some simple reasons why we might end up with a shortage. In normal circumstances, 170,000 ventilators are more than enough for the ICUs and operating rooms that use them. In fact, some of the ventilators we do have are in storage, showing that there isn’t — at least, there wasn’t — a pressing need for them. Meanwhile, hospitals aren’t in the habit of buying extra equipment they don’t need. They typically can’t afford to do so. Even if they could buy them, manufacturers are struggling to fill the orders. Eric Gjerde, chief executive of a small ventilator company called Airon Corporation, told Wired that his company sells 50 ventilators “in a good month.” Now, he’s getting orders for thousands and isn’t able to fulfill them all.  “Making ventilators is not a trivial process,” Gjerde said. “It’s just too dangerous to be thrown into the hands of people who don’t know what they’re doing.” Other companies are experiencing a similar push to increase manufacturing. A Swiss company told the Wall Street Journal that it is trying to double its ventilator production to 400 units a week, and an Irish company told the paper it is doubling its workforce to try to meet demand. And then there’s Elon Musk. Never one to pass up proposing tech solutions to well-publicized problems, Musk tweeted on March 19 that his companies, namely Tesla and SpaceX, could also produce ventilators to help fill shortages, adding that they “are not difficult.” New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio eagerly responded that “New York City is buying!” and would reach out to Musk directly. Simple, right? No. There are several factors preventing, say, an electric car factory from instantly switching over to making ventilators. Musk saying they “cannot be produced instantly” is an understatement. In America, ventilators are tightly regulated and must undergo a years-long rigorous testing and approval process for reasons that should be obvious: When you put someone’s life in the hands of a machine, you have to make sure it works. As MIT Technology Review explains, there are also supply chain issues with both the materials needed to make these machines and the people who know how to build them, neither of which Tesla or SpaceX factories likely have immediately available. Matt Callaghan, the co-founder of One Breath, which Tech Review profiled, intended to produce ventilators for countries in the developing world. He said that the soonest it could even start producing its devices for American hospitals would be nearly a year — and that was a best-case scenario.  “[That] makes us a second-wave solution when you’re looking at the current outbreak,” Callaghan told Tech Review.  Ventilators aren’t cheap, either. At $25,000 to $50,000 each, according to the Washington Post, they can be less expensive than a Tesla, but they also require skilled people to run them. All expenses considered, keeping extra ventilators on hand might require an investment that many hospitals can’t afford, especially if they may never need them. In the case of a pandemic, the US government could buy them instead — other countries’ governments are doing this — but seems to be just as reluctant to spend money on possibly unnecessary ventilators as hospitals are (though it does have significantly more funds available to do so). “Because these are complicated pieces of medical equipment and are built from hundreds of smaller parts produced by companies all over the world — all of which are facing an increase in demand right now — there is no simple way to rapidly increase production,” Frieden said. “Furthermore, operating ventilators requires tubing, oxygen, trained staff, and many other materials.” That said, it’s not out of the realm of possibility that Tesla or Musk could, at some point, produce ventilators. Musk is in talks with Medtronic to produce its ventilators in one of its solar panel factories, GM has its agreement with Ventec, and Ford is working with GE Healthcare. In the United Kingdom, which only has 5,000 ventilators, vacuum cleaner kingpin Dyson — a company that does specialize in machines that regulate the movement of air — designed its own ventilator. The UK’s National Health Service has already ordered 10,000 of them, but they have yet to be produced beyond the prototype stage, nor have they been approved by UK regulators — a process that would normally take two to three years there but will presumably be sped up in this case. The pandemic has also loosened FDA restrictions, with the agency releasing new guidance at the end of March that would allow companies to alter certain parts, materials, and manufacturing processes in order to increase the availability of supplies and the manufacturing capacity — for instance, using car factories to make another company’s ventilators. The agency will also allow ventilators and companies not approved by the FDA to provide ventilators through the agency’s Emergency Use Authorization process. But how many ventilators these efforts may produce and when is still unknown. Part of the reason why FEMA balked at ordering ventilators from GM/Ventec, the Times said (and Trump seemed to confirm this in a subsequent tweet) was that the number of ventilators it said it could produce for that money steadily shrank — from an initial run of 20,000 down to 7,500, or even 5,000. This was due, in part, to the White House’s inability to nail down the number of ventilators it wants, but it was also, the Times said, “an apparent recognition that auto transmissions and ventilators had very little in common.” But that doesn’t mean they shouldn’t try. “Anything industry can do to help us accelerate production of ventilators will be welcome,” Frieden said. The good news is that America doesn’t have a shortage yet. While many predictions say we will run out of this lifesaving equipment at some point, the future has yet to be written. Do your part to flatten the curve and maybe this virus will spread slowly enough that our future won’t look like Italy’s present. Update, March 31, 3:40 pm ET: This post has been updated with new information, including the new FDA guidance on ventilator regulations.Governors and public health officials — including those on President Donald Trump’s coronavirus task force — have spoken often about difficulties finding and processing Covid-19 tests. In a call with governors Monday, however, Trump said he has not heard about these issues.  In audio of the call published by CBS News, Montana Gov. Steve Bullock (D) details two problems with testing. First, that his state doesn’t have enough tests, saying “we’re one day away if we don’t get test kits from the CDC that we wouldn’t be able to do testing.” And second, that the federal government has depleted the tests available on the private market. These are known issues, and are problems the Trump administration has been repeatedly criticized for not working harder to solve. But Trump respond to Bullock’s concerns by saying, “I haven’t heard about testing in weeks. We’ve tested more now than any nation in the world. We’ve got these great tests, and we’ll come out with another one tomorrow, that’s almost instantaneous testing. But I haven’t heard about testing being a problem.” CBS News obtained audio of a call Monday between Pres. Trump and rural state governors about coronavirus. After Montana Gov. Steve Bullock discusses difficulty getting testing equipment, Trump says, "I haven't heard anything about testing being a problem" https://t.co/ScO2YbKZAq pic.twitter.com/YhFPpw7Gni It is true that testing capacity has ramped up in recent weeks, and that the FDA approved a new test from Abbott Laboratories that can deliver results in as little as five minutes. But testing does remain a problem, and one a number of governors have been vocal about. Monday, for example, Govs. Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan (D) and Larry Hogan of Maryland (R) published an op-ed in the Washington Post asking the federal government for more “test kits, medical supplies and other lifesaving equipment to meet the scope of this pandemic.” Trump’s response to questions of testing typically mirrors the answer he gave Bullock — that the US is doing more testing than anyone else. And this, to a point, appears to be true. As of Saturday, Adm. Brett Giroir, coronavirus task force member and assistant secretary for health at the Department of Health and Human Services, said the US had done 894,000 tests.  But while that is a large number, the number of tests done per capita is much smaller: According to the Washington Post, the US had conducted 2,250 tests per million people by March 28, a figure roughly two-thirds of the per capita testing rate South Korea achieved three weeks earlier. The reason this distinction is important is that if we are to end social distancing in the next few months, rather than ending it only when a vaccine becomes available, it is imperative enough tests exist to test on a massive scale, as Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases at the National Institutes of Health, has explained. “If you look at an area, any area — take one that has moderate degree of activity — you can’t just empirically say, I’m going to loosen restrictions there,” Fauci said on CNN’s State of the Union Sunday. “You can do it, but you absolutely must have in place the capability of going there, testing, testing in an efficient way, not take a test, come back five days later, and find out if you’re infected, testing, knowing in real time if a person is infected, and then getting them out of circulation, and contact tracing.” Essentially, the way to begin to go back to something resembling normal life is to test a lot, and track who those who test positive had contact with (or, contact trace). The infected and exposed can then practice social distancing on a more individual level.  A vaccine could be as far as 17 months away, according to experts, making more strategic social distancing an attractive strategy.  In the call with the governors that elicited Trump’s remark about having heard nothing about testing difficulties, Fauci attempted to learn how close those on the line were with getting to a point where limited social distancing would be a viable strategy.  “Do you have any system in place that you feel can adequately identify cases and isolate them and contract-trace them, or are the capabilities and resources there that’s not something you can do with what you have?” Fauci asked Bullock.  Bullock responded that Montana is nowhere near that point, leading to Trump to tout his test numbers. It doesn’t appear that Trump has bought into the idea that expanding testing could lead to a solution for the situation the country has found itself in.  He has said it understands the concept. During his March 25 daily press conference, after being asked about a proposal from Dr. Ashish Jha, head of Harvard University’s Global Health Institute, that recommended testing be done broadly in order to quarantine selectively — broadly, what Fauci outlined — the president said, “I saw his statement.” “We have tested, by far, more than anybody,” Trump continued. “And our tests are the best tests. ... But if you’re saying we’re going to test 350 million people — I watched his statement; I disagree with it.” Testing each and every American isn’t necessarily needed, but as Vox’s Brian Resnick has explained, broad and regular testing is needed throughout the country “to see where the virus may be lurking, especially in cases where symptoms are mild or don’t manifest at all.” Once those places are identified, they can be quarantined on a limited basis, Resnick writes, turning “that sledgehammer of social distancing into a scalpel.” This is the approach South Korea has taken to get the coronavirus under control. Some of the huge number of tests needed to get to that point are in production — Abbott has said it can deliver 50,000 of its new tests each day starting Wednesday, but far more will be needed. My colleague Alex Ward has outlined one way to help ramp up production: Trump could invoke the Defense Production Act, which would allow the federal government to direct private companies to make the tests and other essential material like ventilators and masks. Trump has been hesitant to commit to that thus far — and certainly can’t be swayed to change his mind on the matter until he comes to understand the importance of the testing problem.  Fauci has said the federal government’s top scientists have changed the president’s mind on coronavirus matters before, most recently encouraging him to extend the period of federally recommended social distancing by a month and convincing him not to lock down New York, Connecticut, and New Jersey. And so it may be that the president can be made to understand why testing is still a problem, and that the federal government can do more to help governors get the tests they desperately need.   New York has delayed its 2020 presidential primary until June 23 due to coronavirus concerns, a delay that the Democratic party said could result in the state losing delegates at the national convention in July. New York is just the latest of more than a dozen states figuring out how to balance public health concerns with concluding a Democratic primary. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced the delay at his daily coronavirus press conference Saturday, saying, “I don’t think it’s wise to be bringing a lot of people to one location to vote, a lot of people touching one doorknob, a lot of people touching one pen.” The move will be an easy one, he explained, because the state had a state- and congressional-level primary already scheduled for June 23. But the choice to delay the Democratic contest could come with consequences. Democratic National Committee rules mandate states that push their primaries to a date after June 9 have their delegates reduced by 50 percent.  And the rules also say any candidate campaigning in a state with a contest outside of the DNC’s designated primary calendar will not be awarded any delegates from that state. Sen. Bernie Sanders and former Vice President Joe Biden, the last two candidates in the primary race, aren’t physically campaigning in New York (or any other state), but the DNC defines “campaigning” broadly as being inclusive of but “not limited to”:  Purchasing print, internet, or electronic advertising that reaches a significant percentage of the voters in the aforementioned state; hiring campaign workers; opening an office; making public appearances; holding news conferences; coordinating volunteer activities; sending mail, other than fundraising requests that are also sent to potential donors in other states; using paid or volunteer phoners or automated calls to contact voters; sending emails or establishing a website specific to that state; holding events to which Democratic voters are invited; attending events sponsored by state or local Democratic organizations; or paying for campaign materials to be used in such a state.  The DNC further notes its Rules and Bylaws Committee can add to this list and has final say over whether a campaign’s activities are in violation of this rule. That means that although, for instance, podcasting isn’t included in this list, Biden’s new podcast could perhaps be seen as being in violation of this rule, given it is distributed nationwide, including to New York, Louisiana, and Kentucky — all states that now have post-June 9 primaries.  In light of these rules, most states rescheduling their primaries set new dates just ahead of this June 9 cutoff. Pennsylvania, Connecticut, and Ohio, for example, joined a growing list of states holding primaries on June 2. Other places, like Puerto Rico, cut things a little closer: Its primary will be on June 7. It is not yet clear whether these rules will be enforced, particularly now that the most delegate-rich state left on the calendar, New York, has chosen a delay.  In a statement to Vox, DNC Communications Director Xochitl Hinojosa said, “We will continue to monitor the situation and work with state parties around their delegate selection plans, and if states move beyond the June 9th window stated in our rules, the Rules and Bylaws Committee will meet to discuss and determine next steps.” What those next steps are remains to be seen. In the meantime, however, the DNC is making it plain that it doesn’t want states postponing primaries at all. Following Ohio’s Super Tuesday III announcement that it would delay its primary, DNC chairman Tom Perez said in a statement, “States that have not yet held primary elections should focus on implementing the aforementioned measures to make it easier and safer for voters to exercise their constitutional right to vote, instead of moving primaries to later in the cycle when timing around the virus remains unpredictable.” In a Sunday USA Today op-ed by Perez and six other Democratic Party leaders, the party expounded upon this point, arguing that states should simply expand their voting periods to at least 20 days before elections — and their voting hours — to allow voters to cast ballots in socially distant ways. This would not solve the problem Cuomo cited as his primary concern: that voters risk exposure by coming into contact with high-touch surfaces such as ballot pens and the handles of polling place doors. To that end, the authors also suggest states work to expand their mail-in voting programs, writing:  States should automatically mail ballots to registered voters; voters should be able to mail back those ballots for free or with prepaid postage by the date of the primary; voters should also be able to drop off ballots at predesignated locations, as is the case in Arizona, or have someone else drop it off for them; and ballots should be accepted as long as they are postmarked by Election Day and received within 10 days of the election. And the DNC is now committing to helping states pay for these reforms, with the leaders writing, “any state that voluntarily complies with such reforms will receive payments equal to the costs they’ve incurred.” Ahead of November, Perez and his colleagues further pressed Congress and the White House to embrace a proposal by Sens. Amy Klobuchar and Ron Wyden that, as Vox’s Ella Nilsen has explained, “if 25 percent of US states declare an emergency ... would trigger a requirement to allow any voter to vote from home via a mail-in ballot.” All states have done so, which would place the bill in effect if it were to become law as written. Nilsen noted the bill’s authors hoped the proposal would be included in the Covid-19 stimulus package Congress passed last week; it was not, and it won’t be able to be taken up until at least April 20, when the Senate ends its current recess, if at all.  The ratification of such a proposal would go a long way toward addressing Perez’s second concern earlier this March, namely that the “timing around the virus remains unpredictable.” While delays certainly allow states to strengthen — and in some cases fully develop — their vote-by-mail infrastructure, it is true that on June 23 or November 3 the United States may still find itself needing to maintain extreme social distancing practices. In fact, many experts say this is likely, and that unless a precise system of testing, surveillance, and tracking is developed, the United States may have to continue to shelter in place until a vaccine is developed, a process that could take until September 2021 — if not longer.  This means that Perez is correct in arguing the delays that have been decided on so far may not enfranchise those who would like to vote but are concerned about contracting the coronavirus. It is important to note, however, delays will re-enfranchise some voters: those infected with the virus during their state’s primary.  This is particularly true in New York. Saturday, Cuomo said the state is likely to see its case peak in three weeks — that is, right around April 28, the day it was meant to hold its presidential primary.  As of March 30, the state has nearly 60,000 confirmed cases, meaning more than 60,000 New Yorkers will be at home in bed or in hospitals on ventilators when its original primary date comes around. Not all of that number will be Democrats, but given New York is a solidly blue state, a large number of them will be, and the postponement should allow most of them to vote. Officials hope social distancing measures will force the state’s case count much lower, allowing more people to participate than would have otherwise been able to. Public health experts like Dr. Deborah Birx and Dr. Anthony Fauci have both said the US can expect confirmed case counts to go up in the weeks to come and that it takes time to see the benefits of social distancing. This would suggest that delaying primaries in general will allow them to be held at a time when fewer people are sick. But also that it would be wise to, as the DNC has recommended, adopt vote-by-mail measures that will keep people from having to travel to the polls.  Before the full scope of the coronavirus pandemic became apparent, Biden appeared poised to become his party’s presidential nominee. A candidate needs 1,991 delegates to win the nomination without the aid of superdelegates, and with March’s contests behind him, Biden leads the delegate race with 1,168 pledged delegates to Sanders’s 884.  Before the restructuring of the primary calendar, contests in delegate-heavy states the former vice president was expected to win — like Georgia, Pennsylvania, and New York —meant he had the potential to come close to that 1,991 threshold by the end of April, or at the very least, amass so many delegates as to make it mathematically impossible for Sanders to catch up to him. While this might seem to suggest the delays are beneficial to Sanders’s campaign, this does not currently seem to be the case. The next states scheduled to vote — Kansas, Nebraska, and West Virginia — all favor Biden.  None of these states has a massive number of delegates and much could change between now and June, facts giving Sanders little pressure to drop out. This makes it more likely both candidates will continue to campaign until the summer, in turn making it more difficult for the party to devote resources toward fundraising for its eventual nominee and toward making preparations for the general election against President Donald Trump.  Stripping states that vote post-June 9 of their delegates would further complicate Biden’s path to victory, as doing so would take at least 191 pledged delegates out of the equation. And punishing Sanders and Biden for campaigning in late voting states would have an even greater effect; all together, New York, Kentucky, and Louisiana have 382 delegates on offer, more than Texas and almost as many as California.  The DNC may be inclined to make an exception to current rules to let the primary process play out in a manner that would allow one man to claim a clean victory. Whether they do remains to be seen, but either way, come June 3, the nation should finally have a clearer view of who will be the Democratic nominee. Constitutional law professor Richard Epstein injected an idea that is still lurking in conservative media coverage of the federal government’s response to Covid-19 — that American deaths won’t be nearly as high as scientists predict, meaning the cure — slowing the economy — might be worse than the virus. Three thousand American deaths later, he’s standing by his basic argument, telling me that shutting down the economy was a “totally catastrophic strategy” for a pandemic he still compares to a “normal flu season.”  In his view, lockdowns are examples of progressive political theory, which he told me was a “dangerous form of political ideology.” On March 30, he wrote that the best course of action would be to “ease restrictions as quickly as possible in those areas where the risks are lower, as a “Fortress America” approach, as he termed it, “may turn out to be more deadly than the coronavirus itself.” Epstein is a respected libertarian legal scholar who has long railed against the aggressive use of government to impact public health outcomes. But he’s not an economist. He’s not a statistician. He’s not a doctor. He’s not an infectious disease expert. Still, the conservative Hoover Institute published a piece on March 16 he wrote challenging scientific modeling predicting millions of American deaths, claiming that just 500 Americans would die. (When the death toll surged past 500, he followed up in several posts but maintained the predicted number of likely deaths can’t possibly be true, adding that the virus should be allowed to “run its course” to help the economy.)  His work seems to have inspired President Donald Trump to pivot from an aggressive call to social distance to talking about filling pews on Easter Sunday. “We can’t have the cure be worse than the problem,” the president said last Monday, adding, “We have to open our country because that causes problems that, in my opinion, could be far bigger problems.” That set off major alarm bells among public health experts.  As deaths surged past 3,000 this week, Trump has dropped the calls to get back to normal. But the mixed messaging and potentially wasted time has worried public health officials that the saga hampered the public health response.   America gets its #Rasputin moment. Just heard some of the lunatic ravings of @RichardAEpstein on #coronavirus, with basic facts about virology, evolution, immune response 100% wrong. And he's got the ear of the White House. Be afraid. Be very afraid. https://t.co/KreBMKhoj4 I called Epstein on Wednesday, March 25, to ask about his initial estimate regarding the potential death toll and what, if anything he’d change about his recommendations regarding the pandemic response.  Epstein was somewhat combative during our conversation, saying that coronavirus is not more contagious than the flu and still committed to the idea that the economic fallout of the pandemic — particularly in a lockdown scenario — would be far more dangerous than the pandemic. He has also argued elsewhere that there may be different forms of the virus circulating, a theory which medical experts say lacks evidence.  He made it clear in our conversation that his views are influenced by his disdain for “Big Government” policies, comparing the response to coronavirus to the arguments made by some regarding action taken against climate change. As he wrote in his follow-up piece for the Hoover Institution, “Progressives think they can run everyone’s lives through central planning, but the state of the economy suggests otherwise.” This interview has been edited for clarity and length.  You’ve written pieces making the case that the government is over-responding to the coronavirus, doing far too much damage to the economy than necessary. In your view, overreacting is just as dangerous as under-reacting because, as you say, there are lost lives on both sides of the equation. Both sides, absolutely. [Note: In his March 30 piece for the Hoover Institution, Epstein wrote, “Looking at the costs, the public commands have led to a crash in the stock market, and may only save a small fraction of the lives that are at risk. In addition, there are lost lives on both sides of the equation as many people will now find it more difficult to see a doctor, get regular exercise, stay sober, and eat healthily.”] And you’ve based your argument, in part, on what’s unfolding in South Korea, where the virus has killed far fewer people than models might suggest. But public health experts say testing in South Korea has been far more pervasive. The problem there is a different problem and it’s the problem of cultural differences.  I projected a model, essentially without any government intervention at all. I said that the adaptive responses would be fairly dramatic. If it turns out that these curves are working the way that I’m doing, you are wildly over investing in the lockdown side. You tell this to these standard docs, they don’t even know what it’s about. I teach medical people all the time and they are trained for diagnosis and they make their money in procedures. It’s also a matter of progressive politics, which, as you know, I regard as an extremely dangerous form of political ideology because these people are much more inclined to big government, much more inclined to see things as always being out of the ordinary, always reading small changes as though they’re about to become exponential ones. This is true with respect to climate change and it’s true with respect to this, and so, since they have the exponential model, they think that the costs of delay are absolutely tragically high. If you took the conventional model that I did, you would treat this just the way you did the flu that we had in 2009-2010, which turned out to be normal. So I’m sitting here in this very odd position of being a lawyer, believing that there’s been a misidentification of what it is that counts as field expertise, plus a jaundiced view of lawyers that all we know how to do is to argue in court, right? Well, I’m not a lawyer, I’m a law professor. You shut down three major states and a bunch of interstate activities and you can already see that the only guys who benefit are Amazon and Walmart because of their home delivery services. You want to do this in 50 states? It’s a complete catastrophe.  You’ve got a $25 billion economy. They’re trying to give you $2 trillion in stimulus. That’s not real production, that’s a wealth transfer. Wealth transfers always make you, in aggregate, poorer and not richer, in wealth. You just hope the short-term utility gains from the transfer will offset the long-term wealth effects, which is the basic theory you have to go on for these things to work, but you can only do it once.  Stimulus programs, by the way, it doesn’t matter whether you have a financial meltdown or a biological meltdown, it’s the same basic logic. The case for them rests strictly on the notion that short-term benefits of money, in utility terms, are much higher so that the normal relationship between utility and wealth is completely distorted. But now you’ve got $2 billion of extra money. Where’s it coming from? You could print it. Well, if you always make money by printing it, we’d have hyperinflation. You can borrow it, but then somebody has to pay the interest. You could raise taxes, but that’s not going to happen. So how do you think about risk in this? That’s the whole point. That’s the only thing I’m thinking about, is risk.  We know, to a certainty of about 90 percent, that the shutdown is going to wreck the economy in the short run, right? We know [when] you wreck an economy, one portion of the economy you’re going to wreck is the health service system. So people who need diagnoses, routine breast cancer checks, new glasses and whatever it is, they’re not getting it. If I’m correct in what I said, the dominant model has about a one percent chance of being true, and my model, forget about the differences, is essentially you’re talking about normal flu season, 30,000 to 50,000 deaths, is 99 percent true. Has anybody decided to shut down the economy for six months every year for flu season? The issue that differentiates coronavirus and the flu is that coronavirus is far more contagious and — No, you’re getting confused again. It is not more contagious. [Note: Covid-19 is believed to be roughly twice as contagious as the flu.] It is said to be more lethal. Now, there’s a recent piece in, I think it’s the Financial Times, that somebody sent me, which is, if you’re talking about this as being more lethal, right? Say it’s eight times as deadly, how do you factor that into the equation, right? Well, the first thing is though, is, if it’s true, which it probably is not, that number is probably high.  Then, the evolution that’s going to take place by way of counter strategies is going to take place more quickly. It will be more severe, but the severity will be mitigated, so if the virus is eight times as serious as the standard one, by the time we get done with these things, it’s going to react as three or four or two times what it is because of the adaptive responses to the evolutionary changes.  So, the betting is why is this virus different from all other viruses? I keep calling this the Passover question and they keep telling me, “Well, it’s got a slightly different structure.”  So what’s happening is, researchers see this thing, basically, collapsing earlier than they previously predicted. They’re coming much closer to me. I don’t know when the peak will be. I’m not a master statistician. I know how to draw curves and figure out the relationships.       To progressives, America’s flailing response to the coronavirus pandemic is everything that’s been terrifying about a Donald Trump presidency since his candidacy started gaining steam — dishonesty, disrespect for expertise, lack of focus and attention to detail, all colliding with a genuinely difficult policy problem to create a lethal catastrophe.  It’s sobering, then, to realize that Trump’s approval ratings, while not exactly good, have been steadily rising since mid-March to reach the highest point since the earliest days of his presidency. After an up-and-down associated with the impeachment process followed by the recent decline, he’s now up to about a 45 percent approval rating from around 40 percent at the beginning of November.  But to contextualize this a bit, essentially all incumbent leaders appear to be benefiting from a coronavirus-related bump. Compared to the governors of hard-hit states or the presidents and prime ministers of hard-hit foreign countries, Trump’s bump is actually quite small, amounting to maybe 2 or 3 points. Compare that with foreign leaders like France’s Emmanuel Macron or Germany’s Angela Merkel, who have seen double-digit increases in their approval ratings.  A Siena College poll released Monday showed New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo (D) enjoying a 20-point boost in his approval rating.  To whom it may concern: If you would like to see an actual polling bump for handling a crisis well, see this morning’s @SienaResearch poll of NY voters: pic.twitter.com/nhK9d2IoGD That same poll showed a 1-point bump for Trump in New York state, a bit lower than what national averages show but not far out of line with them.  It’s not really clear what this portends for the future. But it does mean that explanations for Trump’s approval bump that focus on things like his performance at the daily staged newscasts are probably missing the forest for the trees.  Trump is faring far worse than other similarly situated leaders, and the thing to explain is not why his numbers are going up but why they are going up so little.  Italy has become the poster child for the coronavirus’s global spread, and the Italian government’s handling of the outbreak is widely cited as a cautionary tale of mistakes to avoid.  But the public gives high marks to Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte and his cabinet, a hastily composed coalition government that was formed last year in a desperate bid to keep the far right out of power. Polls show a sky-high 71 percent approval rating for a formerly unpopular team. Italy, Demos & Pi poll:Conte II Cabinet Approval RatingApprove: 71% (+27)Disapprove: 29% (-27)+/- vs. 10-13 Feb. '20Fieldwork: 16-17 March 2020Sample size: 1,028#Conte #Coronavirusitalia Smaller but still large approval bumps are also evident for Merkel and Macron. Germany, Forschungsgruppe Wahlen poll:Angela Merkel (CDU-EPP) Job ApprovalApprove: 79 (+11)Oppose: 18% (-11)+/- vs. 3-5 MarFieldwork: 23-26 March 2020Sample size: 1,473#Politbarometer #btw21 #COVID19deutschland France, Ifop poll:President Macron Approval RatingApprove: 43% (+11)Disapprove: 56% (-10)Field work: 19-28 Mar. '20Sample size: 1,930 UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s approval ratings have also soared into the high 70s, despite a policy approach characterized by a confusing back-and-forth on whether to even try to contain the virus, leading to a situation where the prime minister himself has been infected.   Indeed, if anything, European data seems to suggest bigger bounces for leaders with less effective responses, though we’ll probably want to wait and see on an approval poll out of Spain — which has been one of the hardest-hit countries — before making that conclusion firmly.  In the United States, meanwhile, gubernatorial polling has been scant, but what’s out there suggests huge boosts for governors of both the hardest-hit states and states that thus far seem to have been largely spared.  Not a ton of data out there for individual states, but here's change in net job approval ratings for a few govs + Trump.Whitmer (MI): +30Cooper (NC): +31Cuomo (NY): +55**Trump (US): +5(MRG polls for Whitmer, PPP for Cooper, Siena for Cuomo; for MI/NC initial poll in 2019) It’s of course long been observed that presidents benefit from a rally-’round-the-flag effect in wartime.  Franklin Roosevelt’s numbers went up after Pearl Harbor, Jimmy Carter’s rose in the initial phase of the Iran hostage crisis, and George W. Bush’s soared after the 9/11 attacks. One common thread in all of this is that voters seem to discount the question of presidential conduct before the crisis hit. The hostage crisis, for example, was precipitated by the Carter administration’s decision to admit the recently deposed shah of Iran into the country after a lobbying campaign led by Chase Manhattan Bank. The Bush administration ignored warnings about al-Qaeda during its first nine months in office and sidelined plans it inherited from the Clinton administration for more aggressive action.  But in both cases, the incumbent president played the role of national leader on television very effectively in the early days of the crisis; only later would public support eventually wither.  When Democrats praise Cuomo’s response in contrast to Trump’s, they are largely doing something similar. The governor has been a steady presence on television and a clear crisis communicator. But he was slower to take action than West Coast governors like Washington’s Jay Inslee and California’s Gavin Newsom, and the actual situation in New York seems to be quite a bit worse, perhaps as a result. But precisely because things are so bad, Cuomo is on television very frequently discussing the emergency and his efforts to cope with it — and he’s doing a good job of that, regardless of what mistakes may have been made two weeks ago.  If you’re looking for information about likely consequences for November, the most important thing to remember is that to the extent that voters change their minds, they tend to do so in the very short term — the border wall government shutdown tanked Trump’s numbers and then they bounced back right away. The most striking thing about Trump’s approval rating bump, however, is simply that it’s very small. Compared to other politicians in the US and abroad, he’s very bad at playing a unifying figure. As a politician, that weakness is offset by the way the Electoral College overweights his coalition. But given the public opinion equivalent of a layup, he’s falling far short of the hoop.The coronavirus pandemic has made it impossible for President Donald Trump to hold the political rallies he loves so much. But he’s found a substitute of sorts with daily White House coronavirus briefings that have quickly descended into farce. There were more than 500 coronavirus deaths in the United States on Monday alone — the most of any single day yet. You wouldn’t know that from watching Trump’s briefing, however. Viewers were instead treated to a variety show featuring absurdly over-the-top deification of the president, quips about his hair, infomercials for numerous private companies, the promotion of unproven drugs, and verbal sparring sessions with reporters. The briefing came a day after Trump posted unsettling tweets bragging about the TV ratings of the press conferences, which are only necessary because his government bungled its preparations for a deadly pandemic. While Trump once used the briefings to announce new policies, recently they have featured more misinformation and aggrandizement than news. Monday’s was the least newsworthy conference to date, and will only bolster growing arguments that cable networks (and the public at large) would be best served to ignore them. While a number of state governors plead with the Trump administration to do more to provide them with ventilators and other needed medical gear on a large scale, Trump has used the White House briefings to showcase executives from private companies who are stepping in to fill the role the federal government would usually take in responding to a public health crisis. On Monday, it was MyPillow CEO Mike Lindell’s turn to receive the informercial treatment. Lindell is a Fox News fixture and staunch Trump backer. In fact, he reportedly told associates that Trump is pushing him to run for governor in Minnesota. To his credit, as the coronavirus crisis has worsened, Lindell’s company has pivoted from pillows to making masks for health care workers. That’s praiseworthy, and ostensibly the reason Trump brought him to the White House. What was troubling, however, was Lindell’s portrayal of the Trump presidency in biblical terms. “God gave us grace on November 8, 2016, to change the course we were on,” Lindell said at the end of his remarks. “God had been taken out of our schools and lives, a nation had turned its back on God. I encourage you to use this time at home to get back in the word. Read our Bible.” “I did not know he was going to do that, but he’s a friend of mine and I appreciate it,” Trump replied.  The My Pillow guy Mike Lindell says this: "God gave us grace on November 8, 2016, to change the course we were on. God had been taken out of our schools & lives, a nation had turned its back on God. I encourage you to use this time at home to get back in the word. Read our Bible" pic.twitter.com/tRdlubE08u Lindell’s comments came at the end of the pre-questions portion of the briefing. Instead of leveling with the American people about the coronavirus, Trump spoke at length about unproven remedies (“Bayer has donated one million doses of the chloroquine”), promoted new coronavirus tests in a QVC-like manner, and complimented himself on his hair’s performance in the Rose Garden wind (“My hair is blowing around. And it is mine”). "My hair is blowing around. And it is mine. The one thing you cannot get away with. It is a problem if you are president" -- Trump pic.twitter.com/ZifUxnquYQ Things didn’t get any less farcical when it came time for Trump to take questions. Among the first questions Trump took was one from the ultra-sycophantic One America News Network (OAN). As they’ve done in previous briefings, on Monday an OAN staffer served up a loaded question, in this case asking Trump to talk about a false equivalency she drew between coronavirus deaths and abortions. Trump, to his credit, didn’t take the bait and basically dodged the question. One of the more informative moments of the briefing came a short time later, when Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, took the mic to correct the record about the hope Trump expressed that the coronavirus perhaps might not flare up again in the fall, even if the outbreak we’re currently dealing with is brought under control before then.  “In fact, I would anticipate that that would actually happen, because of the degree of transmissibility,” Fauci said, immediately after Trump said, “I hope it doesn’t happen.” Here's Dr Fauci immediately pouring cold water on Trump's hope that the coronavirus won't strike again in the fall pic.twitter.com/oyxG6l6QQN The event wound down with Trump sparring with two of his longtime media foes — Yamiche Alcindor of PBS NewsHour and Jim Acosta of CNN. Acosta asked Trump what his message is to people who are upset about the fact he spent weeks downplaying the coronavirus instead of preparing for it, but Trump dismissed the question and then went on the attack. “It’s people like you and CNN that say things like that, that, uh, it’s why people just don’t want to listen to CNN anymore,” Trump said. “You could ask a normal question ... I don’t want panic in the country. I could cause panic much better than even you. I would make you look like a minor league player. But you know what, I don’t want to do that.” Trump concluded, “Instead of asking a nasty, snarky question like that, you should ask a real question, and other than that I’m going to go to somebody else.”  .@Acosta: What do you say to those who are upset you spent weeks downplaying the coronavirus?TRUMP: "If you look at those individual statements, they're all true. 'Stay calm, it will go away' ... it will go away ... [that's] why people just don't want to listen to CNN anymore" pic.twitter.com/YhAjMMW6Sg (On Tuesday morning, Trump retweeted a video of his exchange with Acosta posted by one of his campaign staffers along with the caption, “BOOM ... Trump obliterates CNN.”) After taking a question asking him to explain the accusations he made the day before about nurses and New York officials misappropriating medical gear — “I expressed what was told to me by a tremendous power in the business,” Trump said, citing an unnamed source despite the fact that he’s attacked reports for citing unnamed sources as recently as Saturday — the president called on Alcindor.  Alcindor asked Trump a straightforward, fair question about coronavirus testing. “You said several times that the United States has ramped up testing, but the United States is still not testing per capita as many people as other countries like South Korea,” Alcindor said. “Why is that?” Instead of answering it, however, Trump lied — “It’s very much on par,” he claimed, falsely — and then for the second-straight day lectured Alcindor about how she should do her job. “I know South Korea better than anybody,” Trump said. “Do you know how many people are in Seoul? Do you know how big the city of Seoul is? 38 million people. That’s bigger than anything we have.” Trump’s claim was way off. The population of Seoul is about 10 million. Here's Trump lecturing Yamiche that "38 million people" live in Seoul, South Korea. The actual population of Seoul is 9.8 million. pic.twitter.com/Lu1jY3sJ9J Trump went on to admonish Alcindor that “you should be saying congratulations instead of asking a really snarky question,” before abruptly ending the briefing. While officials like New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz provide daily coronavirus briefings that are filled with facts and announcements of significance to their constituents, Trump’s have devolved into spectacle. It appears cable networks are belatedly waking up to this — CNN cut away from Trump’s latest briefing as soon as Lindell took the stage. As my colleague Matthew Yglesias has argued, to the extent they’re trying to inform viewers about the coronavirus instead of just entertaining them, cable networks should probably stop broadcasting them live, and instead highlight the newsworthy parts later. On days like Monday, that would mean more or less ignoring them altogether. Trump craves attention, and with political rallies off the table for the foreseeable future, the briefings provide his daily fix. They provide him with some of his largest TV audiences to date — a fact not hugely surprising given public interest in a pandemic that has put their families at risk, but one that Trump has bragged about nonetheless.  But the briefings have become increasingly rally-like, with wild claims and guest appearances. And rarely has the content of the Trump Show reflected a president as out of touch with reality as it did on Monday. Part rally, part media-bashing, part critical updates on the coronavirus crisis. Vox’s Matthew Yglesias says President Trump’s daily press briefings are muddying the message.  Subscribe to Today, Explained wherever you get your podcasts, including: Apple Podcasts, Google Podcasts, Spotify and Stitcher. The coronavirus has now killed more Americans than the 9/11 terror attacks — and the death toll is poised to rise in the weeks ahead. Nearly 3,000 people died after terrorists flew planes into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, and a third plane that had been hijacked crashed in Shanksville, Pennsylvania, on 9/11. According to tallies by both CNN and the New York Times, over 3,000 people in the US infected with Covid-19 have died. It is, of course, not a neat comparison. Those who perished on 9/11 died instantly or soon thereafter, though many first responders suffered major complications in the subsequent years. Meanwhile, the death toll from the coronavirus has risen since January and has grown substantially in the past few weeks. Top health officials in the US government, like Dr. Anthony Fauci, predicted on Sunday between 100,000 and 200,000 deaths in the country before the crisis subsides. Dr. Deborah Birx, another medical professional leading the American response, said the following day that Fauci’s figures could pan out even “if we do things almost perfectly.” President Donald Trump, a longtime New Yorker who only last year changed his official residence to Florida, seems to agree. If the death toll stays around 100,000, then “we all together have done a very good job,” he said during a Sunday press conference. But one parallel between the coronavirus crisis and 9/11 is that, so far, New York City has borne the brunt of two of the worst crises in recent American history. Steven Kassapidis, an intensive care unit doctor in the city, told the Guardian last week that “9/11 was nothing compared to this.” Current conditions are “Hell. Biblical,” he continued.  With regard to 9/11, he said, “We were waiting for patients to come who never came, okay? Now, they just keep coming.” That tracks with what Vox’s Jen Kirby and Emily Stewart reported last week:  Officials are frantically trying to find spaces to care for the New Yorkers they expect to become sick. The US Army Corps of Engineers is planning to build field hospitals at now-empty colleges on Long Island, and to remake the Jacob Javits Center, the convention center on the far west side of Manhattan, into a FEMA hospital. De Blasio said Thursday the city is trying to triple its capacity to 60,000 beds by May. That still may not be enough. The USNS Comfort, the US Navy’s hospital ship, has now docked outside Manhattan for the first time since the 9/11 attacks. The last time this ship docked in Manhattan was in the aftermath of 9/11. It's getting harder to avoid drawing parallels between the two crises. https://t.co/MkL67H2pkY Of course, the greatest devastation of the coronavirus is likely yet to come, whereas the destruction from 9/11 was immediate. Another similarity is that President George W. Bush had ample intelligence informing him that al-Qaeda was planning an attack like 9/11, and Trump had multiple government agencies warning the US wasn’t prepared for a pandemic. Yet neither took sufficient steps to try to prevent the respective threats from unfolding. In Trump’s case, his administration was slow to deal with the outbreak, failing to administer tests early and deliver medical equipment to health care workers treating patients. The sluggish response has already led at least one member of the 9/11 Commission — the government-mandated group that investigated the origins of the attack and the US government’s failures — to call for a similar effort once the crisis is over. “As with prior catastrophic failures of the government to protect the American public,” John Farmer Jr. wrote on Saturday for ABC News, “the public will demand — and good government will require — an accounting of the actions and inactions that contributed to the world’s — and our nation’s — failure to contain the Covid-19 pandemic.” Some national security experts have even begun to argue that the US government needs to dramatically rethink what the greatest threats to America really are — moving terrorism down the list and putting global health near the top. “I can say definitively that the specter of 9/11 has impacted every major political decision tied to US involvement in Afghanistan, with the risk of enabling another such an attack weighing heavily on senior leaders,” Jason Campbell, who from 2016 to 2018 was a top Afghanistan policy official in the Pentagon, told me. “I believe we will see a similar effect when it comes to countering another pandemic.” In a piece for Politico over the weekend, foreign affairs journalist Nahal Toosi compared the US foreign policy community to a high school cafeteria. The popular kids were those who focused on terrorism, among other things, while “the global health specialists would be eating tater tots in the corner with the band geeks.” The coronavirus may soon flip that hierarchy on its head. “I think this is a breakpoint, a transformative moment that is going to change institutions,” Stephen Morrison, who leads a global health program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies think tank in Washington, DC, told Toosi. “You’re going to have a hard time to find people [who] argue again that this really is not all that important.” Campbell, who’s now at the RAND Corporation, echoed that sentiment. “In the coronavirus context, much like with Afghanistan or even counterterrorism more broadly, there is going to be added political risk associated with underpreparing and underfunding,” he told me. Here again, the case of the 9/11 attacks is instructive. After 9/11, the US changed a lot about how it would defend against the next major attack. The Bush administration combined 22 government agencies into a single overarching agency: the Department of Homeland Security. It also created the Office of the Director of National Intelligence to better coordinate and understand the intelligence being gathered across the countries’ numerous intelligence agencies.  The 9/11 attacks also led to the rise of the surveillance state, allowing the government to track the movements of people around the world and online, even if they clearly weren’t terrorists.  The Bush administration prioritized tackling terrorism above almost any other threat in its National Security Strategy, and launched a “Global War on Terror” to confront terrorist threats around the world, which some estimates say cost more than $6 trillion. Today, there are those who say the US government should reform once again.  “Covid-19 marks the final nail in the coffin of the ‘post-9/11 era,’ in which the United States harnessed all elements of national power to confront the scourge of violent Islamic extremism,” the first director of national intelligence, John Negroponte, and Yale’s Edward Wittenstein wrote for USA Today on Monday. “America needs a proactive intelligence agenda that draws on lessons learned from this ongoing pandemic.”  Negroponte and Wittenstein lay out four key elements of such an agenda:  However, it’s not like the US government doesn’t have global health security strategies on hand. It actually does, including one from the White House just last year (although it doesn’t feature the word “intelligence” once). Other experts, like Dr. Angela Rasmussen, a virologist at Columbia University, say the most important change would be more money.  “There needs to be funding across the board for basic research, surveillance, modeling, and experimental work to predict pathogen emergence,” she told me. “This should include a pandemic preparedness plan and a standing committee to oversee this work.” That work would also include ensuring emergency stockpiles of medical equipment are full and ready for use, and also ensure that government agencies know their exact roles in times of crisis. But some say that, other than a lack of preparation to have the medical capacity needed for an outbreak, the US national security community doesn’t actually need much reform.  Michael Leiter, who led the National Counterterrorism Center from 2007 to 2011, told me that the intelligence community did well predicting this kind of crisis. The fault in this case “falls entirely on the National Security Council, and hence the White House.” It’s not so much that the US needs to restructure its national security apparatus, then. The intelligence system worked, Leiter says. It’s the leaders who failed. Others agree. “The real problem is not the intelligence community, but rather the policy side who have been warned about a pandemic multiple times,” said Mathew Burrows, a former top intelligence official who wrote the National Intelligence Council’s Global Trends reports. “The various administrations all complain that there are too many threats to track, but that’s life.” “There is no reason — except bureaucratic inertia — that they could not redesign how they operate in light of a new threat environment,” added Burrows, who’s now at the Atlantic Council think tank in Washington. “This is a huge US failure which goes beyond the stupidity of this administration.”    A dangerous myth is taking hold in the United States that the country must decide between saving the economy at the expense of risking many additional Covid-19 deaths and a depression leading to double-digit unemployment. Trump says that the cure for the virus can’t be more costly than the virus itself. Others, like former Treasury Secretary Larry Summers, caution that the US must stick with stringent public health measures, but simply can’t fix the economy “until we contain the virus.”  But this is a false choice. The virus’s hit to the economy is real. But beyond the direct hit from the pandemic, the US is experiencing an economy-wide collapse in demand, as job losses lead to income losses, which lead to reduced spending and further job losses. There is a climate of concern, and people who haven’t lost jobs and incomes worry that they may do so soon and restrain their spending. There is a pinch on state and local budgets that is causing cutbacks on front-line labor as there’s more, not less, work to do.  
    Related
   And despite frantic moves from the Federal Reserve last week and a big stimulus bill from Congress, the steps taken thus far are too small and too timid — like a series of mattresses to cushion the fall when the US needs a trampoline to bounce everyone back to full employment. That’s not a job that can afford to wait until after the epidemiological crisis is solved any more than the Allies waited until after defeating Hitler to cure the Great Depression. The US needs to beat the virus in part through a massive, deliberate mobilization that puts people back to work. Businesses across the country have been forced to either shut down or dramatically curtail their activities because of the virus.  That inevitably leads to job losses and a declining stock market. But if you broaden your set of economic indicators — including currencies (where the dollar is getting stronger), commodities (where everything from oil to corn to metal has gotten cheaper), bonds (where government interest rates have fallen), and inflation (where expectations are of slower price increases) — you see a second story, a crisis of falling demand.  And though the measures taken by Congress and the Fed last week led to a clear improvement in the indicators, they weren’t nearly enough to address the crisis. The US needs to take the analogy of wartime mobilization that’s been used by many leaders much more seriously and deliver trillions more in tax cuts and spending increases to stimulate demand. Much of that spending should be aimed at mobilizing workers and industry to provide the goods and services the US needs to continue coping with a virus that, even if successfully contained, is not going to vanish soon. To cope with the twin crises of economics and public health, the US will need substantial investment in the production of personal protective equipment for health care workers, but may also need production of masks and gloves for the public. It will need a huge infusion of funds to state and local governments so they can continue to provide — even expand — needed services. It will need medical research in spades, and we’ll need income support for households and businesses as they struggle to adapt to a new world of doing things in less efficient, more socially distant ways. And to support it all, the US needs a creative and flexible Federal Reserve willing to adopt a wartime mentality to finance. A few years ago, Christina Romer, who served as the chair of the White House Council of Economic Advisers under President Obama, and her husband David co-wrote my favorite paper about macroeconomics.  It’s called “The Most Dangerous Idea in Federal Reserve History: Monetary Policy Doesn’t Matter.” In the paper, the Romers review three tragic episodes in American economic history — the early phases of the Great Depression, the Great Inflation of the 1970s, and the extended Great Recession that began in 2008 and left America with labor market weakness that lingered up until the moment the coronavirus hit.  They show that in each of these episodes, policymakers convinced themselves that because of special unique attributes of the situation, there was nothing more that they could do on the demand side of the economy.  In 1930, for example, as the Great Depression gathered, George Norris of the Philadelphia Federal Reserve spoke against the idea of extra stimulus. In his view, the real problem was the extraordinary stock market bubble of the 1920s. “The consequences of such an economic debauch,” he argued to other Fed officials, “are inevitable. We are now suffering them. Can they be corrected or removed by cheap money? We do not believe that they can.”  In the 1970s, the problem was inflation rather than mass unemployment. And William Miller, then chair of the Federal Reserve, insisted that it wasn’t his problem to solve, telling Congress that “an effective program to reduce the rate of inflation had to extend beyond monetary policy” and instead focus on deregulatory and anti-union policy “designed to enhance competition and to correct structural problems.”  And in the wake of the Great Recession, distinguished economists started coming up with fanciful explanations for why labor force growth was persistently slow, even at one point deciding that advances in video game quality rather than a weak job market were to blame.  But in the first two instances, once policymakers — President Franklin Roosevelt in the case of the Great Depression, Fed Chair Paul Volcker in the case of inflation — actually accepted responsibility for solving the problem, they took action by abandoning the gold standard in the former case and with painful but relatively brief spikes in interest rates in the latter. The Great Recession never had such a decisive turning point, but exactly as the Romers predicted, over time growing demand just kept pushing the job numbers up steadily throughout both the Obama and Trump presidencies. So I was alarmed to see something Christina Romer told my colleague Ezra Klein: “I feel like we need a new term for the kind of unemployment we’re going to have,” says Christina Romer, the Berkeley economist who led President Obama’s Council of Economic Advisers during the financial crisis. “It’s not cyclical unemployment. It’s quarantine unemployment. Businesses aren’t allowed to operate. People aren’t allowed to be out of their home. The idea that if you just give people money it’ll somehow prevent the unemployment rate from skyrocketing makes no sense. No amount of demand stimulus will get people to go to restaurants if they’re closed.” What Romer is saying is that the US needs humanitarian relief to help people who can’t work, rather than expecting stimulus to create jobs.  But that’s a huge overstatement. She teaches at UC Berkeley in California, which is under some of the strictest lockdown orders in the country. Yet restaurants in Berkeley are not closed — many of them are offering food for pickup or delivery.  The novelists Ayelet Waldman and Michael Chabon announced on Twitter a plan to buy 25 meals a week from local restaurants to give to nearby hospital workers — a nice gesture for the community. And one thing that makes it a nice gesture, of course, is that lots of people are constrained in the number of restaurant meals they can consume by their income.  Do you run an East Bay restaurant? Once a week for as long as this lasts @michaelchabon and I will buy 25 meals from you and deliver them to the Highland Hospital ER staff. Cash for you, food for them! Win win! Email me at ayeletw@gmail.com. Spread the word. It’s also true that there are plenty of affluent people who eat out frequently who are going to be cutting back for non-financial reasons during this crisis. But it’s a big mistake to think that everyone is in that boat, or that the US has to simply give up on the idea of keeping people engaged in meaningful work.  Even in the midst of the current crisis, some companies are hiring. Instacart says it’s looking to add 300,000 staff as demand for grocery delivery picks up. Amazon says it’s going to hire 100,000 new people, and Domino’s Pizza expects to add 10,000 more workers.  A crisis for some is an opportunity for others. And in an appropriately stimulated economy, workers laid off from some sectors would gain new jobs in others. But something I’ve noticed in my Washington, DC, neighborhood is that even though supermarkets and hardware stores are still open, they are curtailing hours rather than expanding them.  Prudent people are trying to shop at the least crowded possible times in order to minimize human contact — typically at odd hours. The Whole Foods in my neighborhood is normally open from 7 am to 10 pm. The store has established special hours for people ages 60 and older, from 6 am to 7 am, and it is closing early at 9 pm. In a healthier economic environment, the store would be opening early and closing late — adding shifts to cover those times and adding workers to do extra cleaning and disinfecting.  This might lead to price increases for some retail goods, partially offsetting retailers’ reduced costs for commodities and the fuel to get things shipped. Nobody likes to see high prices. But that’s what you’d expect to see from an appropriately stimulated economy — overall stable or slightly rising inflation as total spending levels stay steady even though the virus is disrupting exactly what people spend money on. Instead, aggregate spending is collapsing. Recode’s Peter Kafka reports that even as news consumption is soaring, the advertising market is shrinking. BuzzFeed News announced across-the-board salary cuts. This isn’t the virus forcing media companies to shut down or making it impossible to buy laptops. It’s the secondary and tertiary demand impacts that are creating a generalized economic crisis.  Congress has declared victory and gone home, but it’s important for leaders in both parties to stay engaged. They need to keep monitoring the situation and continue passing new stimulative measures until there are clear indications that things have gone far enough on the demand side.  That’s going to mean primarily pushing a lot more money out the door.  Secondarily, the federal government needs to mobilize the country to address the virus — working with private industry, but also plenty of pushing cash out to state and local governments to do things.  Last but by no means least, the Federal Reserve— the American government’s premier demand-management agency — needs to commit to allowing a small spurt of inflation if that’s what it takes to ride out this crisis, and to extending maximum support to whatever the nation’s elected officials decide to spend money on.  Fed Chair Jay Powell’s announcements last week pointed in that direction, but everyone would benefit from a clear and consistent statement from the central bank that it supports fully and swiftly returning to full employment, even if it means a temporarily elevated pace of price increases. If people look back on the year 2020 and see that the big problem was 4 percent inflation, rather than mass unemployment or the widespread collapse of hospital systems, that’s a victory. At the very beginning of the crisis, President Trump was said to be interested in a major payroll tax cut.  Eventually he got talked out of that by Democrats who argued that generous unemployment insurance benefits and flat cash transfers to households should be higher priorities. That was the right judgment, but with demand still not fully stabilized, it would make sense to go back and look at the payroll tax issue.  The kind of companies that are still enjoying healthy sales — from giants like Target to the little hardware store across the street from my house — would be more likely to expand staff and rehire some newly unemployed workers if employer-side payroll taxes fell. Employers whose businesses have been hurt by the crisis but who aren’t forced into closure by it will, similarly, have an easier time avoiding layoffs if they get a tax break.  Meanwhile, the millions of Americans who haven’t lost their jobs but are dealing with unusually difficult working conditions, complicated child care situations, and other problems could use a boost from a worker-side payroll tax cut.  Depending on the market reaction to that, it could also make sense to do more rounds of cutting universal checks. Even while maintaining fairly severe social distancing, reasonable people might want to splurge on home exercise equipment, new toys and activities for kids, better equipment for your home office, or remote consultations with medical doctors or psychotherapists. The political controversy du jour is Trump’s reluctance to invoke the Defense Production Act (DPA) and secure critically needed ventilators and personal protective equipment for front-line health care workers. He should do all that. But the government at all levels should also acknowledge that our wartime production needs are broader than the most critical supplies. The acute shortage of N95 respirators facing medical personnel treating Covid-19 patients obviously needs to be fixed first. But instead of managing the shortage by telling the public surgical masks aren’t useful, the US ought to make more masks and widen the circle of people who get them.  The gap between our current situation — where front-line health personnel can’t get the basic equipment they need — and a realm where everyone is amply provisioned with masks and gloves for routine use is huge. Filling that gap will be hard. But it’s the opposite of the problem of having too many workers with nothing left for them to do. The US needs to be looking at all appropriate tools to get newly unemployed people into manufacturing masks and gloves. That probably means some mix of DPA edicts, direct subsidies for production, and guarantees that the government will purchase any “excess” supplies if the crisis ends up ending sooner than expected.  But beyond medical equipment, we are looking at a reasonably extended period of time in which people should be consuming more soap, hand sanitizer, disinfecting sprays and wipes, and lotion. Especially once the US is able to move beyond the most severe lockdown measures, we’re going to need lots of household cleaning supplies. And that means we’ll need more personnel and industrial capacity to make them. Congress should also directly infuse state and local governments with the money they need to run things properly. Mass transit agencies are being crushed by falling ridership and have started curtailing service. Distancing best practice, however, is that transit agencies should run ample service even as commuter loads fall so that trains and buses can stay as uncrowded as possible, even while vehicles are disinfected frequently. This isn’t financially viable for local governments, but the federal government can make it viable, and in doing so support public health and employment at the same time.  More broadly, the one saving grace of the coronavirus pandemic is that the pathogen is fairly easy to kill with soap and other normal cleaning supplies. While surface spread is not thought to be the main vector of the coronavirus, high-touch surfaces in playgrounds, parks, and other public spaces could and perhaps should be routinely disinfected as part of a transitional strategy to getting things partially opened up again. The barrier to doing that is simply cost.  But that’s just another way of saying the virus hasn’t eliminated our need for labor. There is plenty for workers to do instead of being unemployed, as long as people refuse to accept mass unemployment as inevitable. Rather than it being necessary to completely fix the health situation before the US can heal the economy, mobilizing idled workers should be part of how to get the health situation under control.  But to undergird it all, Americans need a cooperative central bank. The question of Federal Reserve action is intimately linked to the inevitable question of whether the country can really afford to engage in stimulus on this level. And the answer is yes.  Since the 1951 Fed/Treasury Accord, the Fed has operated independently of the rest of the American government. But as Jessica Romero of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond recounts in his history of the accord, “during World War II and its aftermath the Federal Reserve did not enjoy such independence.” Instead, “at the request of the Department of the Treasury, the Federal Reserve formally committed to maintaining a low interest-rate peg of 3/8 percent on short-term Treasury bills. The Fed also implicitly capped the rate on long-term Treasury bonds at 2.5 percent.”  The point of this was to make sure it was affordable for the government to borrow the money it would need to fight and win the war. Current interest rates are less than half of where they were set as an emergency wartime finance measure, and the Fed has announced that it’s willing to engage in unlimited purchases of government bonds “to support smooth market functioning and effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions and the economy.” 
    Related
   What’s further needed from the Fed is a clearer statement of the goals of its activity. In the past generation, the central bank’s overwhelming focus has been on ensuring that inflation stays near but below a target of 2 percent.  To support an adequate recovery, the Fed should state clearly that its goal is to help fiscal authorities fully eliminate any shortfall in demand. That means as long as the virus is with us, we should be willing to see inflation rise above 2 percent levels, as you would expect to see in an economy suffering from a supply-side problem.  A lot of commercial transactions, even when they restart, will have to be conducted in slightly cumbersome ways with more emphasis on delivery, uncrowded spaces, and lots of disinfecting. That will mean a higher cost structure, higher prices, and lower economic output — real economic problems that stimulative policy can’t fix and that will ameliorate only as testing, treatment, and vaccination will improve. But it won’t have to mean mass unemployment or a chilling choice between overwhelmed hospitals and a depression.  The corners of the economic policy world I follow are spending a lot of time playing armchair epidemiologist and debating various theories about how deadly Covid-19 really is and how useful lockdown-type policies really are in combating it.  Current estimates of the coronavirus fatality rate may be too high by orders of magnitude, write Profs. Eran Bendavid and Jay Bhattacharya from @StanfordMed https://t.co/5zIfFWK1Ko via @WSJ I reproduced by average-growth-in-last-week graph, but this time for COVID deaths instead of cases.Can you spot which places had lockdowns? Because tbh I cannot. pic.twitter.com/hnW5AKVbnD These are important questions, and in these uncertain times, I am also interested in them. Trump has become personally enthusiastic about the prospects of using hydroxychloroquine, perhaps in combination with azithromycin, as a pharmaceutical treatment for Covid-19. (The research so far on the effectiveness of such treatment is preliminary and mixed.) I hope some of that pans out, too, and it’s not unreasonable to try to maintain some optimism on the epidemiological side.  But this also has an air of grasping at straws about it. Both the human mind and the political system rebel at the idea that the current bleak economic picture Americans are seeing is our only alternative to a world with increasing sickness from a new virus.  We need to be clear-eyed, however: That false choice only exists because we aren’t thinking big enough about economic policy. Both the virus itself and the public health countermeasures that have been put into place to combat it are costly to the national economy. But the financial market indicators we can see are a clear indication that these costs are being exacerbated by a second wave of problems — demand-side problems — that are actually larger in scale than the problems on the supply side.  And unlike on the epidemiological side, the solutions to a demand crisis are actually very clear.  We are already poised to begin significant fiscal stimulus, and that has helped. But to get to where we need to be, we need to do even more — put more cash into state and local government coffers, cut taxes on individuals and businesses, put money directly into the hands of the American people, and finance increased production of medical and household cleaning supplies.  A program like that won’t eliminate the economic costs of coronavirus. Huge amounts of labor will be “wasted” on cleaning and re-cleaning surfaces, and manufacturing supplies that are swiftly used up and thrown away rather than building wealth. But it will avoid mass unemployment, cascading waves of bankruptcies, and the other miseries associated with a depression. And since the economic problems will be genuinely virus-related, they will go away whenever the medical situation improves — whether that’s because of improved testing, improved treatments, new findings that it’s not as deadly as we feared, or whatever else. The problem with the demand shock is that it is currently bigger in economic terms than the supply-side impacts of the virus itself. And — because it’s caused by policy failure rather than RNA strands replicating in our cells — there’s no guarantee it goes away, even if there is a totally effective vaccine a year from now. It’s time for economic policymakers to let the doctors, epidemiologists, and other public health officials do their jobs, and to start taking responsibility for doing their own work instead. The virus is a fact we have to deal with. The ongoing collapse in aggregate demand is a policy choice we can avoid.  Vox’s Ezra Klein and Matt Yglesias analyze the huge but inadequate stimulus bill.  Subscribe to The Weeds wherever you get your podcasts, including: Apple Podcasts, Google Podcasts, Spotify, and Stitcher.With medical experts and politicians now predicting that coronavirus cases will dramatically exceed the capacities of hospitals across America, doctors and nurses face the prospect of picking which patients to prioritize for treatment. Though the term “triage” may conjure images of rough battlefield medicine and crude estimates of patients’ survival odds, excruciating decisions on whom to treat already confront doctors in some places and will likely soon be necessary in America. In Italy, infections have skyrocketed so quickly that its fatalities have surpassed China’s, where the outbreak started, and doctors are already weighing whom to treat as sick patients overwhelm the hospital system. The published guidelines for an Italian intensive care unit noted that it may become necessary to establish an age limit for access to intensive care. Doctors are reportedly weeping in the hallways as they decide which patients to save. “If you have a 99-year-old male or a female patient, that’s a patient with a lot of diseases. And you have [a] young kid that need[s] to be intubated and you only have one ventilator, I mean, you’re not going to ... toss the coin,” a surgeon and oncologist in Rome named Carlo Vitelli told NPR last week. The United States is likely not far behind, with the confirmed case count already above Italy’s, and the country may soon experience an equally severe scarcity crisis. In New York City, health care workers are reporting that their resources are or will soon be overwhelmed. “These decisions run counter to everything that we stand for and are incredibly painful,” tweeted Meredith Case, an internal medicine resident at Columbia/New York-Presbyterian Hospital, on March 25. “Our ICU is completely full with intubated Covid patients. … We are rapidly moving to expand capacity. We are nearly out of PPE. I anticipate we will begin rationing today.” Guidelines for rationing scarce resources differ by state, though many assign rankings based on a patient’s odds of both short-term and long-term survival. The federal government has not yet released official recommendations for the Covid-19 pandemic. 
    Related
   But difficult moral questions about how to allocate scarce medical resources have received extensive consideration from both philosophers and doctors, and it’s been the subject of rigorous academic study among bioethicists. After Hurricane Katrina, professors at Stanford University developed a widely used framework to guide medical decision-making in situations of resource scarcity, such as pandemics and natural disasters. In an influential 2009 article in The Lancet, Ezekiel Emanuel, chair of the Department of Medical Ethics and Health Policy at the University of Pennsylvania, and two co-authors gave a systemic analysis of moral principles of allocation and how doctors can use them. Some researchers have even developed mathematical models to help decide whom to treat first. As the coronavirus sweeps across America, these ethical principles will collide with the messy realities of limited medical resources in dramatic ways. Despite the best efforts of philosophers and physicians, the results will inevitably be imperfect compromises that invite a thousand more questions on how to judge whose life is worth saving. There are three theories of how to make ethical triage decisions, according to David Magnus, director of the Stanford Center for Biomedical Ethics: egalitarianism, utilitarianism, and prioritarianism. Doctors and nurses aren’t philosophizing about these approaches as they make long rounds and rush to treat patients. Rather, these frameworks allow health care professionals to streamline decisions and focus on medical tasks, not be mired in moral questions or burdened by guilt after making hard decisions. “As much as possible, we want to move away from forcing clinicians to make bedside decisions and to have broader decision-making about these issues in advance,” said Magnus.  Each theory has its own moral logic. Egalitarianism seeks to treat patients equally; using a lottery system to select vaccine recipients is one example. Utilitarianism aims to maximize total benefit, generally measured by the remaining life years — or expected remaining high-quality years — that decisions will save. If a 20-year-old and an 80-year-old both required a ventilator, treating the 20-year-old would likely maximize life years. In a choice between two people of the same age, the quality of life that each could expect upon recovery would become relevant. Prioritarianism, or the “rule of rescue,” treats the sickest people first; emergency rooms operate on this principle, for example, choosing to treat the gunshot wound victim before the person with a broken leg.  Though each of these appeals to certain moral intuitions, they all have serious problems. To treat patients equally, for example, is also to treat them indiscriminately — because egalitarianism does not distinguish between the age of patients or the severity of their conditions, it can easily seem like an arbitrary or wasteful use of resources.  Utilitarianism confronts the notorious difficulty of ranking quality of life and ignores the moral imperative of urgency. Imagine that the same medical resources could be used either to save one 75-year-old from coronavirus or perform a dozen hip replacements for 65-year-olds. While the latter might ultimately create more years of happy, healthy life, most would consider it the wrong choice, as the recent cancellations of elective surgeries around the country show.  Meanwhile, a rule to prioritize the sickest patients first can clash with the goal of helping the greatest number possible: Lavishing extensive resources on a single patient with only a small chance of surviving could mean refusing treatment to multiple patients who are less sick but more likely to live if treated.  While analyzing trade-offs among these principles is vexing in theory, making and implementing decisions in real time can be excruciatingly difficult. “If you have a patient on a ventilator and they have to be taken off — that is probably the most horrible of all decisions for a doctor or nurse,” said Emanuel. “Vaccines are not always life-and-death. But if someone who doesn’t have a ventilator is going to die, having to withdraw that person is incredibly psychologically traumatic, and this is likely to happen.”  
    Related
   And the nature of medicine makes some ambiguities inevitable. There’s space for individual judgment, for instance, about what constitutes an urgent versus elective surgery, or when respiratory failure is irreversible. If an older patient with coronavirus and a short life expectancy required CPR, it could be difficult to decide whether saving the patient justified exposing health care workers to significant risk.  In normal circumstances, many patients on ventilators in America have only a very small chance of survival, Magnus explained. Family members often insist on continued treatment even when loved ones will almost certainly not recover. “In our society, the ICU often becomes a place for grieving and prolonging the dying process. It’s not obvious that this is a good use of resources even in normal circumstances, but it’s just not going to be possible now,” he said.   The ethical dilemmas posed by the coronavirus are real-world examples of deep moral questions philosophers have studied for centuries. Princeton’s Peter Singer, probably the world’s most famous living utilitarian philosopher and a vocal proponent of effective altruism, told Vox, “There’s always a scarcity of resources in medicine, but situations like this make it particularly clear.”  Singer said he favors a utilitarian approach that considers multiple factors: the life expectancy of patients, some types of adjustment for quality of life, and perhaps the patient’s ability to help others. He gave the example of a patient with severe dementia or terminal cancer with a six-month life expectancy as cases where it might be reasonable to prioritize other patients. Attempts to rank quality of life are controversial, particularly in cases of disability, but they are also already widely used.  In the United Kingdom, quality-adjusted life year, or QALY, scores are a crucial factor in health care decision-making and are calculated by multiplying years of life by quality of life. If a given medical treatment would allow a patient one year with full quality of life, the patient would have a quality score of 1. If the same treatment would produce a year of life with only half of the normal quality of life, they would have a quality score of 0.5.  Numerical scores might give the illusion of objectivity, but the complexities of actual life inevitably complicate such decisions. Mental health, family size, income, temperament, pain tolerance, and professional, personal, and relationship satisfaction — a vast array of factors that escape quantification still influence the quality of one’s life but are not accounted for in current equations.  These are incredibly challenging and controversial decisions to make. In particular, people with disabilities have spoken up about their concerns that they will be left behind whenever triage decisions are made. “People with disabilities deserve to have equal access to scarce medical resources,” wrote the American Association of People With Disabilities in a letter to Congress, “and should not be subject to resource allocation discrimination when needs exceed supply...we believe that during this difficult period it is especially important to protect patients with disabilities from discrimination.”  The Office for Civil Rights at the US Department of Health and Human Services has also announced that it is investigating states rationing plans to ensure that they are compliant with civil rights law. As Alice Wong of the Disability Visibility Project told the New York Times, “I deserve the same treatments as any patient. As a disabled person, I’ve been clawing my way into existence ever since I was born. I will not apologize for my needs.”  For a utilitarian, prioritizing those who can benefit others is a defensible choice. “The classic case might be the Army doctor whose treatment is prioritized because he will be able to treat others,” Singer said. “I suppose in the current situation maybe it’s possible to make a case that certain doctors would be in a similar position, but of course you would want to be careful that you were not just prioritizing the health of your colleagues.” In fact, prioritizing medical workers is one of the suggestions made by Emanuel in an article recently published in the New England Journal of Medicine making recommendations for triage in the Covid-19 pandemic. But defining what constitutes a benefit to others is also difficult and controversial. Elizabeth Anderson, a MacArthur “genius” grant winner and philosophy professor at the University of Michigan, cautioned against thinking in too “ruthlessly consequentialist” a manner. “In strictly consequentialist terms, you might ask who are the most valuable workers, but actually, that’s not the right way to think about it,” she told Vox. “In reality, if the CEO of a major corporation had a heart attack, they are actually more replaceable than the parent of young children, who need specific individuals to be there for them and have a very personal relationship with their parents. It’s an argument for prioritizing caretakers,” she said. One factor that doctors and philosophers agree should not be relevant is the wealth of patients. But it’s also an undeniable reality of American health care that wealth improves quality of care. “It’s a huge flaw in the American system compared to any other affluent society,” Singer said. Emanuel imagined a scenario in which a scarce supply of coronavirus vaccines became available on the open market. “You don’t want a vaccine that only the rich can buy,” he said, adding that some form of random selection like a lottery would be preferable. “There is no moral framework in which wealth plays a role.” As the number of cases continues to spike, American health care workers will likely face agonizing decisions on how to ration care — and soon. That’s why for now, self-quarantining and social distancing are themselves moral decisions we can all make that can have significant impacts. “How bad the triage will be depends enormously on the behavior of ordinary people now,” Anderson said. “The only way to solve this is through massive social collaboration.”  Taking collective action to decrease the scale of infections will ultimately reduce the suffering not only of patients but of nurses and doctors. “Triage is awful — it’s traumatizing,” said Anderson. “Doctors who have dedicated their careers to helping people now have to turn people away. It’s dreadful. It’s really on all of us to pull together so that we don’t force these horrible triage choices.” Nick Romeo is an author and journalist whose work has also appeared in the New Yorker, the Washington Post, the Atlantic, National Geographic, and more.The House and Senate likely won’t return to Capitol Hill until April 20 at the earliest, but that’s not stopping House Democrats from thinking about a fourth coronavirus stimulus package. One major initiative Democrats are already contemplating is an infrastructure bill, particularly related to coronavirus recovery. A list could include expanding America’s broadband and 5G internet to allow more Americans to work from home; modernizing hospitals and community health care centers; and updating crumbling water pipelines.  “The fourth bill would be about recovery,” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) told reporters on a Monday press call. “We would like to see in what comes next something that has always been nonpartisan ... and that would be an infrastructure piece that takes us into the future.” Pelosi and two House committee chairs — House Energy and Commerce Committee chair Frank Pallone and House Committee on Education and Labor chair Bobby Scott — laid out a number of priorities they plan to work toward in the coming weeks, including more protective equipment and increased health and safety regulations for doctors and nurses, and other essential workers like grocery store workers and pharmacists. Democrats also continued to push for free coronavirus treatment for everyone, including the uninsured. “I guarantee you you’re going to get some surprise bills, whoppers,” Scott said, nodding to the high cost of a visit to the emergency room or long-term intensive care. “The average family is going to be bankrupt, even if they have insurance.” Of course, in order to have a bill go anywhere, Pelosi would need buy-in from the Trump administration before she could get cooperation from the Republican-controlled Senate. Having just passed a historic $2 trillion bill, Republicans right now seem reluctant to spend much more.  “I’m not sure you need a fourth package,” House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-CA) said this weekend on Fox News’ Sunday Morning Futures. The three influential House leaders also talked about where they think Democrats and Republicans could agree on another potentially costly stimulus package. Pelosi repeatedly came back to infrastructure, noting that it is one of the priorities Democrats share with President Donald Trump. “In terms of recovery, that’s probably the most bipartisan path we could take,” Pelosi said. “Infrastructure’s never been a partisan issue, ever. It’s a public health issue, actually: clean air, clean water. In addition to that, it’s an economic issue, it’s a job issue.” Pelosi emphasized to reporters that the House is in the very early phases of gathering ideas for a fourth coronavirus bill. The legislation is yet to be drafted, but the House speaker added she’d like something ready to go when Congress returns next month. “I do think it is important that as soon as we’re here, we’re ready to pass legislation,” Pelosi said. “I’d not suspect we’d have any bipartisan legislation before we return.” Here’s what’s on House Democrats’ list of ideas that could show up in an eventual draft: “It is absolutely essential that legislation is required,” Pelosi said. “If we fail to act, we will be making the situation even more dangerous.” “We need more community health centers in rural areas,” Pallone said, highlighting one of the ways Congress could improve America’s health infrastructure after the coronavirus crisis subsides. Democrats are in the earliest stages of brainstorming ideas for a next coronavirus package, and it’s too early to tell whether Republicans will get on board. But this gives us an outline of what to expect from Democratic leaders going forward. A federal judge on Saturday confronted the Trump administration on its treatment of an especially vulnerable population — migrant children in US custody — as the coronavirus pandemic rages. Judge Dolly Gee of the US District Court in Los Angeles instructed the Health and Human Services Department (HHS) and Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) on Saturday to either promptly release migrant children from custody or explain why they must be kept in detainment amid the pandemic, which has killed more than 2,500 in the US as of March 30, according to the New York Times. If the agencies fail to do so by April 10, Gee said she will order the government to release about 3,400 children in HHS custody and hundreds more in ICE family detention centers, to either their family members or foster parents. She also said she decided against ordering their immediate release due to the risk of exposing them to the virus, given current travel restrictions. While children generally have a low risk of becoming seriously ill due to the coronavirus, four children in HHS custody — all of which are housed at facilities in New York — have already tested positive and may have spread it to others, including caretakers and people with underlying health conditions who are more likely to face severe complications. Because coronavirus poses “unprecedented threats” to the children themselves and those who interact with them, Gee ruled that keeping them in detention likely violates a decades-old agreement that lays out basic standards for their care. That agreement — known as the the “Flores settlement” — mandates that the government release migrant children “without unnecessary delay,” and keep them in “safe and sanitary conditions” in the meantime. Gee also appointed an independent monitor to ensure that the government is maintaining such conditions for children in its detention facilities, which she described as “hotbeds for contagion.” It’s not the first time federal courts have found detention conditions for migrant children lacking. Well before the coronavirus hit, Gee ordered the government to provide migrant children with basic necessities, including toothbrushes and soap, under the same settlement agreement. The government has made efforts to mitigate the spread of coronavirus in its immigration detention facilities, which house both children and adults, but social contact still poses a serious risk to vulnerable populations. HHS has stopped sending children in its custody to New York, California, and Washington state, which currently have the highest numbers of confirmed coronavirus cases in the US. It also requires twice-daily temperature checks of children in custody, provides Covid-19 testing, and isolates those found to have tested positive for the virus. (It has not, however, instituted social distancing in its facilities so far.) ICE, which has 38,000 immigrants in detention in more than 130 private and state-run facilities nationwide, was comparatively slower to respond to the pandemic. Only as of March 27 — and only after outcry from immigrant advocates — did ICE begin distributing hand sanitizer and soap more widely to detainees. It also instituted more regular and thorough cleaning in common areas, put schooling on hold in certain states, and encouraged social distancing at mealtimes and in common areas. But it hasn’t announced any plans to release immigrants, many of whom have no previous criminal convictions. Despite these measures, medical experts nevertheless fear that immigrants in detention remain particularly vulnerable to Covid-19, the illness caused by the novel coronavirus. Detainees housed in tight quarters can’t maintain social distancing, and medical resources — including personnel, testing kits, and personal protective equipment — are limited in detention centers. Lawmakers and advocates have been calling for their release, especially for detainees who are older or have underlying health conditions that make them more susceptible to the virus. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, that includes people with blood disorders, chronic kidney disease, chronic liver disease, compromised immune systems, current or recent pregnancy, endocrine disorders, metabolic disorders, heart disease, lung disease, and neurological and neurodevelopmental conditions. The American Civil Liberties Union and the Northwest Immigrant Rights Project have already sued ICE to seek the release of vulnerable detainees at one detention center in Tacoma, Washington, which is just outside Seattle, the original epicenter of the Covid-19 outbreak in the US. Children themselves don’t appear to be vulnerable to the virus unless they have a preexisting health condition that puts them at risk. But the effects of social isolation in detention can be particularly harmful to them, exacerbating psychological trauma and mental health issues during a critical developmental period. They may also be able to carry the virus without exhibiting symptoms, potentially spreading it to those with whom they come in contact. President Donald Trump just dramatically redefined success on the country’s response to the coronavirus. Barely a month ago, Trump claimed the coronavirus would go away on its own. Then he said it paled in comparison to the 2009 H1N1 flu outbreak, which killed about 12,500 Americans. Now he’s saying that the estimates showing Covid-19 could kill 100,000 Americans — roughly equivalent to two Vietnam Wars or 38 September 11 attacks — actually reflect how effective he’s been. During a news conference on Sunday, Trump said that a final US coronavirus death toll somewhere in the range of 100,000 to 200,000 people would indicate that his administration has “done a very good job.” “You’re talking about 2.2 million deaths,” Trump said, referring to an Imperial College study that identified 2.2 million people as the high end of how many Americans could die if no measures were taken to slow the spread of coronavirus. “So if we can hold that down, as we’re saying, to 100,000, it’s a horrible number, maybe even less, but to 100,000, so we have between 100 [thousand] and 200,000, we altogether have done a very good job.” “If we have between 100,000 and 200,000 we’ve all together done a very good job,” Trump says, about up to 200,000 Americans dying of #COVID19.pic.twitter.com/ricnlAbKKK The president acknowledging that as many as 200,000 people could die from the coronavirus is a somewhat stunning admission — especially considering that as recently as last week, Trump was pushing an absurdly dangerous talking point about relaxing social distancing in time for churches to be packed on Easter. But it also previews the sort of argument he’s preparing to make during the upcoming election about how his handling of the crisis was a success — no matter the outcome, and regardless of his past statements. Trump’s comments on Sunday indicate that experts have talked some sense into him since last week. During an appearance on CNN earlier in the day, Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, cited the same range of expected deaths as Trump did hours later. Dr. Anthony Fauci says there could potentially be between 100,000 to 200,000 deaths related to the coronavirus and millions of cases. “I just don’t think that we really need to make a projection when it’s such a moving target, that you could so easily be wrong,” he adds. #CNNSOTU pic.twitter.com/F2MOHY3xl4 But Trump’s newfound realism represents a dramatic departure from not only what he was saying last week but also (and perhaps more importantly) from what he was saying during the crucial period in February and early March, when the virus was spreading largely undetected, in part because of his government’s failure to quickly devise an effective and widely available coronavirus test. On February 26, for instance, Trump noted that there were only 15 known cases of coronavirus in the country, and claimed that “within a couple of days is going to be down to close to zero, that’s a pretty good job we’ve done.” Two days later, he said, “It’s going to disappear. One day, it’s like a miracle, it will disappear.” There are now more than 148,000 confirmed cases of coronavirus in the country as of March 30, according to the Johns Hopkins tracker. On March 9, Trump posted a tweet suggesting that the measures taken by state governments to shut down economic activity in hopes of slowing the spread of the virus wouldn’t be necessary because tens of thousands of people die from the flu each year (including more than 30,000 in the 2018-’19 season), yet “[n]othing is shut down, life & the economy go on.”  So last year 37,000 Americans died from the common Flu. It averages between 27,000 and 70,000 per year. Nothing is shut down, life & the economy go on. At this moment there are 546 confirmed cases of CoronaVirus, with 22 deaths. Think about that! During a press conference four days later, Trump compared his government’s handling of the coronavirus favorably with that of the Obama administration’s response to H1N1. “Interestingly, if you go back — please — if you go back to the swine flu, it was nothing like this,” he said. “They didn’t do testing like this. And actually, they lost approximately 14,000 people. And they didn’t do the testing. They started thinking about testing when it was far too late.” Trump’s claim about the number of Americans who died from H1N1 in 2009 and 2010 is false. A CDC study conducted years after the fact found that about 12,500 died. And ProPublica recently detailed how the Obama administration presided over the CDC’s development of an H1N1 test that became available for use just two weeks after the first case was detected. Trump, by contrast, oversaw a botched CDC test-development process that put the US behind the curve when it comes to detecting the spread of the coronavirus. He absurdly tried to blame Obama for this on Sunday. "The biggest problem was the test didn't work. That was not from us. That has been there a long time" -- here's Trump trying to blame Obama for faulty coronavirus tests that were developed by the CDC earlier this year pic.twitter.com/v2zXukCpwf Of course, Trump lying about Obama is no surprise. But what’s important is that instead of leveling with Americans about the coronavirus threat in a manner that likely would’ve prompted people to take greater precautions, Trump kept downplaying it as the virus spread and his government bungled the effort to start testing people. It’s good that he’s finally being realistic, but the reality is we’re now at the point where an outcome in which 100,000 Americans die sounds like getting off easy. Consider South Korea, by contrast. South Korea and the United States reported their first coronavirus cases on the same day, January 20. But while Trump was trying to wish the virus away, South Korean officials sprung into action. The Guardian details the difference between the South Korean and US responses: Within a week of its first confirmed case, South Korea’s disease control agency had summoned 20 private companies to the medical equivalent of a war-planning summit and told them to develop a test for the virus at lightning speed. A week after that, the first diagnostic test was approved and went into battle, identifying infected individuals who could then be quarantined to halt the advance of the disease. Some 357,896 tests later, the country has more or less won the coronavirus war. On Friday only 91 new cases were reported in a country of more than 50 million. The US response tells a different story. Two days after the first diagnosis in Washington state, Donald Trump went on air on CNBC and bragged: “We have it totally under control. It’s one person coming from China. It’s going to be just fine.” Not only was it not “fine,” but Trump’s rhetoric and complacency also made it worse. Instead of acknowledging those failures, however, Trump on Monday told Fox & Friends that he “[could not] imagine any president being able to do more than we’ve done.” During his news conference Sunday, Trump repeatedly brought up the Imperial College study that concluded as many as 2.2 million Americans would have died from coronavirus had the government not done anything. “A lot of people were saying, maybe we shouldn’t do anything [about the coronavirus]. Just ride it. Ride it like a cowboy. Ride that sucker right through. That’s where the 2.2 million [deaths] come in,” Trump said. “That is not acceptable.” TRUMP: "We heard people saying maybe we should not do anything [about the coronavirus]. Ride it like a cowboy. Ride that sucker right through. That is where the 2.2 million [deaths] come in ... That is not acceptable." pic.twitter.com/5XerXRltfa Trump seemed to be trying to draw a contrast between the scenario where the government literally did nothing and the path America is now on. With his reelection on the line, he set the stage to eventually proclaim that even 200,000 Americans deaths from the coronavirus would be proof that he saved lives. We’ll never know how many people could’ve been spared had Trump taken the coronavirus more seriously early on. And it’s true that this is a truly unprecedented situation that almost any administration may have struggled with. But we do know that almost everything Trump said and did about the outbreak from January until a couple of weeks ago — with the exception of restricting travel from China after the virus had already started spreading here in the United States — was a fiasco. Trump is trying to rewrite history. If 100,000 Americans die from the coronavirus, it would only be a successful outcome relative to the disastrous situation we now find ourselves in after weeks of wishful thinking and inaction from the president — a state of affairs that stands in contrast not only to the Obama administration’s handling of the H1N1 and the 2014 Ebola crises, but also to how governments like South Korea have responded to the current crisis. The news moves fast. To stay updated, follow Aaron Rupar on Twitter, and read more of Vox’s policy and politics coverage. President Donald Trump is attacking New York hospital officials over something that isn’t their fault — and is a problem he himself could help solve with the Defense Production Act. Speaking about the shortage of protective masks throughout the country at a press conference Sunday, Trump brought up New York hospitals’ dire need for the equipment during the coronavirus pandemic, which has infected over 140,000 Americans as of March 30. He suggested there was something strange about the rate at which providers are going through the masks.  “That statement was made that they’ve been delivering for years, 10 to 20,000 masks,” Trump said. “Okay, it’s a New York hospital. Very — it’s packed all the time. How do you go from 10 to 20, to 300,000? 10 to 20,000 masks to 300,000?” The answer is that there is a great need for masks at the moment. Beyond the surging number of patients hospitals are seeing, best practices also dictate those who interact with patients infected with Covid-19 dispose of all the personal protective equipment (PPE) they are wearing during that interaction — masks included.  Given the shortage of PPE, however, medical professionals have begun to disregard those practices, using sterilization techniques and other methods to extend the life of their gear. But even with those measures, there is not enough PPE to go around. But rather than empathize with that distressing scenario, Trump suggested Sunday that the shortage has some sinister origins: Something is going on, and you ought to look into it as reporters. Where are the masks going? Are they going out the back door? How do you go from 10,000 to 300,000? And we have that in a lot of different places. So, somebody should probably look into that, because I just don’t see, from a practical standpoint, how that’s possible to go from that to that. And we have that happening in numerous places — not to that extent; that was the highest number I’ve heard. To make sure he was understood, the president later underscored his claim by saying, “I don’t think it’s hoarding ... I think maybe it’s worse than hoarding.” The remarks drew criticism from health care workers who did not appreciate being accused of stealing as they risk their lives to treat people with a novel illness, including from the president of the Greater New York Hospital Association, Kenneth Raske, who said in a statement, “New York’s health care workers are treating exploding numbers of Covid-19 patients around the clock — willingly and without complaint. ... They deserve better than their president suggesting that PPE is ‘going out the back door’ of New York hospitals.” Trump’s campaign responded to this criticism by tweeting a video from a press conference New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo gave on March 6, in which he said, “There have been thefts of medical equipment and masks from hospitals, believe it or not — not just people taking a couple or three, I mean just actual thefts of those products.” President Trump is listening to health care professionals. Some have reported that people are stealing large numbers of masks and medical equipment from hospitals.Governor Andrew Cuomo asked the state police to investigate this in New York. pic.twitter.com/kDlFDCdiGg Cuomo went on to say he asked his state police to investigate the thefts, but also suggested it was opportunists who were stealing the equipment and reselling it, saying he’d directed officers to “look at places that are selling masks, medical equipment, protective wear, feeding the anxiety” — rather than to investigate hospital workers themselves.  It is true that some New York medical professionals have admitted — as a few did to Reuters’  Nick Brown and Joseph Ax — that they have resorted to stealing PPE. But not to resell, and not for any nefarious purpose: only so that they can keep working while protecting themselves and their patients.  “Masks disappear,” a nurse at New York’s Mount Sinai Hospital said. “We hide it all in drawers in front of the nurses’ station.” Sometimes, Brown and Ax report, the masks are taken from areas of the hospitals that treat other types of patients by those treating coronavirus patients. This petty theft, a doctor at one hospital told the reporters, is done because the only masks available when the story was published on March 27 were those that had been donated by the staff’s family members or that team leaders had been able to buy with their own money on the open market. This reporting would suggest there are some thefts, but hardly on the scale the president has suggested, and only what is needed to keep hospitals running given the federal government had not been able to provide them with badly needed supplies.   As Vox’s Alex Ward has explained in detail, presidents are empowered to direct manufacturing of needed equipment during crises through the Defense Production Act (DPA).  The law works by giving the federal government priority in ordering raw materials and in taking delivery of goods — even if others are “in line” ahead of the federal government, it gets to receive its orders first. The DPA also allows the government to ask companies to make certain things, like masks, and to give financial or equipment loans to help those companies fulfill those requests.  Trump has wavered on using the act, or has refused to “invoke the P”, as he puts it, in any sweeping way. He has thus far only used it to require General Motors to speed up production and reduce the cost of their offered ventilators, and has refused to use it to push any other firm to produce anything else.  Saturday, he teased invoking it again in order to get some “problem children” to start making needed supplies, but by Sunday said those “problem children,” which he refused to name, have “come into line. And, by the way, General Motors is doing a fantastic job. I don’t think we have to worry about General Motors now.”  One reason Trump has cited for his refusal to use the act is that it would turn the United States into a socialist country.  “We’re a country not based on nationalizing our business,” Trump said during a coronavirus press conference last week. “Call a person over in Venezuela; ask them how did nationalization of their businesses work out. Not too well. The concept of nationalizing our business is not a good concept.” Of course, as Ward has explained, the DPA doesn’t cause companies to be subsumed, or even partly owned, by the federal government — it just directs them to make items the country needs, like masks and ventilators.  All this makes the president’s strange accusations sad and ridiculous. The fact is, New York — and every place in the US currently struggling to treat high volumes of Covid-19 patients — needs goods that simply do not currently exist.  The scarcity of these materials has anecdotally led to some petty theft and overall led to criminals attempting to profit from a difficult situation. But spinning up conspiracy theories isn’t the way to solve the problem. Taking responsibility for the production of what citizens need to survive the coronavirus crisis is. And Trump can do so at any time.Katie Porter would like a word. The California Congress member has emerged as an influential voice on Capitol Hill amid the coronavirus crisis — she is leading the (thus far failed) charge to push for remote voting, and in a five-minute viral exchange she got the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to concede that the authority already exists for Covid-19 testing to be free. And she’s not stopping now, especially in the wake of the $2.2 trillion stimulus package Congress passed last week — which, by the way, she’s not thrilled with. Specifically, the $500 billion corporate bailout that has very few strings attached. “Maybe we should still be debating that, but they tried to package it all in together,” she said in an interview on Friday, the day the bill passed. “I’m sure it produces a great press conference. I’m not sure it produces the best results for the American people to have these behemoth bills.” Porter wasn’t in Washington to vote on the package — she was at home in California after a coronavirus scare of her own. Congress has now passed three major bills in response to the coronavirus, and it’s unclear, legislatively, what their next steps are as lawmakers head out of town for several weeks for recess and the political will to do more tapers. That’s where Congress’s oversight role kicks in, both in making sure the measures it’s passed are implemented and in keeping an eye on the executive branch, where much of the response power resides.  Porter, who has a knack for upping the temperature during committee hearings, is pushing for remote hearings so that work can continue even if from afar. She’s particularly worried about the corporate bailout money Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin will oversee and the possibility of Congress again being reactive instead of proactive in keeping an eye on it. “By the time the panel is set up and running, hundreds of billions of dollars could have gone to corporations with no engagement or oversight from this panel,” she said.  I spoke with the first-term Congress member last week about the good, bad, and the ugly of the stimulus package, the debate around remote hearings and voting, and what Congress can do, in terms of legislation and otherwise. Porter also pointed out that the CDC law that can pay for testing can cover treatment as well. Our conversation, edited for length and clarity, is below: So let’s talk about the stimulus package. Do you think Congress is doing enough, or is it too little?  Parts of this stimulus are really strong — the relief that we’re providing to small business, this is the first time that I’m aware of that Congress has ever provided grant assistance as opposed to loans. It’s a very strong package on that front. The extension of unemployment is strong. I think the $100 billion to hospitals and front-line providers is really good. There are some really good things in this bill. There are other things that are either missing or I’m concerned about. I think for providers, this still is a win. But for patients, there’s a missed opportunity. This bill does nothing to address the costs of treatment for those who are either uninsured or underinsured, or if you have high-deductible plans. This bill again affirms that testing is free, but the reality is a lot of people will hesitate to get tested, because they are concerned about the cost of treatment. It’s very important to help providers right now, but we shouldn’t be leaving patients behind. This bill also has, I think, on the good side, significant funds for FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency] disaster relief and for state and local government, coming out of the stabilization fund, but it has way more money for the nation’s largest corporations in this $500 billion slush fund that’s going to be administered by Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, so that’s a real concern for me. We obviously needed to pass a bill. We needed to make some of these changes urgently. With unemployment, we need urgently to help get people some extra money in their pockets, urgently to get hospitals and state and local governments these resources. But I’m concerned about some of the potential for corporate abuse in this bill with that $500 billion fund, unless there’s really strong oversight, because there are not any conditions. There are very few conditions put on it right now — a couple of conditions around stock buybacks, but there could be a lot more. There needs to be a lot more. Then there’s some real missed opportunities to help patients and workers here. We’re helping unemployed workers. We’ve got employment insurance, but what didn’t get included was requiring the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to issue an emergency regulation on what kind of protective equipment and public health practices we should be doing right now for all of our workers who are still at work, who are still on the job in grocery stores, transit drivers, gate agents in airports, TSA agents, all of those folks, including health care workers.  We hit some targets, and I think we failed to take aim at others. What else can Congress do? You’re saying there are these giant gaps, but also the Senate, at least, is going on recess now until April 20. Is this the end of what Congress does, at least for a month? One of the most important things we need to be doing right now is we need to be continuing to do oversight. I think from my role on the Financial Services Committee and on the Oversight Committee, I’ve shown that that oversight can really matter. It can really help give the American people confidence that government is working, is paying attention.  I’m incredibly frustrated with House leadership, on both sides of the aisle, for not being able to use these two months to come up with technology to allow us to have remote hearings. The fact that we’re not getting a chance to question Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar, or Seema Verma, who oversees Medicare and Medicaid, or the CDC. We need to have a plan, and we needed to build a plan starting back at the end of January, so that we could continue to do our oversight work, even if we’re unable, for public health reasons or personal health reasons, to travel right now. Have you made any leeway ... on the remote work for Congress? I know you’ve been pushing for that.  I’ve gotten nowhere, and it’s been incredibly frustrating.  We started pushing for that before we left, before the House adjourned last time. It was just a very firm no from House Speaker Nancy Pelosi. We’ve continued with 40, 50 members on our letter then, and it’s bipartisan. We then had a lot of bicameral support, with a lot of senators coming out in favor of remote voting. But again, to be clear, it’s leaders on both parties, because we had Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell who would not support remote voting. We sent another letter addressing the constitutional issues showing that there is no barrier in our Constitution to taking this action. Ultimately, there was a report produced by the Rules Committee that essentially concludes we don’t have time to figure this out before Friday, March 27, [when the House adjourned]. Well, okay, but that’s why we asked you to start thinking about it two weeks ago.  We can’t allow procrastination to be an excuse for failing to produce, and I would say this is equally true about the Trump administration. There was time to think about this. It was the last two weeks. When you wait until the last two days, then you’re going to be in trouble. I think there’s a lot of hindsight, a lot of questions about what we could have done. I’m in New York, and we’re also talking about this a lot here, too. I guess my question is going forward, at this point, should the American people just think, “Oh, Congress isn’t going to be doing much for a while”? Is there any impetus in Congress to do more right now, or is it stimulus, and then we see how it goes for the next month? No. We’re going to keep working. The only message I’ve heard very, very consistently is that we are going to continue working.  Congress does most of its most important work in the community that we represent, listening to them, seeing what’s going on, hearing their concerns, and then taking those concerns to Washington. But it doesn’t have to be literally to Washington; they can be communicated by phone. We can draft bills from here. We can review ideas from here, write letters from here. We could, if we got the technological capacity up and running, be doing remote hearings from here to be able to give the American people the answers they need.  I am definitely planning on continuing to come up with ideas and put ideas into motion. As soon as I get off the phone with you, I just talked to my chief of staff about some outreach we’re going to do to local labor to see what kind of personal protective equipment our grocery store workers are having. All of that work is going to continue.  It really isn’t about what you see on the House floor. There’s so much more that we do than the bills. But, to be clear, we can be working on the next bill, starting today, starting now, and I think my colleagues already are working on the next bill. One of the items of this bill that’s gotten attention is the checks that will go out to the public. Is everyone going to get them? They’re tied to tax returns — what about people who don’t file taxes? There will be the checks, the $1,200 per worker, phasing out, again, for people with incomes over $75,000. It’s not just for those who filed taxes. It applies broadly to Americans with Social Security numbers. What they’re going to be doing is using what are called 1099-Gs. That’s the form you get if you get government assistance, unemployment benefits, disability, those kinds of forms. The IRS issues you a 1099-G. We’re going to be using that data to identify people who may not have filed taxes last year, or the year before, whose incomes may be too low but are still eligible to get those checks. That process will take a little longer, though. It’s a little bit more complex to do, but those people are going to be getting help. The other thing that’s really frustrating to me is that this bill really illustrates is this effort to put everything into one huge bill, to create so many results and so much complexity, but the American people can’t understand what Congress is even doing. There are a lot of provisions in this bill that we could have voted on without even requiring everyone to travel back. You pass them on voice vote.  I don’t know that I have very many colleagues who do not support the small business piece of this. I think that has the support of the vast majority of Democrats and Republicans, if not unanimous support. The $100 billion to health care providers, I think that has the support of the vast majority of my colleagues. But by trying to put it all into this gigantic package, that has slowed down some of the easier, more obvious pieces that maybe we should have been doing a week ago or more. It makes it harder to hold out on things like the corporate bailout when it’s all tied together. That’s more controversial, and maybe we should still be debating that, but they tried to package it all in together. I’m sure it produces a great press conference. I’m not sure it produces the best results for the American people to have these behemoth bills. A lot of corporations are hurting, but are corporations ultimately a winner here? Do we risk rerunning 2008, where we bailed out companies without guardrails?  The guardrails in the bill with regard to the $500 billion corporate fund are insufficient, period.  While there are some accountability provisions, I wish they were stronger. Secretary Mnuchin can begin moving this money within hours of President Trump signing this bill into law. Yet the oversight provisions, which include the special inspector general and this oversight panel or oversight commission, the oversight commission doesn’t have to issue its first report until 30 days after the Treasury acts.  When people hear the word “oversight,” I think they envision something that is in real time, and creating more immediate transparency and an opportunity for the American public to engage. When I say to my kids, “I’ve asked you to clean your room. You didn’t do it. Now I’m going to stand here and I’m going to make sure you do it.” I think that’s what the American people think is happening, and that’s not necessarily going to happen with this. There is a grave risk. By the time the panel is set up and running, hundreds of billions of dollars could have gone to corporations with no engagement or oversight from this panel. Earlier this week, I was on five different calls with different committee chairs all designed to allow Democrats to ask questions about this CARES Act. I was the only one who asked a question about the $500 billion fund in six-plus hours of conversation. People asked tons of questions about the stimulus checks. They asked lots of questions about personal protective equipment. They asked lots of questions about testing, but I was a really lonely voice in terms of this oversight piece and what we were going to do to make it happen quickly. I encourage my colleagues to really be focusing in on this, because the American people need to know and deserve to know where this money’s going. We’re giving $100 billion to hospitals who are on the front line of these crises, and we’re giving five times that to corporations. By the way, the corporations can take that money that we give them and then leverage it to borrow trillions and trillions of dollars, which could ultimately lead them to be overindebted, and overleveraged, and require even more bailout.  It makes sense that this would be an area of focus for you because of your own background, right? It’s absolutely related to my background. It’s also related to how I fundamentally think about this job: Yes, it’s about delivering policies and passing legislation, but it’s also about oversight. The vast majority of the power to address this pandemic resides in the executive branch. That was true from the first case that happened in the United States, and it is still true today.  It’s really important that Congress passed this legislation and the bills before it, but there are still lots and lots of tools in the executive branch that they’re not picking up and using. The Defense Production Act doesn’t require an act of Congress. It requires the administration.  The bill exchange I had with Dr. Robert Redfield, the head of the CDC, about free testing, that was an existing law that he could have used. It’s incredibly frustrating to me to see the talking points about this bill come out. One of our talking points is this bill guarantees free testing. Well, first off, that was in the last bill we passed, too. What are we doing? Just repeating ourselves? Then, also, that’s already there in the law. We could do this by holding the administration’s feet to the fire, which as I showed takes literally five minutes. Literally, I had exactly five minutes to question.  By the way, that same law that I used to pressure Dr. Redfield on testing covers the cost of treatment. The bill we just passed does not provide for help in covering the costs of coronavirus treatment to those who are uninsured, underinsured, in high-deductible plans. A lot of my colleagues and I are frustrated about that. The response from leadership was, “Well, the Republicans wouldn’t agree to that.” Okay, but we have it in the law, so let’s do oversight to get the administration to use the tools that it has. Leadership focuses on the legislation, but the most democratic part of the House of Representatives isn’t really the voting, it’s the hearings, because the leadership controls what comes to the floor for a vote. The committee chairs were the ones who were involved in negotiating these bills, not the rank and file. The rank-and-file members, the freshmen like me, our biggest chance to influence the process comes from the fact that every member, regardless of seniority, gets five minutes. Not having remote hearings is losing that, and it’s losing that accountability over the executive branch piece of this. How much teeth does congressional oversight really have, though? Before that CDC hearing, I had sent a letter with my colleagues, Rosa DeLauro and Lauren Underwood, trying to get them to act, and there was communication with the CDC the night before the hearing. But what that hearing did was it told the American people, hey, this government can help you. Government should be helping you. It created a democratic groundswell of people saying, “Testing should be free.” It engaged Americans in telling their government what they want. That’s really the ultimate oversight here, coming from the American [people]. Those hearing moments, and then what happens after those hearing moments, as they get replayed on TV, as people reach out to our office, as they call their other congressperson and say, “Hey, I want you to push for free testing, too.” That’s really the ultimate kind of oversight. On the stimulus bill, there’s a need for there to be oversight over a lot of parts of it. I’m concerned about the Small Business Administration’s capacity to actually process this many loan applications and grant applications. I’m concerned about the question you asked about how is Treasury going to identify people who should get checks but maybe aren’t taxpayers, don’t have to file taxes because their incomes are too low. That’s the work that committees should be doing. There’s sort of that little oversight. With regard to the big bill, the oversight here is retrospective, and I think that’s a big mistake. After Mnuchin is given the money, then we’re going to write about it in a report. I think the American people are expecting a more active kind of oversight, rather than a study of what happened in the past. I think the more that we can try to take those oversight provisions and stop them from being history, and turn them into being engagements, the better off we’ll be.The country will not be open by Easter, President Donald Trump conceded on Sunday, as the White House extended its coronavirus social distancing guidelines until at least the end of April.  The decision came as the coronavirus statistics from the United States are increasingly grim: More than 140,00 cases nationwide and more than 2,500 deaths as of March 29. New York state alone has recorded more than 59,500 cases and more than 1,000 deaths as of March 29.  Dr. Anthony Fauci, the federal government’s top infectious disease specialist, said over the weekend that the US could see more than 100,000 deaths during the course of the pandemic. That seems to have gotten Trump’s attention.  
    Related
   “If we can hold that down, as we’re saying to 100,000, it’s a horrible number, maybe even less, but to 100,000, so we have between [100,000] and 200,000, we all together have done a very good job,” the president said at a press conference Sunday. And while April 30 might still be an ambitious end date to the coronavirus crisis, there’s at least something to look forward to next year: The new date for the Tokyo Olympics is now July 23, 2021. Here’s what you need to know today.  What began as “15 days to slow the spread” of coronavirus is now more than a month. On Sunday, President Trump said the federal government would extend its social distancing guidelines until April 30. Those guidelines recommend that Americans avoid nonessential travel and shopping trips; work from home when possible; stay home when sick; and stay away from bars, restaurants, and public gatherings of 10 or more people. “Nothing would be worse than declaring victory before the victory is won. That would be the greatest loss of all,” Trump said at the Sunday press conference. “The better you do, the faster this whole nightmare will end. Therefore, we will be extending our guidelines to April 30, to slow the spread.” 
    Related
   This is an about-face from Trump’s position last week, when the president expressed concerns about the economy being shut down for a prolonged period of time. He’d suggested that he wanted the country open by Easter, with “packed churches.” But on Sunday, Trump admitted that coronavirus deaths in the United States would likely peak in two weeks. Trump’s move is the right one, as public health experts say loosening up restrictions prematurely could lead to more deaths — and would still significantly damage the economy anyway. That hasn’t stopped Trump from feuding with New York over vital supplies, or bragging about the ratings his coronavirus briefings are getting.  But at least he’s committing to a much clearer timeline on how long Americans must practice social distancing, to protect themselves and others.  The United States now leads the world in reported coronavirus cases, and the death toll continues to rise. It is now well past 2,000, doubling in just two days. And the worst is yet to come.  Dr. Anthony Fauci, the government’s top infectious disease expert, says between 100,000 and 200,000 Americans may die from the coronavirus before the pandemic ends. The number of positive cases is likely to reach in the millions.  Fauci qualified this by saying all of these numbers are based on projections, which are always tough to model. “To make a projections when it’s such a moving target, you can so easily be wrong and mislead people,” Fauci said on CNN’s State of the Union. “What we do know ... is we have a serious problem in New York. We have a serious problem in New Orleans, and we’re going to be developing serious problems in other areas.” Dr. Anthony Fauci says there could potentially be between 100,000 to 200,000 deaths related to the coronavirus and millions of cases. “I just don’t think that we really need to make a projection when it’s such a moving target, that you could so easily be wrong,” he adds. #CNNSOTU pic.twitter.com/F2MOHY3xl4 Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House’s coronavirus response coordinator, also said on NBC’s Meet the Press that “no metro area” would be spared from the outbreak.  Fauci and Birx’s messaging was a sober contrast to some of Trump’s rhetoric from last week about the need to reopen the economy  — though, again, he has since extended those social distancing guidelines and looks to be deferring to his experts.  But the bottom line is this: The coronavirus crisis is far from over in the US.  Less than a week after the Tokyo Olympics were finally postponed, the organizers have announced a new official start date: Monday, July 23, 2021. They’ll wrap up on August 8, followed by the Paralympics, which will take place from August 24 until September 5. Though the dates have been changed, the branding — the XXXII Olympiad — is staying the same. “These new dates give the health authorities and all involved in the organization of the Games the maximum time to deal with the constantly changing landscape and the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic,” the International Olympic Committee (IOC) said in a statement. This one-year postponement seemed the mostly likely scenario, given the uncertainty around the coronavirus pandemic. Athletes under quarantine have been unable to train, and many qualifying competitions had already been postponed or canceled. This new window will ideally allow for both to happen — though it’s still not clear the coronavirus outbreak will be under control in a year’s time. Health care and other essential workers — doctors, nurses, physician assistants, technicians, grocery store workers, delivery people, you name it — are on the frontlines of the coronavirus crisis. Around the world, people have tried to show their appreciation for these workers by staging rounds of applause for them.  New York City did the same Friday night, with quarantined New Yorkers cheering and clapping from their balconies. It’s a few days old, but it’s pretty neat — and on Monday, we could all use a little pick-me-up.  On Friday night, New Yorkers took to their windows to applaud the health care workers, first responders, nurses, grocery store employees, truck drivers and many more who are stepping up to keep us safe during these unprecedented times. Thank you for all you do.   #ClapBecauseWeCare A post shared by  TODAY (@todayshow) on Mar 27, 2020 at 6:17pm PDT Just when I thought couldn’t love this city any more, New York came out tonight with cheers, applause and cowbells to thank healthcare workers & essential service providers ❤️ #clapbecausewecare pic.twitter.com/GkO7CdOS7u Thank you everyone- doctors, nurses, cleaning staff, mailman, grocery cashiers/restocking guys, restaurant staff, delivery guys, sanitation guys, first responders , MTA staff and our city and state government public servants out there - every day! Thank you! #ClapBecauseWeCare pic.twitter.com/EgzsiMtXmnThe failures of the United States’ initial response to the Covid-19 pandemic are already well established: Officials were too slow to recognize the threat of the disease and too slow to get diagnostic testing in place, and were ill prepared for the strain on our health care system.  But now, largely, Americans are doing something right: social distancing. The outright lockdowns of movement in some cities, as well as the less severe policies in place across the country, can slow the spread of the pandemic. And per at least one poll, people are, by and large, complying. Frustratingly, though, we must be patient in our isolation. The impacts of social distancing lag in case-count data and may take a few weeks to show up. Right now, there are infections out there, in the public, that were seeded long before these orders came into effect. It can take 10 days or more between when a person is infected and when they show symptoms — during which they can spread the virus to others.  The social distancing measures in place also aren’t airtight, so these infections will still seed some others. And just the cases that are already out there are expected to overrun hospitals.  It’s important to recognize it could be months until it's safe to lift social distancing restrictions. And the timeline might vary depending on where you live and when the virus strikes the hardest.  We need social distancing because it slows the spread of the disease to manageable levels. When that happens, we can move to a more sustainable mitigation strategy. But we’ll need to be careful. Just look at Hong Kong: After a month of strong control measures, including social distancing, cases are on the rise again, perhaps fueled by residents returning from abroad. 
    Related
   Know this: Ceaseless social distancing is not the only way to end this outbreak. And President Trump has painted a false choice between saving lives and saving the economy. We can find a balance. It’s just that the current orders of social distancing would need to be replaced by a comprehensive, extremely ambitious plan.  Epidemiologists and pandemic experts have been telling me about what it would take to end social distancing safely while fighting the spread of Covid-19. It isn’t easy. It will require an immense amount of leadership, coordination, and more sacrifice. It would take a sort of moonshot-level effort. But the tactics they outline aren’t unfamiliar. They’re textbook epidemiology — they just need to be scaled up to a level never really seen before.  “We really do need a Manhattan Project effort to get this stuff in place in really a two- or three-month period,” Jeremy Konyndyk, a senior policy fellow at the Center for Global Development, says.  We need social distancing across the country, and we need to keep it in place for some weeks, if not months, to buy time. If social distancing works, is enacted broadly, and is kept up, the number of new infections could decrease. It would give us a pause in the action, to potentially move on from social distancing to a more targeted pandemic strategy. Right now is the time to get plans ready so when that pause comes, we can make things right.  It’s understandable that some — maybe most — people want life to go back to normal already. Trump was anxious too, and until March 29 was saying he hoped to reopen the country by Easter, April 12.  That is “a nightmare scenario for epidemiologists and health care workers,” says Tara Smith, who studies emerging infectious diseases at Kent State University. “Imagine the mixing of populations that would happen at Easter if given the ‘all clear’ — people who may be carrying the virus without knowing it, hugging their loved ones, spending hours in close contact, and then everyone going back home afterward.” Luckily, Trump announced he would extend the federal social distancing guidelines until the end of April, at least. Although data show that all age groups and people without preexisting risk factors can fall critically ill from the disease, social distancing isn’t just for you. It crucially protects vulnerable people from the disease. Without it, they become vulnerable again. “If we all just went right back to how things were before, transmission would start again with the same intensity,” says Caitlin Rivers, a professor at Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. “It’s hard to experience so many restrictions, and so many hardships, and not feel like it’s not working. We need to recognize that we are doing the right things. You just have to be a little bit patient.”  It’s worth remembering why we’re in this situation. “The facts remain that we wasted a lot of time in terms of ramping up testing,” Saad Omer, director of the Yale Institute for Global Health, says. Testing in an outbreak provides two functions. One is to diagnose those who are sick. The other is surveillance: to see where the virus may be lurking, especially in cases where symptoms are mild or don’t manifest at all. The US has barely had enough testing capacity to test the sickest, let alone the capacity to do surveillance. Many doctors are telling patients with milder symptoms to just stay home and not get a test. “Social distancing is basically a sledgehammer,” Konyndyk, who has worked on past outbreaks, like Ebola, says. “You’re just stopping everything and hoping that in the process you will also slow transmission.” What we need to do, he says, is turn that sledgehammer of social distancing into a scalpel: widespread testing and contact tracing.  “The classic epidemiological approach to controlling disease is not to shut down society; it’s to target the people you know to have the disease and understand who they’re spreading it to,” Konyndyk says. “We can’t do that right now because we don’t have enough testing to know who has the disease.” 
    Related
   Not only do we need more testing, we also need testing that can be completed within minutes. “I would just be so happy if we had rapid diagnostics,” Saskia Popescu, a hospital epidemiologist in Phoenix, Arizona, says. “If you’ve ever been to an urgent care, when they do a flu test, in many cases it takes, like, 10 minutes. So if we can move to more of a rapid diagnostic where it’s a very, very quick turnaround, then we can make sure that those people go home and isolate themselves.” Currently, it can take days to get a diagnostic test back, and people may not be sure of what to do while they wait. These rapid tests are in the works: Recently, the FDA approved one that can give results in five minutes. But we’re going to need other kinds of testing, too, like serology — testing of people’s blood. That way, we can figure out who has already had the disease and is now immune and can safely return to be in contact with others in society. (Though scientists still need to do more work in determining what immunity looks like in any given person.) “The first piece of the moonshot is what we’re doing now, and will hopefully sustain, which is mass social distancing to do the sledgehammer to bring down the numbers,” Konyndyk says. “Once you bring down the numbers back to a manageable level,” he says, we need to go back to some textbook epidemiology.  Once there’s widespread testing, there needs to be a huge team of public health workers in place to trace the contacts of those who test positive. Everyone who tests positive or who has come into contact with someone who tests positive then needs to be put into quarantine or isolation, to not spread the virus any further. This is how authorities routinely beat outbreaks — even of incredibly infectious diseases like measles.  In South Korea, this work was aided by technology. Authorities used GPS data from people’s cellphones to figure out whom they may have been in contact with. The GPS data may prove more reliable than their memory. “We need to take a good look at what South Korea has done, and what people here are willing to accept as far as some of those intrusions of public health into their normal lives, their privacy,” Smith says.  Also helpful would be “a forecasting function for the ebb and flow of the disease at the community level,” Konyndyk says. The country already has tools to forecast flu outbreaks. We could adapt them for Covid-19. With such a forecasting tool, “we could see an upsurge in cases, and then dial the social distancing back up,” he says.  Even aided by technology, this work would require an enormous number of workers. “It’s very labor-intensive to find contacts of people who are sick,” Rivers says. “A part of what we do with contact tracing is to check on them every day to see if they have become sick.” Keeping some measures of social distancing in place might make this work easier, too: If people have fewer places to go, fewer crowds to assemble in, there will be fewer contacts to track. Konyndyk suggests this effort would take “tens of thousands of people, maybe more.”  So these are the questions our leaders need to be asking now: Who will do this work? Will it be the National Guard? Could we employ and train laid-off workers from the concurrent economic crisis to provide support? “I think there’s lots of options, but starting with the vision and the strategy is kind of where we should begin,” Rivers says.  
    Related
   And right now these experts don’t see that vision coming from the federal government. By and large, the response to this outbreak is in the hands of state and local leaders. But “you want the federal government laying out, ‘Here’s the strategy, here’s the path,’ and getting the ball rolling,” Konyndyk says.  And even in this aggressive test-and-trace scenario, there could be many disruptions to our lives. It could mean a lot of people still under quarantine orders. Some level of general social distancing might also still need to be put in place. Perhaps, for example, schools could reopen but adults would still be encouraged to telework, and sporting events and other mass gatherings would be canceled. It’s not the case that everything could go back to normal. It’s the case that we could let some things go back to normal. Social distancing is a treatment we’d need to gently taper off. (We’d also need to be vigilant about the possibility we still could import new cases from abroad.) Researchers at the Imperial College of London suggested another way to taper off in a paper: pulsing. That is, we can relax social distancing policies when hospitals seem to be managing cases, and ramp them up when ICU beds are in short supply. But this isn’t ideal. “How would life look like if went on, and then we went off, and then on, and off, I think it would be hard to envision how life would unfold under that scenario,” Rivers says. This likely wouldn’t end the pandemic, but it would spread its pain over a longer period.  In any case, we’ll probably have to take a step-wise approach off social distancing and see how we can best balance it with returning to some small slice of normal life. In time, we’ll learn how to achieve that balance. For now — and because there are just so many things about this virus that are still not known — we need to stay put.  Still, you might be wondering: How long might this all take?  Rivers, along with former FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb and other co-authors, released a plan Sunday on how to ease off social distancing. The plan has several phases: Phase one is slowing the spread through social distancing, while ramping up testing capacity, and ensuring hospitals have the equipment they need. In phase two, social distancing restrictions ease while public health workers continue to track and isolate cases.  But it will take a lot to get there. The authors argue these decisions need to be made on a region-by-region basis: Phase two should only begin after 14 days of sustained case reductions in an area, and only after testing capacity is dramatically increased. Even in phase two, they stress, if cases go up again, we’ll need to go back to severe social distancing. Before there’s a vaccine, we’ll have to remain vigilant.  The ultimate goal in stopping a pandemic is a safe and effective vaccine that can prevent people from getting the virus. The good news is that these are already being tested. The bad news is that it could take a year or more to find one that is safe and effective. “Honestly, I think the vaccine in 12 to 18 months is a moonshot,” Smith says. In the meantime, we might be able to find a treatment sooner. The World Health Organization is currently facilitating a multinational clinical trial, testing medicines — and combinations of medicines — to treat Covid-19. If scientists do discover “drugs that decrease the ICU time by 20 to 30 percent, that would add up,” Omer says, and ease the strain on hospitals. But even those drugs wouldn’t necessarily stop the outbreak.  
    Related
   “It would be really great, I think, for saving lives,” Rivers says. “But you wouldn’t really expect it to slow transmission at all.” People could still be getting sick and spreading the virus. And we would need to be vigilant, and patient, in this scenario, too. Even if we reduce the risk of severe disease and death, if we increase the number of cases, more people can still get sick and die.  The scientists I spoke to for this piece all understand the extreme weight and burden of social distancing. “The economic concerns have real impact on health,” Omer says. “It’s not that we’re being cavalier about this stuff.” The economic ramifications of the pandemic are only adding to existing mental health strain. The scientists want it to end too.  But a balance is needed. “I don’t want to turn the economy back on in a way that just nukes our hospital system, and that’s what we would do right now” if we abruptly ended social distancing, Konyndyk says.  So whatever time we buy with social distancing we need to use wisely. We need to ramp up production of critical hospital supplies; we need to establish supply chains for the massive testing regime that will be needed. We need to train more people to help. And we can do this. “Amazon was born in this country, UPS was created in this country, and we are teaching supply chain logistics in every management school, and we can’t have a stable supply chain of personal protective equipment?” Omer says. Clearly, we can — and need to — do better.  But all this requires leadership. President Trump has been hesitant to use the full power of his office to make sure companies produce the needed supplies. If anything, he frequently uses his office to downplay the harms of the virus and hawk unproven cures. Right now, we still have a chance to reduce the amount of harm this virus could cause. How? “Let’s figure out testing, let’s get enough PPE [personal protective equipment] for first responders,” Smith says. “Let’s get enough swabs. Let’s buy more ventilators, build more ventilators — to have this second chance at not messing things up.”  We need to do this as a nation. While the pandemic is now hitting the New York region the hardest, it will in time likely hit other cities hard as well.  The greatest power we have right now is patience. It’s not easy to muster in the face of such sacrifice. And at times, it can feel ineffective. But where you find it, drink it in. Currently, it’s likely our best chance at a cure.  Vox’s Brian Resnick (safely) meets Sean in a Washington, DC park to deliver the Five Commandments of social distancing.  Subscribe to Today, Explained wherever you get your podcasts, including: Apple Podcasts, Google Podcasts, Spotify and Stitcher. Right now, the biggest worry is whether the medical system has enough ventilators and protective equipment to treat patients with Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus. But another troubling shortage is on the horizon: doctors, nurses, and other health care personnel. As patient demand continues to ramp up nationwide and more health care workers are unable to show up for work, either because they contract the virus or because they have to self-quarantine, doctor shortages are a real possibility, Cynthia Cox, vice president of the Kaiser Family Foundation, told Vox.  “There is a very real risk of provider shortages in areas hit hard by the coronavirus, both because of increased patient numbers and doctors and nurses falling ill from or being exposed to the virus,” she said.  One solution is to make it easier to bring in doctors and nurses from abroad. The US health system already relies heavily on immigrants, who make up 17 percent of all health care workers and more than one in four doctors. At a time when coronavirus is pushing states like Washington and New York to the limits of their resources, those health care workers will be all the more critical.  New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo has already waived licensing requirements to allow graduates of foreign medical schools to contribute to the coronavirus response anticipating such a shortage, but no other state has so far followed suit.  But even before the current crisis, the immigration system made it difficult for foreign doctors and nurses to work in the US and go where they’re needed. Doctors may face long wait times for green cards, restrictions on where they can settle geographically, and limitations on where they can practice while they’re waiting for a green card. Nurses, meanwhile, also face long waits for green cards and can’t come to the US under temporary skilled worker visas. The implications of a shortage would be devastating, both to overworked personnel and to the patients for whom receiving medical attention could be a life-or-death matter. But it’s a problem that more immigration could easily fix — if the Trump administration were willing.  The top priority for most hospitals right now is the shortage of personal protective equipment, including masks, N95 respirators, and gowns. Medical workers have resorted to reusing masks and eye shields when treating multiple patients, against the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s recommendations, increasing the risk that they become infected — and, as Caroline Hopkins writes for Vox, that they spread it to their patients.  The protective equipment shortage could make it even more difficult to treat an incoming wave of patients with the virus.  Dozens of health workers have already tested positive for the virus, and hundreds of others have been exposed, forcing them to self-quarantine. Two doctors who were treating patients on the front lines in New York and Washington have been hospitalized. And preliminary research from China suggests that infected health care workers tend to have more serious cases of the virus than expected for people of their age.  Certain state and local governments have already started to prepare for the possibility of a personnel shortage. New York City has asked former medical workers to come out of retirement to deal with the increased patient load. So has the Veterans Affairs medical system, which already has about 44,000 medical vacancies that it has been struggling to fill amid a competitive market — a problem that can usually be solved by immigration. Washington, DC, has even started recruiting volunteers without any medical training.  The US was projected to face a shortage of doctors before the pandemic hit: The Association of American Medical Colleges had estimated that it could reach 46,900 to 121,900 physicians by 2032. And in rural areas, particularly in states such as Mississippi and Arkansas, doctors were already in short supply. Many states are also projected to face significant nursing shortages in the coming years, particularly California and Texas.  The pandemic could potentially exacerbate these shortages.  “We can limp along during normal times,” Greg Siskind, an immigration attorney who represents doctors, told Vox. “But it’s already been a huge problem in rural areas. And right now, coronavirus has been seen to be impacting the urban areas, but eventually it’s going to work its way to the rural communities.” Every year, roughly 4,000 foreign doctors come to the US on J-1 visas for residencies at teaching hospitals, which rely on Medicare funding to pay their salaries. While most of those doctors would like to stay in the country after they complete their training, only about 1,500 of them are ultimately able to do so, Siskind said.  That’s because they are required to return to their home countries for at least two years upon completing their training in order to be eligible for an H-1B skilled worker visa or a green card, unless they can obtain one of a few sought-after waivers.  The Conrad 30 program, for example, offers waivers to 30 doctors in every state who agree to practice where the government has designated a health care worker shortage, mostly in rural areas. Doctors can also obtain waivers through the Department of Health and Human Services by conducting medical research in field that is of interest to the agency or by practicing in underserved areas designated by the agency.  But even for those who are able to obtain waivers, the process of applying for a green card can involve long waits, particularly for immigrants from India, which produces about a third of all foreign doctors training in the US. That’s because there are per-country caps on the number of green cards issued annually, and India gets the same number of green cards as any other country despite being among the most populous nations in the world. (A bill that would have eliminated these country caps recently failed in the Senate.)  “Indian doctors are looking at a 20-year wait for a green card,” Siskind said. “When these Indian doctors are finishing up their training in the US, they’re seeing that they can get a green card in Australia, Canada, and UK immediately and a fast-track to citizenship. It’s a mess.”  Not only does the current system make it exceedingly difficult for doctors to stay in the US long-term, but it also severely restricts where in the US they can go. Under the terms of both J-1 and H-1B visas, doctors can’t just change jobs. They usually can’t even moonlight at another hospital and take on extra hours. At a time when doctors need flexibility to go to areas of the country that are hard-hit by coronavirus, that’s a huge obstacle.  Most nurses come to the US on green cards, but they, too, face long wait times due to the same backlogs that are hurting Indian doctors. Many of them also come from India, as well as the Philippines, where they get the receive the same kind of training that they would in the US.  There are also a significant number of nurses who can come to the US from Mexico and Canada through trade agreements. In Detroit, for example, about 1,000 nurses cross the border daily from Windsor, Canada, Siskind said. But that mostly helps border towns — it has little bearing on the personnel shortage in other parts of the US.  Immigration attorneys are currently working on devising ways that the federal government could make it easier for foreign doctors and nurses to contribute to the coronavirus response and make up for hospital staffing shortages without relying on Congress to pass legislation.  There’s been a push for years to get the roughly 16,000 to 18,000 J-1 visa holders who are in various stages of the medical training in the US at any one time to be able to take on extra hours at hospitals that are outside their teaching program. The State Department, which helps administer that visa program, hasn’t allowed for that yet, but the agency could reconsider its policies.  HHS could also declare the entire country as a current shortage area of medical personnel, which would allow foreign doctors to practice wherever there are hot spots of infection.  Doctors also face administrative hurdles that the administration could eliminate: for example, it could allow doctors to fast-track their visa applications for the duration of the crisis and temporarily eliminate the requirement that they go to consulates abroad, which are shut down amid the pandemic, to pick up their visas.  Preexisting legislative proposals might also deserve a closer look as the US scrambles for more medical personnel. Sen. Amy Klobuchar, for example, has been pushing for legislation that would expand the Conrad 30 program since at least 2013. That bill, which has been endorsed by the American Medical Association, would allow more than 30 waivers to be granted to physicians in a given state dependent on need.  Siskind said he’s hoping that bill could be expanded to allow doctors to apply for Temporary Protected Status that would allow them to work wherever they’re needed for 18 months amid the coronavirus crisis. TPS is currently only granted to citizens of countries suffering from various forms of disasters, be it a hurricane or civil war. But there’s nothing precluding the program from applying to people in a certain occupation — in this case, the medical profession, Siskind said.  To deal with the nursing shortage, meanwhile, US Citizenship and Immigration Services — the agency that administers work visas — could change its policies to give nurses more pathways to come to the US. It could allow nurses with bachelor’s degrees to apply for H-1B skilled worker visas, which aren’t currently available to them.  Immigrant advocates at America’s Voice have also proposed that the agency grant them parole status, based on humanitarian or public interest reasons, that could allow them to live and work in the US temporarily.  These are immediate measures that the federal could take to make foreign medical workers more accessible — but under President Donald Trump, who has pursued policies designed to keep immigrants out during his time in office, it’s not clear whether the current crisis will be enough to spur him to action.  Very few people have the breadth and depth of experience with infectious disease — scientific, activist, and personal — as Gregg Gonsalves.  Gonsalves was a leading member of ACT UP, a militant activist group that played a vital role in waking the American public up to the HIV/AIDS epidemic of the 1980s and ‘90s. An HIV-positive gay man, he spent the following decades doing research and activism surrounding AIDS and other infectious diseases. He has a PhD from Yale University in epidemiology, where he’s currently a professor studying microbial diseases, and received a MacArthur fellowship (more commonly known as a Genius Grant) in 2018. So when we spoke on the phone this week and he sounded the alarm about the Trump administration’s push to relax coronavirus quarantine measures as soon as possible, I got a little panicked. “The rest of the United States [will be like] New York two weeks from now,” he told me. “You can’t relax social distancing now without risking a conflagration.” In his mind, Trump’s handling of the crisis feels like an eerie callback to the 1980s, when then-President Ronald Reagan chose to ignore early warnings about the threat from HIV/AIDS. About 450,000 Americans died of the disease between 1981 and 2000, a toll that Gonsalves believes can (at least in part) be blamed on Reagan’s “malign neglect” of the outbreak. For Gonsalves, the Trump response to coronavirus feels like the same thing all over again  — just with the time frame sped way up. We talked about his view of the science and policy surrounding coronavirus as well as the lessons the AIDS epidemic has for Americans today — not just when it comes to policy, but also what ordinary people can do to make things better despite being stuck at home.  A transcript of our conversation follows, edited for length and clarity. What do you think happens in a world where certain parts of the country start ending restrictions on business activity?  You don’t have to be an epidemiologist to figure that one out: viruses don’t respect state borders. If we’re going to sort of be able to contain this outbreak, it’s going to have to be a national commitment.  Ron DeSantis, governor of Florida, and the governor of Mississippi have said they’re not willing to do these sorts of stay-at-home orders; I think the governor of Mississippi overruled local officials on this. We already have a patchwork of responses to the epidemic. New York City may be the epicenter of the epidemic right now, but there’s only a matter of time until it spreads to Miami and Tupelo and New Orleans — which [currently] has some of the largest increases in cases. Everybody said we were in Italy two weeks ago. The rest of the United States is New York two weeks from now.  Unless we figure out how to sort of move toward what the New York Times called for the other day — a national lockdown of sorts — we’re just going to see cases increase and emergency rooms and ICUs across the country be filled to capacity. People no longer being in the hospital, but in morgues around the country — and people unable to bury their dead for risk of infection to themselves. It’s pretty clear what the choices are for us. This isn’t controversial among epidemiologists, right? I want to be clear. No.  We’re operating off of public health history and what’s happened with other epidemics. We did this SARS, we did this with H1N1, we’ve done this with Ebola. It’s not different now except that this is a more widespread pandemic than we’ve seen before. The models differ a little bit, but their implication is the same: Without extreme social distancing, we’re going to unleash the virus and potentially collapse our health systems. You can’t relax social distancing now without risking a conflagration. Is there a world in which the United States could adopt an approach more like what you see in South Korea — where you have much more widespread testing and you have contact tracing of people who are infected? Or are we past the point of no return on that kind of approach? Could’ve, should’ve, would’ve.  Three months ago, we could have used the WHO tests instead of developing a CDC test that was so defective that they had to start from scratch. If we were going to do scale-up of testing and contact tracing to contain the epidemic, it would have started happening in late December, early January. We’re now in a case where the virus is everywhere.  We do need to scale-up testing. We need to know how far and how deep this epidemic goes across the US, but we’re in the mitigation phase. There’s hundreds of thousands — if not millions — infected with the virus already. So we’re trying to sort of keep it from spreading further.  Testing is going to be an important part of that. Not just virus testing, but antibody testing to see who has been exposed and is no longer carrying the disease. Testing and contact tracing are going to be really important, but we’re at the end of March and we don’t have the testing capacity in the United States even to test everyone who comes into our hospitals to find out if they have Covid-19.  [The South Korea approach] is going to be our eventual way out. But we’re not there. We’re not even close. You mentioned historical pandemics and epidemics earlier. I want to talk about the early HIV/AIDS outbreak, the most deadly recent outbreak in the US prior to Covid-19 — and a topic on which you’re a leading expert.  What lessons should we be taking from our own experience with a deadly epidemic in our country? We have two cases of sort of botched responses to epidemics out of neglect and incompetence. In the 1980s, we had a president who ignored the AIDS epidemic for most of his presidency — didn’t mention AIDS until the seventh year of his two-year term. That malign neglect, which for President Reagan was probably based on homophobia and racism and fear of people who use drugs, is a very specific kind of malevolence and incompetence. Here, I don’t understand it. It’s also a denial and neglect and an abdication of responsibility. But in this case, we’re not talking about what America back then thought of as disposable people. We’re talking about the entire population of the United States, particularly our elderly and our sick.  One of the things that I think we learned from the AIDS epidemic is that people also grasp at straws. People were mixing concoctions to their bathtubs and trying blood thinners to try to fight HIV before we had the drugs to stop them.  You see the same thing being played out in front of your TV screen every night, with the president touting hydroxychloroquine or as some other sort of cure that he’s sure works. Maybe we’ll get lucky and we’ll find a treatment for coronavirus. But we also may have to wait several years before we’re able to contain it medically with a treatment or a vaccine. I think the other thing to learn — and I think we’re seeing it now as we did then — is that communities pulled together. My old doctor, Joe Sonnabend, wrote a pamphlet in the early ‘80s called How to Have Sex in an Epidemic. You weren’t getting advice from the CDC, so the community banded together to sort of invent safer sex. We think of safer sex as something that’s always been with us, but it came out of a community mobilization against the virus.  Today, everybody’s staying at home to keep themselves safe, but they also don’t want to infect their neighbors and their parents and their children. This is an enormous act of solidarity and generosity, and it reminds me of the sort of community spirit that we had back in the LGBT community.  People are trying to figure out how to help their neighbors in a way that we don’t think about very much in our daily lives. It’s actually wonderful to see how people are banding together city to city, town to town across the US to keep each other safe. It’s remarkable considering what’s going on at White House, this sort of daily performance that we see on the evening news from the president. Down at the grassroots, down at the block basis, neighborhood basis, people are doing heroic things. That “malign neglect” from the Reagan administration — can you be specific about what specific policies or failures led to and contributed to the hundreds of thousands of deaths back then? The AIDS epidemic arrived in the United States in 1981. It was pretty clear within a year or so that this is no sort of nothing that was going to blow over. It was spreading all around the country and all around the world.  It took six years for a national response to be initiated from the executive branch. It was an absolute abdication of any sort of executive authority. President Reagan was not on TV in 1981 and 1982; there was actual radio silence for almost the entire two terms of the president who watched this happen. There were tens of thousands of people who were sick and dead by the time he left office.  And what’s interesting is that it continued into George Bush senior’s administration, where we had tens of thousands more people who died. The Ryan White Care Act and other sorts of legislation that was crafted from the Democratic Congress got signed later on. We botched the scale of the coronavirus testing. We botched the scale-up of HIV prevention in the early years when we had a few cases in a couple of our cities and we could have stopped this disease in our tracks — if there was national leadership and national mobilization. I don’t know how old you are, but I remember when the Legionnaires were in Philadelphia in that hotel [in 1976] and this new disease struck the hotel. The CDC was mobilized, there was a national mobilization over a few cases of a new unknown disease. A few years later, we had people screaming from the rooftops that [AIDS] is going to be a disaster — but nobody really was listening. Does it feel like déjà vu when it comes to coronavirus — but sped up? The déjà vu is in a bumbling idiot of a president who is totally unprepared to do what’s necessary to deal with the health and wellbeing of the people he serves.  The mobilization outside of DC among ordinary people is completely different than what we saw in the early days of the [AIDS] epidemic. Just think of our heroic doctors and nurses in our hospitals, the academic community, the community of faith leaders. If we had this kind of mobilization back then, we would’ve been in much better shape, but we didn’t. We did among ourselves in the gay community, but we were a small group of people. Today, it’s been a national mobilization — except at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.  Once again, we have a president who failed to take an epidemic seriously and ended up getting many of the people who he’s supposed to represent killed.  I don’t know if this is even the right way to think about this. But is there any way, based on your experiences with ACT UP, to describe what coronavirus activism might look like?  Is it the social solidarity that you’re describing earlier, in terms of community mobilization, or is there some kind of more directly political way to put pressure on the White House or governors or other authorities to do more? Weeks ago, old ACT UP alums and younger AIDS activists were all over this. Our antennae go up when we see infectious diseases get ignored and I think we were all talking about this in December and January. There’s a Covid-19 activist group in New York City that’s doing everything from diagnostics to social media.  My friend Amy Kapczynski at Yale Law School and I, who both have AIDS activist backgrounds, have written for the Boston Review talking about the political challenges of this pandemic. A lot of old AIDS activists have been central to this and it’s no coincidence that Debbie Birx and Tony Fauci are two old AIDS hands as well.  There’s been a very big mobilization around AIDS activists around the coronavirus epidemic, but the big challenge is that you can’t do what we used to do, which is to storm the NIH and seize control of the FDA — because you can’t leave your house. That’s why I’m asking. A lot of people are sitting at home feeling impotent and scared; what would you tell them if somebody reading our interview thinks, “I would like to do something about this the way these AIDS activists are organizing”? What kinds of avenues for activism are there? Well first of all, they’re doing something really, really important right now. As I said, social distancing is an act of solidarity and generosity, it’s just tremendous. Think of the millions of people who are going out — maybe to go grocery shopping once a week. The other thing is that we got to get more people to join the cause, and it means reaching young people who seem to feel a little bit immune to this. I was on the phone with a group of Harvard students earlier this week where they’re developing sort of a campaign called #WhyIStayHome. The idea is trying to reach out to people through social media; we have a lot more resources in terms of getting the word out about what needs to be done that is sort of proliferating across the country.  I just retweeted an editorial from a West Virginia newspaper, which was simply brilliant saying, “We need to take this seriously” — really challenging what’s coming out of the White House in Charleston, West Virginia. We’re able to amplify that, an editorial in which you would mostly consider a red state. Lots of stuff is happening. I think organizers from the Women’s March — I was on a call with them yesterday — are trying to figure out ways to keep the pressure on Congress, on governors, and local officials. Remember that the president can make whatever pronouncements he wants on social distancing, but it’s going to be the governors and mayors who decide what happens.  So a lot of activism can happen very locally, where you may know your mayor. You may know the member of your city council. You may be able to get on the phone with them and make change: It doesn’t matter if you reach Mike Pence or Donald Trump, if you’re reaching the governor of Rhode Island or the mayor of Hartford and saying, as a citizen of your state, as a citizen of your city, I expect you to hold the line and keep us together by keeping us apart. You’ve tweeted, on #WhyIStayAtHome, that you’re someone who has HIV yourself. What does it feel like to move around in the world under these circumstances, especially as someone who’s —  I’ve seen your picture — doesn’t look like the kind of older person we associate with being especially threatened by the coronavirus. Well, one is I’m not immunocompromised. I’ve been on antiretroviral therapy since 1996. I’m more than about 15 years with a stable HIV infection. That’s great, that’s just great. But there are other people who have HIV who may be more compromised than I am. As I said in that tweet, my mother is 86 years old and I have a sister-in-law who has cancer. I worry about them more than I worry about myself. I’m no spring chicken; I’m 57 years old, so my chances, in general, are higher than yours of developing symptomatic disease.  But moving around in the world, I feel less physical risk than I do the weight of the history of the AIDS epidemic. Another epidemic being mishandled; it’s PTSD of a certain sort where you’re like, we’re really doing this again? I shouldn’t go to Las Vegas because I’m pretty unlucky, and I think a lot of us are feeling that way. We have resilience and an ability to respond and to organize and know what to do. But we also know what it’s like to watch your loved ones die, these waves of dying friends, over the course of a month and years. I don’t know anybody personally who’s died of coronavirus yet. But I’m waiting for the shoe to drop and it’s terrifying. Is it going to be my partner? Is it going to be any of my close work colleagues? Going to be somebody in my family? And that feeling is very reminiscent of the days of the AIDS epidemic because you were going to funeral after funeral.  I know the hospital here [in New Haven] is close to capacity in terms of its ICU beds. New York hospitals are the same way. And so the chances that you’re going to be able to get access to care with each passing day is going to become more remote because there’s not going to be enough beds to put you in. I’m petrified that I’m going to get a call from somebody who says I have it or somebody saying, he has it or she has it and they’re in the ICU or something like that. Advice is almost the wrong word here, but do you have any guidance for helping people think through these emotions, that kind of fear, given your experience with an epidemic where people you knew were getting infected and dying? A member of ACT UP, an art critic named Douglas Crimp, wrote a big essay called “Mourning and Militancy.” He talked about how, in ACT UP, we were all sort of militant: fighting, and so didn’t really want to talk about how we felt about what was going on. He said that it was important to acknowledge the anger and the grief and the sadness you’re feeling, while sort of maintaining an outward focus, a commitment to making things better. As Vito Russo, another member of ACT UP said, “We have to be alive when this is all over to make sure it never happens again.” So I think the advice for people is to understand what’s going on emotionally for you, the grief you’re feeling, the sadness you’re feeling —  even if it’s not for somebody who’s gotten sick and died, but for the sort of life that we once all had in January or February. That life is over for the foreseeable future.  And it’s hard to believe they we’re all going to be the same after these next few months. Take it in, understand it. I’m not a touchy-feely person, but I think it means talking to people you care about either face to face if you’re in the same house with them, or online or whatever. But don’t stew in it; say “there’s something I can do.” I can protect my community by social distancing. Whatever skills I have, I can contribute — I can write for a newspaper or I have power as a citizen in my city or my state. I can influence my elected officials on the phone or by email or other means of communication. ... Face your emotions and your grief and then make sure that we can get through this together, with the fewest deaths and the least damage.The Great Recession in 2008 was supposed to be a once-in-a-generation economic calamity. Just 12 years later, the United States is facing a far more daunting crisis caused by the coronavirus pandemic. “This one is scarier to me, because we knew how to handle the other one,” former Rep. Barney Frank, a lawmaker who was central to crafting the 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street reform legislation, told Vox. “The other one was a result of human error and bad decisions. This is different.” Among the central differences between the two is the unprecedented public health emergency that’s taking place now. Thus far, Congress has rushed to authorize a $2 trillion economic relief package, but interviews with several lawmakers and advisers who worked on the 2008 stimulus bills suggest the US government may have to think even bigger in the future — depending on how long the coronavirus outbreak lasts.  The size of the stimulus that’s been approved so far already dwarfs that of bills passed during the financial crisis. Taken together — the $700 billion Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 that passed under President George W. Bush (also known as bailing out the banks) and the $840 billion American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 that passed under President Barack Obama — had a combined cost of around $1.5 trillion.  
    Related
   “Everything this time is happening bigger and faster,” said Jason Furman, a former economic adviser to Obama, who played a key role in designing the administration’s response to the financial crisis.  For one thing, Republican lawmakers who obstructed Obama’s recovery efforts at the start of his term have shown no qualms in working with a Republican president to pass trillions in stimulus.  In 2009, “there was no Republican help,” former Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel, who served as Obama’s chief of staff from 2009 to 2010, told Vox. “Mitch McConnell said forget it.” A chart comparing the number of unemployment claims filed this week to those filed during the financial crisis also underscores a stark contrast in need. In the week ending March 21, unemployment claims nationally surged to 3.28 million, nearly quadruple the 665,000 claims seen in 2009 at the height of the recession.  “The economic impact was greater in 2008 but it was concentrated on the financial area,” said Frank. This time around, the impact on workers across industries has been evident from the get-go.  And there are other roadblocks to recovery that didn’t exist in 2008. Until America’s Covid-19 outbreak is under control, there will be lingering uncertainty about how to address the resulting economic fallout. What workers, businesses, and states need most at this time is liquidity — and a lot of it — experts told Vox.  “The problems [between 2008 and now] are fundamentally different,” said Cecilia Rouse, a former member of Obama’s Council of Economic Advisers and current dean of Princeton’s Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs. “Right now, we don’t need stimulus. We need the opposite of stimulus. We want the economy to stop, in many ways. Right now, we need liquidity. We need people to be able to pay bills.” Congress’s recent efforts are an attempt to meet these needs, and they include legislation that Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer has dubbed the “largest rescue package in American history.” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi has acknowledged, however, that another bill could well be required. Multiple former Obama administration officials told Vox that thinking big is absolutely warranted. The most recent package includes a wide range of policies such as direct payments to most adults who make $75,000 or less, $367 billion in loans for small businesses, and $500 billion in aid to affected corporations. The biggest challenge, ultimately, might be getting the money out the door and into the hands of workers fast enough.  “Someone’s got to be riding hard on them, full stop,” Emanuel told Vox. “The resources don’t automatically go out, we’ve got to get them out.” While the 2008 bailout was about getting money to industries and workers to encourage spending, this year’s package is all about giving people enough money to tide them over while the economy is effectively on hold. As people stay home and social distance to combat the spread of Covid-19, nonessential businesses have been forced to shutter, resulting in mass layoffs that could affect as many as 6 million workers solely in March. The main purpose of a stimulus package is to guarantee these workers (as well as companies, hospitals, and states) the financial support they need as the US attempts to slow the spread of the coronavirus.  The public health component makes this crisis unique — and challenging.  In 2008 and 2009, the core issue that fiscal stimulus was trying to address was a dearth of consumer spending and jobs, prompted heavily by the fallout caused by banks’ handling of mortgage-backed securities. The problem at hand is much tougher to rein in because it requires more than just economic tools; the US must first get the coronavirus under control before it can reopen the economy.   “What we’re seeing is caused by something external to the economy,” Gus Faucher, chief economist of PNC Financial Services Group, told USA Today.  Because of this, the government response has had some key differences. Right now, one of its big focuses is making sure people have the money they need to weather this crisis while businesses are closed.  For example, as part of the latest stimulus package, the government is sending residents a notable influx of direct money: most adults who make $75,000 or less will receive a $1,200 one-time payment, a significant increase from the $250 checks some individuals received in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis. The allocation of these direct payments this time around is much more tangible for people than the payroll tax cut many received in the Obama years, which typically showed up in their rebates later.  In 2009, “the voters had seen a big bill passed, they didn’t see much impact right away. We didn’t have immediate rebates,” recalled John Lawrence, who then served as House Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s chief of staff. Ensuring this immediate liquidity for all workers is key, said Rouse. “If we can get the liquidity right, so that people feel comfortable and are willing to stay home, it will mean that we can recover from this much faster,” she emphasized. “The longer that we drag on, the more that we’re going to be in this for the long haul with these different kinds of stimuli.” The expansion of unemployment insurance, too, is also unprecedented. While the Recovery Act in 2009 included more generous unemployment insurance, it only expanded support by $25 per week for recipients. In the latest legislation, Congress is expanding the benefit by $600 per week for up to four months.  
    Related
   The current deal captures, in part, the magnitude of the crisis so far, but uncertainty around how long this outbreak could last means more aid could well be needed. At this point, experts aren’t sure just how much support the economy will require in the long term. The emphasis on stopping the spread of disease is ultimately central to preventing even more economic fallout in the months to come.  “If you did too little on health today, you would have to do much more down the line, and that will hurt the economy even more,” Furman said.  The politics of these stimulus measures are different this time around, too. The negotiations in the 2008 bank bailout were much more contentious as the optics of a bank bailout were politically unpopular with both parties. House Democrats didn’t want to be seen giving a handout to misbehaving banks, and Republicans didn’t like the massive increase in government spending. It took multiple rounds of votes and Bush’s treasury secretary literally getting down on one knee in front of Pelosi before the bailout was passed in 2008. “I don’t think people blame the airlines or blame restaurants for having caused the problem,” Lawrence told Vox. “That relieves the political problems we faced; there was a great hesitation to do that.” The biggest challenge, once again, could be getting this money directly to the people, businesses, and municipalities grappling with the fallout from coronavirus. Former Obama chief of staff Emanuel spearheaded the administration’s 2008 stimulus negotiations with lawmakers. Once Congress passed billions in stimulus money, Emanuel remembered talking to officials in the White House about the need to move the money as fast as possible.  “I said look, all the departments are going to treat it like appropriations, and you can’t move it at an appropriations pace,” he said. “This cannot work at normal government speed.” As Furman explained, one of the difficulties Obama administration officials encountered in 2009 was how to get money to small businesses that needed it during the Great Recession. “This time, that’s going to be needed in a huge way,” Furman added.  Additionally, questions have already emerged about how eligible adults are able to access the direct payments that are part of the stimulus. As Vox’s Dylan Matthews has written, because these payments are based on past tax returns, if the government doesn’t have an individual’s direct deposit information, that person could see delays in receiving this money. “One lesson we learned in the last crisis was that things that sound great on paper aren’t always easy to actually put in place,” said former Obama economic adviser Karen Dynan. “In this case, the challenges are going to be with getting the checks out and — especially — changing and massively scaling up the way we do small business loans.”  Making sure that the necessary support gets to states — many of which have “balanced budget” laws that strictly limit spending — is also as vital this time as it was in 2008.  “If states do have to recover by cutting back, then that will induce its own bit of headwind and it might induce its own kind of recession,” said Rouse.  The $500 billion that’s been allocated for corporations also prompts some echoes of the past. While one of the main critiques of the previous 2008 bailout was that not enough strings were attached to the funds banks received, the relief offered in 2020 includes slightly more limitations on stock buybacks and worker layoffs.  Many Democrats who were involved in the 2008/2009 stimulus negotiations said it could have been much larger if not for frequent Republican protests about adding to the national deficit. “In 2009, the response was too little and that was because the Republicans were being obstructive,” said Frank. Indeed, some former Obama cabinet officials noted the February 2009 stimulus program should have been more bipartisan; it was something Bush realized was inevitable and tried to get Republican lawmakers to support in his last few weeks in office. 
    Related
   As a candidate for president, Obama had worked with Bush to convince Democratic lawmakers to support the bank bailout. Once he was inaugurated in 2009, Obama made an effort to work with congressional Republicans — to no avail, his former director of legislative affairs Phil Schiliro told Vox. On one of the president’s early trips to the Capitol to meet with Republicans, the tone was set. “On his way there — to the Capitol — the House Republican leadership sent out a message to their members telling them to vote against the bill,” Schiliro remembered, adding, “I don’t think President Trump has ever met with the House and Senate Democratic caucus.” Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, a vocal opponent of the Recovery Act in 2009, has not shied away from the steep price tag of the 2020 stimulus legislation. “This is not an ordinary situation and so it requires extraordinary measures,” McConnell said in response to recent questions about the cost of the bill. McConnell was among 38 Senate Republicans who voted against the 2009 stimulus.  With Trump as president, GOP opposition to excessive government spending and raising the deficit has largely disappeared. Well before the coronavirus pandemic, Republicans raised the national deficit with their 2017 tax cut bill.   “As someone who was right in the middle of this last time around, it’s amazing to watch Republican senators not care about the deficit or increased spending,” said Jim Manley, a former longtime spokesman for then-Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid. “We had to fight tooth and nail to get the stimulus bill done.” Democrats involved in the 2009 effort see a pretty clear explanation for the turnaround.  “There’s a Republican president, so the Republicans cooperate,” Frank said plainly.  Still, the $2 trillion package is a rare show of bipartisanship from two bitterly polarized parties. “More important in some ways was not that they did it, but how they did it,” former Sen. Chris Dodd, a co-author of the 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street reform bill, told Vox. For now, experts aren’t sure just how much money could still be needed to combat the effects of the pandemic, and Pelosi and other lawmakers have left the door open for more stimulus packages.  “We need to recognize that this is not a one-time effort,” Rouse said. “We’re going to need to be thinking about the immediate term, the medium term, and the longer run.”President Donald Trump has spent many of his recent daily coronavirus press conferences bragging about his administration’s response, promoting unproven treatments, attacking the press, and suggesting he planned to stop recommending social distancing.  Sunday, he continued to do the first three things, but took a new and more sober stance on the timeline for ending social distancing — announcing plans to extend his support for the measure by one month. “Nothing would be worse than declaring victory before the victory is won. That would be the greatest loss of all,” Trump said. “The better you do, the faster this whole nightmare will end. Therefore, we will be extending our guidelines to April 30, to slow the spread.” TRUMP: "The modeling estimates that the peak in death rate is likely to hit in 2 weeks. I will say it again. The peak, the highest point of death rates, remember this, is likely to hit in 2 weeks ... Therefore, we will be extending our guidelines to April 30, to slow the spread." pic.twitter.com/fPhtgmTchl Originally, the Trump administration released a 15-day plan asking Americans to take more aggressive steps than had previously been recommended to limit the transmission of Covid-19.  It wasn’t clear what would happen when that 15-day period ended, as it is set to do this week. Last week, the president suggested several times he would stop recommending that Americans stay home, telling Fox News hosts during a federal coronavirus task force town hall Tuesday that he hoped to have social distancing guidelines relaxed by Easter in order to “have packed churches all over our country.” The president also suggested that he was concerned about social distancing’s effect on the economy. As Vox’s Matt Yglesias has explained, the US Department of Labor announced there were a record number of unemployment insurance claims filed in the week ending March 21 — 3.3 million. The stock market has seen dramatic falls, with the Dow Jones dropping below where it was when Trump took office, erasing three years of gains. Concerns over these indicators had Trump telling the public, “America will again, and soon, be open for business. ... A lot sooner than three or four months that somebody was suggesting. A lot sooner. We cannot let the cure be worse than the problem itself.” But on Sunday, his top public health experts — Dr. Anthony Fauci and Dr. Deborah Birx — appeared on television, with Fauci saying that models suggest 100,000 to 200,000 Americans could die of Covid-19. Birx said officials believe there “won’t be any city spared from the virus.” She urged states and cities to take mitigation steps similar to those in New York, where despite social distancing, school closures, and other measures, hospitals are at risk of being overwhelmed by the nearly 60,000 confirmed cases as of March 28.  Trump said this explained his new approach, saying he asked both doctors what would happen “if we did nothing, just rode it out.” “I think we got our most accurate study today or certainly most comprehensive,” the president said. “Think of the number, potentially 2.2 million people [would die] if we did nothing, if we didn’t do the distancing, if we didn’t do all the things we’re doing.” Trump added, “And so if we can hold that down, as we’re saying to 100,000, it’s a horrible number, maybe even less, but to 100,000, so we have between [100,000] and 200,000, we all together have done a very good job.” Thus far, the Trump administration hasn’t been lauded for the job it has done. And arguably, had it taken stronger steps earlier, far fewer than 100,000 people would be at risk of death from Covid-19. But on some points, the president appears to now be listening to his public health experts.  Sunday’s press conference was far from perfect, however. He still made unfounded claims, like when he claimed the coronavirus means “people are going to be dying all over the place from drug addiction” and “tremendous suicides.” He pushed a conspiracy theory about disappearing masks, and attacked several reporters for asking him about his past statements by reading him his direct quotes, calling one quote a “lie.” Trump also continued to set deadlines for a return to normal business experts have argued is unrealistic, saying, “We can expect that by June 1, we will be well on our way to recovery.” Experts have said it may take until September 2021 — but Fauci, Birx, and epidemiologists have said social distancing keeps the rate of infection down, meaning expanding the federal government’s social distancing guidelines is a wise idea, and a good response to the current situation.    President Donald Trump boasted about the ratings of his daily live news conferences on the coronavirus Sunday, and suggested that the large viewer numbers — rather than the misleading remarks he has made during them — are fueling discussions in the media about ending the practice of broadcasting them live and unfiltered. “Because the ‘Ratings’ of my News Conferences etc. are so high, ‘Bachelor finale, Monday Night Football type numbers’ according to the [New York Times], the Lamestream Media is going CRAZY,” Trump tweeted Sunday afternoon. Because the “Ratings” of my News Conferences etc. are so high, “Bachelor finale, Monday Night Football type numbers” according to the @nytimes, the Lamestream Media is going CRAZY. “Trump is reaching too many people, we must stop him.” said one lunatic. See you at 5:00 P.M.! Trump followed that tweet with four others that quoted a New York Times story that referred to the president’s daily briefings as “a ratings hit.” But while Trump is framing the debate about whether his briefings should be broadcast live as stemming from envy or political ambition in the liberal press, in reality the arguments from columnists and staffers at CNN and MSNBC have centered on Trump showering the public with dangerous misinformation and spreading false narratives about the state of the coronavirus pandemic.  As the Times reports, Trump’s daily press briefings on coronavirus are attracting huge numbers: 8.5 million on cable news, which is, in fact, “roughly the viewership of the season finale of ‘The Bachelor.’” (That doesn’t include viewers on broadcast television or online streaming, which likely increases that figure by millions more, if not tens of millions more, people who are watching the briefings.) Trump sees this as an opportunity to brag — a sign of his popularity and, theoretically, public trust in his leadership in a time of crisis.  The problem with that line of thinking is that many people are not tuning into the briefings because of Trump, but because they want to keep up-to-date on coronavirus and the US’s policies on it. During these briefings it’s not just Trump who speaks, but his coronavirus task force, which includes top public health officials like Dr. Anthony Fauci, the widely respected director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and Dr. Deborah Birx, a physician noted for her work combating HIV/AIDS and the White House’s coronavirus response coordinator.  The coronavirus pandemic has caused an economic crisis, policy chaos at home and abroad, and widespread physical and mental suffering around the globe — it would make sense that millions are tuning in to hear the nation’s top officials provide clear, accurate information on the latest.  It’s precisely the critical importance of conveying accurate information in a time of crisis that has spurred many political analysts and members of the press to argue that it’s dangerous to present Trump’s words to the public through live broadcasts. Trump has made dozens of false claims during the briefings, including overstating the potential of hydroxychloroquine as a treatment for Covid-19, and falsely saying that anyone who wants to be tested for coronavirus infections can be. Vox’s Matt Yglesias has argued against live broadcasts of Trump’s briefings on the basis that they’re “ersatz rallies held for political purposes rather than bona fide attempts to inform the public:” It’s never good when politicians lie. But in a public health crisis, you have a lot of people seeking accurate information and some of those people turn toward the news media. It’s important for those of us working in the media to try to provide that information. When a person turns on the television and sees the president of the United States giving inaccurately optimistic assessments of the progress of testing, vaccine research, and treatment it encourages people to be less careful with their hand-washing and social distancing than they otherwise might be. That costs lives. And while offering a post-briefing “fact check” is better than nothing, it doesn’t really undo the harm of showing it in the first place. What’s called for is news coverage that incorporates the fact that the president is saying things, but that focuses on providing people with accurate information — there are not currently Covid-19 treatments that scale very well, leaving hospitals at risk of becoming overwhelmed and unable to offer ventilators to everyone who needs them, making it morally urgent to do everything possible to slow the spread of the virus until a more comprehensive testing regime can be put in place. When prominent members of the media and news anchors like MSNBC host Rachel Maddow have argued against television networks broadcasting Trump’s briefings, it’s not because they’re upset that someone they oppose politically is getting a lot of attention. It’s that the politician involved is exploiting that attention for political gain and hurting the public with falsehoods.  The coronavirus has already led to massive layoffs. Unemployment claims for the week of March 16 shot up to a record 3.3 million. For context, the highest this number ever got during the Great Recession is 661,000. The coronavirus spike is about five times that number. This raises an obvious question: Are enough of these people going to get unemployment insurance? And if they do, will they get enough money? On March 18, Congress passed a bill offering $1 billion to states to help them sort through the historic surge in unemployment. But they realized this was nowhere near enough. Now, Trump has signed into law the third legislative package responding to the coronavirus crisis, authorizing a big boost to unemployment insurance benefits. The centerpiece of the new plan is a $600-per-week across-the-board increase in unemployment benefits for all workers claiming them. Given that as of January the average UI check was $385 per week, this is a massive increase. The package promises these higher benefits for UI recipients for up to four months (Democrats successfully pressured Republicans to increase the number from three). The bill creates a new program, Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, for self-employed and contract workers who are typically ineligible for UI. It provides some incentives for work-sharing, a program whereby the government covers a portion of lost wages for workers whose hours have been reduced. The intention here is to incentivize companies to retain workers by just employing them for less time. 
    Related
   For all the increase in assistance, UI experts agree that the package could be improved. “It does some things well,” Arindrajit Dube, a professor of economics at UMass Amherst, who released an influential plan for boosting UI benefits during the recession, says, but “some/many workers seeing hours cuts will fall through the cracks.” Chad Stone, chief economist at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities and an expert on UI policy, told me, “In the grand scheme of things it’s pretty good, albeit temporary.” The biggest problem is that its most important provision, the $600-a-week bump in benefits, expires at the end of June. And it doesn’t include some modernization measures that policymakers have wanted for years. But it does represent a big temporary investment in helping people put out of work. Unemployment insurance has existed in its modern form since it was created in 1935 as part of the same legislation that created Social Security. It’s funded by state employment taxes and by the Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA), which is 6 percent of the first $7,000 in each employee’s wages. States can levy their own taxes that can replace up to 5.4 percent of the 6 percent tax. Because it’s administered by the states, the generosity of UI varies widely. Most states offer up to 26 weeks of UI, but some offer far less: Florida and North Carolina offer only 12 weeks currently, though their generosity increases with the state unemployment rate. Missouri offers only 13 weeks per statute, a number that doesn’t increase with the unemployment rate. There’s similarly large variance in the recipiency rate — the share of unemployed people getting UI — and benefit size as a share of the average weekly wage. The highest recipiency rate is in Massachusetts, where 57 percent of unemployed people get benefits. In North Carolina, only 10 percent do. In Hawaii, the top state for generosity, the average benefit is 55 percent of the average weekly wage; in the worst state, DC, it’s only 21 percent of wages (Arizona and Louisiana aren’t far off with 23 percent). There are many causes of this variance, but a lot of it boils down to state-level policy: Most of the low-receipt, low-benefit states are choosing to be stingy. For years, experts at think tanks and elsewhere have been urging Congress to modernize the unemployment system, to bring more consistency to state systems, replace a higher share of pre-unemployment income so unemployed people can pay rent and afford groceries, and expand benefits to contractors and self-employed people. The most notable plan came out in 2016 from the Center for American Progress, the Georgetown Center on Poverty and Inequality, and the National Employment Law Project. The Obama administration proposed UI modernization in its final year, but the plan went nowhere. In 2008, Congress initiated a program called the Emergency Unemployment Compensation (EUC) program, similar to a program that existed during the early 1990s recession. At its peak, it offered up to 53 additional weeks of benefits in addition to standard coverage in states with especially high unemployment, funded by the federal government, for a total of up to 79 weeks in states with 26 weeks of unemployment coverage. There is also a permanent UI program called “Extended Benefits” that can kick in automatically, but it’s half-funded by states, which reduces its viability during downturns when states are cash-strapped, and its “triggers” for availability were less likely to kick in than EUC’s. Even at its peak, it only offered 20 extra weeks of benefits for certain states with especially high unemployment, pushing the total number of eligible weeks up to 99, on top of EUC and normal benefits. The new stimulus law’s most notable provision adds $600 per week on top on every unemployment check for four months. That’s a massive expansion in the generosity of the program; Dube says it “would increase benefits for eligible workers more than raising the replacement rate from say 40 to 85 percent,” and would push the replacement rate beyond 100 percent for workers with weekly wages below $600. But there are other important provisions as well. It expands unemployment insurance to contractors, the self-employed, and nonprofit/government employees who are not typically eligible. It revives the “Emergency Unemployment Compensation” program but only for 13 additional weeks on top of states’ standard; that limits the total benefit period for states with 26 week programs to 39 weeks, compared with 99 weeks maximum during the Great Recession. Many states have a one-week “waiting period,” meaning that the first week a person is unemployed, they get no benefits. This bill pushes states to waive that period by paying the full cost of that week of benefits. States with work-sharing programs (also called “short-term compensation”) have their full work-sharing costs covered by the federal government; those interested in setting up such a program get assistance in paying startup costs, and a 50 percent match in expenses. Dube is particularly nervous about these work-sharing and hours-reduction provisions. Suppose someone loses half their hours and applies for unemployment. “It’s not clear if someone loses half their hours and claims partial benefits, will they just get their inadequate 50 percent replacement rate for lost hours or also a pro-rated enhanced benefit?” he notes. Beyond that, both Dube and Stone expressed concern about the short duration of the program. The $600 bump expires as the end of July, and it’s far from clear that the crisis will be over then. Dube additionally notes that beyond the $600, there’s little for people with too little earnings to normally qualify for unemployment insurance. He suggested that the program should lower the minimum earnings requirement to allow poorer workers, or workers without much earnings history like people graduating from high school or college in 2020, to benefit. In the future, we don’t need to scramble to pass emergency legislation like this. Sen. Michael Bennet (D-CO), who has also been helping lead the effort to make unrestricted cash part of the economic response to the coronavirus, has a new plan to boost unemployment insurance to make it more effectively cover workers both in emergencies like now and afterward, that he shared exclusively with Vox. The plan was already in the works well before the coronavirus crisis, as part of a package of “automatic stabilizers” that Bennet was developing.  The plan would vastly ramp up “extended benefits,” the long-neglected part of the UI system mentioned above that is already part of the unemployment insurance law, and adds emergency money during large downturns. Bennet’s plan would fully federally fund the program, taking pressure off states, and trigger extended benefits automatically when the unemployment rate spikes, or if it ever exceeds 6.5 percent. It would set benefits to 100 percent replace wages, up to a maximum level (set at 80 percent of the median wage) during public health emergencies like the coronavirus. It would also impose stricter rules on states to make them push minimum weeks of coverage up to 26 weeks, and minimum replacement rates up to 75 to 80 percent. That could increase generosity even in already generous states; recall that Hawaii, at the top of the list, only replaces 55 percent of the median wage. The bill, consistent with Bennet’s interest in a child allowance, would mandate at least $25 per week as a dependent’s allowance for children of unemployed workers. The bill also includes sub-minimum wage workers like those with disabilities or tipped workers, by allowing people with lower incomes to qualify for UI. It also changes rules so that benefits are based on more recent wages, increasing the program’s generosity and making it more attractive. Finally, the bill would make leaving one’s job for compelling family reasons an eligible cause for unemployment insurance. Right now it can be difficult to get benefits if one hasn’t been explicitly fired. There are a lot of details to the Bennet bill, and proposals for automatic benefits are likely to evolve considerably as this crisis continues. But it answers an important need: for legislation that expands UI even when Congress is too busy arguing to do so. If Bennet’s bill had been passed last year, say, we arguably wouldn’t have needed an emergency intervention by Congress in response to the coronavirus. Sign up for the Future Perfect newsletter and we’ll send you a roundup of ideas and solutions for tackling the world’s biggest challenges — and how to get better at doing good. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. Future Perfect is funded in part by individual contributions, grants, and sponsorships. Learn more here. Days after President Donald Trump signed into law a $2 trillion coronavirus relief package, House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy has begun to argue additional congressional aid may not be necessary — even as House Speaker Nancy Pelosi says she is eyeing “phase four” of coronavirus relief. “I’m not sure you need a fourth package,” McCarthy said on Fox News’ Sunday Morning Futures. Congress has passed three relief bills in the last several weeks. “What concerns me is when I listen to Nancy Pelosi talk about a fourth package now, it’s because she did not get out of things that she really wanted,” he said, noting certain elements Democrats asked for had held up the CARES Act, which was signed into law on Friday. Those elements included support for “sanctuary cities” and the “Green New Deal,” McCarthy said. He was likely referring to certain stipulations that Democrats had attempted to insert into the bill, such as tying relief for airline companies to increased environmental standards, increasing relief for solar and wind energy, and setting aside $350 million in aid for refugees, something which remained in the final bill.  Earlier in the week, McCarthy also expressed concern that the CARES (or Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security) Act would be followed up too soon with additional federal dollars, before lawmakers were able to fully understand the effects of its latest aid package. “We have now just passed what would be the third bill,” he said on Fox News Thursday morning. “Let’s let this work ... We have now given the resources to make and solve this problem. We don’t need to be crafting another bill right now.” The CARES Act, the biggest federal bailout in history, provides direct cash payments to most American adults, expands unemployment insurance, and creates loan funds for small businesses and large industries. It passed the House by a voice vote and the Senate 96-0, before being approved by Trump. Despite the strong bipartisan showing at the final vote, the days leading up to the bill’s package were marked by turmoil, as Democrats and Republicans sparred over certain provisions, including oversight measures for a $500 billion loan program for large businesses. And since its passage, some critics, especially on the left, have said that it does not go far enough, excluding some workers from cash payments, for example, and leaving accountability measures easily overstepped.  That may be part of why, at a press conference on Thursday, before that bill had officially passed, Pelosi said an additional package that goes beyond “mitigation” of the crisis was in order. “There’s so many things we didn’t get in any of these bills yet in the way that we need to,” she said. Democrats have pushed for long-term expansions of emergency food assistance, paid leave programs — one such program, passed in mid-March, exists only through the state of emergency — and worker protections. Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer also signaled he would consider an additional aid package. “We should be willing, able to come back in a bipartisan way and do more if we need it, and I believe we’ll probably have to do that, one way or another,” he told Politico on Thursday. McCarthy disagreed Thursday, saying, “I wouldn’t be so quick to say you have to write something else ... Whatever decision we have to make going forward, let’s do it with knowledge, let’s do it with experience of what’s on the ground at that moment in time.” But many of his fellow Republicans disagree. Republican Sen. Roy Blunt, for example said, Friday, “The minute we’re done with phase three, we’ll start talking about phase four because all of us know that phase three can’t have included everything that needs to be included.” When senators will return to negotiate a fourth package is not clear; the Senate is out of session until at least April 20, and the House is also on a recess. However, McConnell has said he’s instructed senators to be ready to return earlier if needed: “If circumstances require the Senate to return for a vote sooner than April 20, we will provide at least 24 hours notice,” the majority leader said. In spite of the three relief packages that have already passed, the American economy — and the individual workers, investors, and businesses that compose it — are still deeply hurt by the spread of Covid-19. Amid a spiraling stock market, one of the starkest illustrations of the economic freefall sparked by this virus’s spread — a freefall that could lead to a recession, if not an outright depression, economists say — is the most recent jobless numbers: 3.3 million Americans filed for unemployment last week, shattering a 1982 record of about 700,000 filings in one week. This has wide-reaching effects, as Vox’s Matthew Yglesias and Christina Animashaun report: it means small businesses, temporarily shut down to encourage social distancing, may permanently shutter; in the meantime, workers are losing jobs and curtailing spending. “The surge is so unprecedented in historical terms that it essentially defies efforts to forecast where the economy may go in the future,” Yglesias writes.  And while some disagreements remain between Republicans and Democrats over Congress’s role in providing economic assistance — such as whether the latest bill should be the first part of an ongoing disaster relief effort or phase one of an ongoing stimulus program — there is bipartisan support for congressional economic aid. GOP Sen. Mitt Romney, for example, was a strong supporter of sending checks to individual Americans, and House Democrats proposed giving the airline industry a $40 billion bailout. While the scale of the economic disaster is still unknown and hard to foretell — early predictions of unemployment filings were off by about a million, for example — quelling one wave at this stage won’t necessarily prevent more from rippling out, as Vox’s Ezra Klein has written, citing Moody’s Analytics chief economist Mark Zandi. Following the sudden stop of public life in the last few weeks, as people stop eating out, seeking child care, traveling, buying homes and cars, and engaging in the thousand activities that spark a healthy economy, more waves follow, Klein writes: When the economy stops, and GDP plummets, workers lose their jobs. That, Zandi said, is wave two, and “it’s coming very quickly.” It may already be here. Initial data suggests we’re seeing a spike in unemployment claims so massive it makes the worst week of the Great Recession essentially disappear on a chart. .... The third wave, according to Zandi, will be “all these folks who’ve seen their nest egg wiped out. They thought they were set for retirement and they’re not. They’ll go into panic mode.” The shattered stock market will be a disaster for those in or near retirement. They’re watching wealth they worked their whole lives to build crumble in the space of weeks. They won’t purchase that new car, buy that new house, plan that vacation — and unlike some of the direct economic stoppages, which will lift when the virus eases, their reticence to spend will slow economic growth long after the direct crisis ends. Wave four, Zandi continues, will see businesses cut investment. Corporations that intended to open a new factory won’t; media organizations thinking of launching new publications will hold back; businesses that meant to upgrade their office space in 2021 will decide they’re fine where they are. Another engine of economic growth dead. As a result, relief money that does not take into account long-term ramifications — the money people will need in their pockets to keep stocking up on food, for example, during ever-increasing stay-at-home orders — will not be enough to mitigate even the worst effects of this disaster, much less spark ongoing energy back into the economy. The crafting of any additional relief legislation will shed some light on which direction lawmakers intend to go: whether they seek to stanch economic bleeding or proactively try to prevent more wounds from opening.The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has announced a freeze on enforcing environmental regulations due to the coronavirus pandemic that is so sweeping in scope that critics have begun to argue the change is actually a bid to advance the Trump administration’s long-standing deregulatory agenda. Under the new directive, announced Thursday, the EPA says it does “not expect to seek penalties for violations of routine compliance monitoring, integrity testing, sampling, laboratory analysis, training, and reporting or certification obligations in situations where the EPA agrees that Covid-19 was the cause of the noncompliance.”  The rule, which will remain in place indefinitely, means factories, power plants, and other major polluters have tremendous discretion in deciding whether or not they think the coronavirus will prevent them from meeting legal requirements on air and water pollution and hazardous waste management. The EPA will not be fining companies for violating certain requirements on limiting pollution during this time. Many experts and environmental advocates say that while case-by-case relaxation of rules for companies that are short-staffed due to the pandemic makes sense, the expansiveness of the EPA’s directive appears both unprecedented and designed to give a green light to polluters to act recklessly at a time when air quality is acutely important for public health.  Cynthia Giles, the EPA’s former head of enforcement during the Obama administration, said she was “not aware of any instance when EPA ever relinquished this fundamental authority as it does in this memo,” according to the Guardian.  She described the EPA’s suspension as “an abdication of EPA’s responsibility to protect the public.”  “This EPA statement is essentially a nationwide waiver of environmental rules for the indefinite future,” she said in a statement to the Hill. “It tells companies across the country that they will not face enforcement even if they emit unlawful air and water pollution in violation of environmental laws, so long as they claim that those failures are in some way ‘caused’ by the virus pandemic. And it allows them an out on monitoring too, so we may never know how bad the violating pollution was.” Prior to the suspension, trade associations like the American Petroleum Institute were lobbying the EPA for more lax enforcement, like regulations on repairing leaky equipment. But the EPA’s move goes well beyond such targeted requests.  The EPA has pushed back against criticism, describing the policy as a temporary measure for dealing with the crisis, and told HuffPost on Friday that the agency retains “all our authorities and will exercise them appropriately.” But Giles and other environmental advocates don’t buy that characterization. “Incredibly, the EPA statement does not even reserve EPA’s right to act in the event of an imminent threat to public health,” she told the Hill. In the 24 hours after the EPA freeze, the Trump administration rolled out a host of other policies that suggested it’s exploiting the pandemic to more broadly deregulate the private sector and advance controversial policies surrounding both public health and the environment that might otherwise garner more scrutiny. HuffPost’s Alexander Kaufman and Chris D’Angelo have a good rundown: Hours [after the EPA announcement], the U.S. Department of Agriculture confirmed a waiver allowing a private company to take over inspection duties at a Tyson Foods beef slaughterhouse. By Friday morning, news broke that the administration was close to finalizing its plan to roll back Obama-era rules raising fuel-economy standards on new vehicles, resuming a fight that delighted the oil industry, divided automakers and revealed a double standard on states’ rights as the White House sought to bring California to its knees. And by midday, the administration published a final review of a proposed 211-mile road that would cut through a portion of Alaska’s Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve and open up an area rich in copper, zinc and other minerals.  Taken together, a broader pattern of privatization and deregulation is evident. And it’s consistent with the history of the Trump administration, which has taken steps to slash government regulations, privatize public programs and goods, and degrade the environment.  In recent months Trump and his administration have challenged EPA water rules, created a loophole to allow pipelines to avoid environmental review, and axed Obama’s signature climate change policy, the Clean Power Plan. Overall, a New York Times analysis has found that the Trump administration has rolled back nearly 100 environmental rules and regulations. Its actions have made it easier to drill in wildlife refuges, slashed regulations meant to combat overfishing, and narrowed safety assessment requirements for potentially toxic chemicals.  Environmental advocates see the broad EPA freeze on enforcing rules as fitting that pattern, as a coalition of activists wrote in a letter to the EPA sent by the Environmental Integrity Project: While it may be reasonable in limited circumstances for EPA to exercise discretion on a case-by-case basis to temporarily refrain from enforcement where the pandemic has clearly undermined a facility’s ability to comply ... It is not clear why refineries, chemical plants, and other facilities that continue to operate and keep their employees on the production line will no longer have the staff or time they need to comply with environmental laws. Trump has appeared to be playing favorites with politicians, voting blocs and certain industries when it comes to responding to the coronavirus crisis. Allowing the EPA to relax its policing certainly seems to fit that same mold. As Covid-19 continues its spread across the United States, health care providers across the country face a staggering lack of necessary equipment, with shortages in a federal stockpile of emergency medical equipment contributing to unequal distribution among affected communities, according to new reporting by the Washington Post. While it is still not clear which communities are receiving more or less federal support — or how distribution decisions are made — the Post article suggests, anecdotally, that federal allocation of medical resources do not seem to target density of need, but rather the political makeup of affected communities.  According to the Post, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) requested $2 billion for emergency medical equipment in early February, but received just $500 million weeks later. Now, under strain, that federal stockpile — comprised of ventilators, masks, drugs, and other medical equipment — is insufficient to meet the needs of hospitals who feel underresourced due to the spread of the novel coronavirus. Communities have been begging, sometimes literally, for increased access to medical equipment, including ventilators and respirators, and basic personal protective equipment (PPE), like masks, gloves, and gowns, for weeks. But distribution from the federal government has appeared to be uneven. In Massachusetts, where there are major outbreaks around Boston and in the state’s western Berkshire County, only 17 percent of requested resources have been shipped out. Maine has received about 5 percent of what it has requested, and Colorado has received about a day’s worth of supplies, according to the Post. On Sunday, Michigan’s Gov. Gretchen Whitmer appeared on Meet the Press to say that her state received 112,000 masks from the national stockpile Saturday, but that even with that number, “We’re going to be in dire straits again in a matter of days.” President Donald Trump has been critical of Whitmer’s requests for aid, and her criticism of his administration’s response, referring to her as “the woman in Michigan.” By contrast, he has praised Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida, where Trump resides, and that state has received multiple shipments of everything it has requested, and is awaiting another, according to FEMA data. It is not clear why this disparity exists, or what protocol FEMA, which recently took over control of the stockpile, uses to administer resources.  The federal stockpile exists to ensure that states can easily access emergency necessities without relying on a fickle open market. But that reserve, established in the 1990s, was never intended to span a nationwide emergency, a former acting director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Richard Besser, told the Post. “The response contains enough for multiple emergencies,” said Besser. “Multiple does not mean 50 states plus territories and, within every state, every locality.”  At a press briefing on March 19, Trump expressed resentment about being asked for medical supplies, saying that the federal government is “not a shipping clerk.” He also suggested that governors needed to take care of their own states, acquiring necessary medical materials themselves on the open market. Governors “are supposed to be doing a lot of this work” of obtaining supplies, Trump said at the time. But many governors and health officials have said this approach is difficult, needlessly expensive, and that it pits localities both against one another — and the federal government. “Allowing the free market to determine availability and pricing is not the way we should be dealing with this national crisis at this time,” Virginia’s Gov. Ralph Northam said. “It is a challenge,” Kentucky Gov. Andy Beshear said. “The federal government says ‘States, you need to go find your supply chain,’ and then the federal government ends up buying from that supply chain.” Equipment is hard to find on the open market, health officials say, because individuals and communities across the globe are buying out what exists. And prices are rising in the private market for the same reason: a number of actors — individuals, hospitals, states, the federal government, and other countries — are competing for the same limited resources.  This paradigm favors wealthier states, those most willing to divert financial resources toward the pandemic (regardless of potential political fallout), or those able to leverage existing relationships with a president who often uses personal preference to determine national policy. As the crisis deepens, all states — regardless of whether they have these advantages  — are finding needed equipment in dangerously short supply.  Rhode Island Gov. Gina Raimondo has told reporters her state is trying “to scour the world to find all the supplies we need in order to do the testing,” with mixed success. And Oklahoma’s Secretary of Health and Human Services Jerome Loughridge told reporters his state will run out of personal protective equipment within the next week. There is a mechanism by which the federal government could help states overcome these difficulties — essentially, by working, despite what Trump has said, as a shipping clerk. As Vox’s Alex Ward explained, the Defense Production Act (DPA) allows the government to procure badly needed resources and to direct production to resolve supply shortages: The federal government could get involved and place an order for masks, which would get fulfilled first because a DPA order takes priority over all others. Then, because the government knows which areas have the most need for those masks, it can distribute them appropriately.  ... [To fill those orders, companies are] going to need additional materials and may be hampered in their efforts if they can’t get those materials. Again, this is where the DPA comes in: The federal government can find other sources of those materials and then put in an order to have the company sell the materials to the federal government instead of using them to make their own products. ... Finally, there may be a company that wants to help build something — say, respirators — but doesn’t have the machinery or capital to do so. If the federal government thinks that company could be useful, it might give a loan or offer equipment under DPA so production can begin right away. That accelerates that company’s ability to help right now. Trump has begun using the DPA in an extremely limited fashion. Its broader use could go a long way toward helping state officials access the materials they need, however. But with no guarantee that federal assistance is at the ready, states may have to continue their efforts to figure out how to protect their own — even if that’s to the detriment of the collective United States.Joe Biden’s appearance on Meet the Press with Chuck Todd on NBC Sunday morning was — to anyone who follows Sunday morning political interview shows — borderline surreal.  Due to coronavirus concerns, both the host and his marquee guest were broadcasting from home studios, delivering production values that fell short of usual for network television. Satellite transmission lags clearly marred the dialogue at key moments, and while Biden avoided any gaffes, he repeatedly stumbled over words or shifted directions mid-sentence — reminders that for all he’s ridden the Obama legacy to front-runner status, he’s not even close to his former boss’s equal as a public communicator.  But the former vice president had a clear double-barreled message to deliver to President Donald Trump and the American people.   First, the president should listen to qualified scientific and economic experts about Covid-19, and second, the president should accurately convey what they are telling him to the American people. No more happy talk, no more wishful thinking: Just a serious effort to prepare the public for what’s likely to be a prolonged experience and to mobilize the resources of the federal government to alleviate that trauma with wider use of the Defense Production Act (DPA) and additional fiscal stimulus beyond what Congress has already enacted.  The interview’s key moment came when Todd said scientists believe it may take until June before the United States is in a position to start relaxing social distancing measures.  “You’re certainly hearing scientists say that and an occasional governor will say that, Dr. Fauci might say that,” Todd observed. “But you don’t hear a consistent message nationally. How would you convey that to the American people, basically telling them, another 60 days of home confinement? That’s a lot to ask of the American public.” Biden did not exactly muster a level of eloquence to match Winston Churchill’s famous “blood, toil, sweat, and tears” speech, but he did have a clear and compelling answer: Tell the truth and trust the people rather than raising unrealistic expectations that inevitably won’t be met, and that could provoke a crisis of confidence in the government and its officials:  Look, the American public is really strong and tough. The first thing we should do is listen to the scientists. Secondly, we should tell them the truth. The unvarnished truth. The American people have never shied away from being able to deal with the truth. The worst thing you can do is raise false expectations and watch them get dashed. Then they begin to lose confidence in the leadership. So we should just tell the truth as best we know it. As best the scientists know it. We should let them speak. Biden then repeated his call for the president to set free market dogma aside and invoke the Defense Production Act to broadly scale-up production of personal protective equipment and other health care supplies before returning to this theme of honesty.  “We should be telling the American people the truth,” he said. “They’re strong. They’ll get through it.” This is a strong contrast to Trump’s approach, which owes less to the historic legacy of statesmanship than to sales and marketing tactics or the self-help tips of The Power of Positive Thinking. Trump prefers not only to put a positive spin on his administration’s handling of things, but on the overall situation — touting the possibility of returning to normal by Easter and promoting the scientifically unproven idea that hydoxychloroquine is a remarkably effective treatment for Covid-19.  There is obviously a lot of uncertainty about the coronavirus situation, and it’s certainly possible that the country — and the world — will benefit from upside surprises or technological breakthroughs. But Biden’s argument is that it’s a mistake to count on such things because they leave the country both materially and psychologically unprepared for the extent of the difficulties it may be facing.  Todd tried a couple of times to entice Biden into delivering a quote-worthy slam on Trump, or to elicit praise for the president in the interest of national unity. Biden didn’t bite in either direction. For instance, the former vice president declined Todd’s invitation to say Trump has “blood on his hands” but also refused to say he would eschew criticizing the president.  “I argued several weeks ago, we should be using the Defense Production Act,” Biden said. “It was there, I have been arguing for it for some time. If I see something that’s not happening, I think it’s my obligation to step up and say this is what we should be doing.” Beyond the idea of using the DPA to increase output of medical supplies, Biden spoke repeatedly about the need for additional stimulus beyond what Congress and the White House have already delivered. He didn’t get into details on the show, but his campaign has called for responding to the coronavirus pandemic with student loan forgiveness, a boost to Social Security benefits, fiscal transfers to state and local governments, more comprehensive action on paid sick leave, and taking a look at delivering additional checks to households beyond the $1,200 per person Congress has already enacted.  Rather than promising people that the country will swiftly get back to normal, in other words, Biden wants the government to roll up its sleeves and prepare to do more.  Biden’s final advice to Trump was to spend more time focused on the administrative details of government.  “You should focus on making sure we’re in a situation where we’re able to see to it that unemployment benefits can get to people,” Biden said. “What is the IRS doing to get the $1,200 checks to people? That’s where the focus should be and it should be laser-focused.”  The reference here is to administrative problems in the unemployment insurance system, which is not really built to handle the current volume of claims as well as to the reality that the government currently anticipates it may take months to get the $1,200 into the hands of people who don’t already have direct deposit setups with the IRS. This kind of administrative minutia has never been Trump’s strong suit (see the testing fiasco) and it seems very unlikely that he’ll take this advice.  But for those who’ve been waiting for Biden to become a more forceful and visible public presence on the coronavirus crisis, he seems to have found his message — listen to experts, tell the truth about what they say, and put in the difficult, granular work to address the crisis. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) issued a travel advisory on Saturday night calling on residents of New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut to avoid “non-essential domestic travel” for the next two weeks to help slow the spread of coronavirus. The travel advisory is far less stringent than the “enforceable” tri-state quarantine that President Donald Trump had floated several times earlier on Saturday, an idea that caught New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo (D) off guard and that caused confusion about the legality and logistics of such a maneuver.  Trump tweeted late on Saturday that he asked the CDC to issue the guidance after consulting with the three states’ governors, and decided “a quarantine will not be necessary.” Anthony Fauci, the head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said on CNN’s State of the Union Sunday that Trump settled on the advisory after “very intensive discussions” at the White House Saturday evening.  “After discussions with the president we made it clear and he agreed, it would be much better to do what’s called a strong advisory,” Fauci said. “The reason for that is you don’t want to get to the point that you’re enforcing things that would create a bigger difficulty, morale and otherwise, when you could probably accomplish the same goal.”   According to the CDC, the travel advisory does not apply to “employees of critical infrastructure industries, including but not limited to trucking, public health professionals, financial services, and food supply.” The agency says the governors of the three states have “full discretion” to implement the advisory. Trump’s decision to go with a travel advisory after causing confusion — and anger — over his seemingly spontaneous suggestion of an “enforceable quarantine” underscores the extent to which his leadership during the coronavirus crisis has been defined by chaotic messaging and poor coordination with states. President Trump said around noon on Saturday that he was considering an enforceable short-term quarantine in certain parts of the New York metro area after a conversation with Cuomo. “I just spoke with Andrew Cuomo, I just spoke with [Florida Gov.] Ron DeSantis. We’re thinking about certain things. Some people would like to see New York quarantined because it’s a hot spot” of coronavirus cases, Trump told reporters on the White House lawn. “We might not have to do it, but there’s a possibility that some time today we’ll do a quarantine, short-term, two weeks on New York. Probably New Jersey, certain parts of Connecticut.” But Cuomo, who was giving a press briefing at the same time Trump spoke to reporters, said he had not discussed that idea with the president and expressed concern about it. “I haven’t had those conversations,” Cuomo said when asked about Trump’s statement.  “I don’t even know what that means. I don’t know how that could be legally enforceable,” Cuomo said at his press conference in Albany. “And from a medical point of view, I don’t know what you would be accomplishing.” ”But I can tell you, I don’t even like the sound of it,” he continued. The disconnect between Trump and Cuomo over a potential quarantine was the latest instance of public clashing between the two politicians while trying to coordinate a response in a region that has become the epicenter of the American coronavirus crisis. As Vox’s Aaron Rupar has explained, Trump has insinuated that governors need to stop criticizing him and to “treat [the administration] well” if they wish to receive federal help.  Complicating things further, it was difficult to know how seriously to take Trump’s quarantine statement, given his habit of making false claims about coronavirus-related policy launches in recent weeks, such as his haphazard rollout of the Defense Production Act, during which he and a Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) administrator revealed different timelines for directing the production of protective gear and life-saving medical devices. However, Trump seemed to double down on the idea of a quarantine in the tri-state area later in the day after his first talk with reporters. After his initial comment he tweeted, “I am giving consideration to a QUARANTINE of developing ‘hot spots,’ New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut. A decision will be made, one way or another, shortly.” And when speaking to reporters another time Saturday afternoon before boarding Air Force One to Norfolk, Virginia, Trump signaled again that a decision would be imminent. “We’re looking at it, and we’ll be making a decision,” Trump said. “A lot of the states that aren’t infected that don’t have a big problem, they’ve asked me if I’d look at it so we’re going to look at it. It’ll be for a short period of time if we do it at all.”  When asked for details about how he’d pursue a quarantine, he told reporters he would talk about it later with Cuomo. Federal and state policymakers have been scrambling to figure out how to respond to the explosion of cases coming out of New York City.  Earlier in March, Cuomo used the National Guard to create a one-mile “containment zone” around New Rochelle, a suburb of New York City, to help slow a cluster of cases. On March 27, New York City accounted for over a quarter of all confirmed cases of coronavirus infection in the US.  Vox’s Jen Kirby and Emily Stewart report New York is expected to get worse: “Though the state, including the city, has been under strict stay-at-home orders since Sunday, New York is not expected to reach its peak in coronavirus cases for at least another three weeks. On March 25, New York Mayor Bill de Blasio predicted that, in a city of 8 million, half the population should expect to get coronavirus before the pandemic ends.” But Trump has struggled to work productively with Cuomo on mounting a response to the crisis.  Earlier in the week, for example, Cuomo complained that FEMA’s decision to send New York 400 ventilators from a national stockpile was inadequate for the scope of the crisis. “You want a pat on the back for sending 400? We need 30,000,” said Cuomo on Tuesday. Trump fired back later that the governor “should have ordered the ventilators” when he had a chance, and has also downplayed the state’s need for them.  Trump’s quarantine idea — and that Cuomo was evidently in the dark about it — suggested he was contemplating pushing for what could be a hugely consequential policy change without consulting the relevant local policymakers.  “The specifics & impact of this new directive by tweet are unclear & uncertain,” tweeted Democratic Sen. Richard Blumenthal (CT) on Saturday. “The effect may be more confusion than confidence.” Moreover, it was unclear if Trump was issuing a new policy or was simply floating an idea he hadn’t actually thought through and had no real intention of implementing. In recent weeks, Trump has made dozens of false claims, such as falsely promising that anyone who wants to get tested for coronavirus can get tested. Trump has also been touting hydroxychloroquine as a miracle drug for Covid-19, even though there has been no substantial evidence proving whether it’s effective, or even safe. Meanwhile, lupus and rheumatoid arthritis patients are experiencing a shortage of the drug as people heeding Trump’s message are stocking up.  Trump’s slapdash messaging surrounding a possible New York quarantine seemed par for the course in his ongoing response to the coronavirus crisis.  Speaking on Meet The Press Sunday morning, former Vice President Joe Biden called for widespread invocation of the Defense Production Act to not only meet the need for ventilators but also to scale up production of “masks and gowns ... and shields and all the things our first responders and doctors need.” “Why are we waiting?” Biden asked, “We know they’re needed.” WATCH: Former VP @JoeBiden says he would be "moving rapidly" on the Defense Production Act if he was president. #MTP #IfItsSundayBiden: "I would do the same thing for masks and gowns ... and all the things our first responders and doctors and nurses need. Why are we waiting?" pic.twitter.com/ISdCNiJ5Wc The former vice president is referring to widespread shortages of masks and other personal protective equipment that health care providers are reporting.  This equipment takes several forms and the terminology gets confusing at times. But the key piece of equipment health care personnel need is N-95 respirators, tight-fitting masks that, when applied correctly, can protect people from infection when they need to interact closely with sick patients. The respirator shortage has become so acute that medical personnel are relying on surgical masks, looser-fitting garments that offer a lower level of protection.  US officials have been mostly coping with a comprehensive equipment shortage by discouraging ordinary citizens from using surgical masks, in contrast to the widespread practice of community mask usage in Asian countries. But experts are increasingly questioning the wisdom of the “don’t wear a mask” guidance, noting that they can be broadly useful in three ways — preventing asymptomatic patients from inadvertently spreading a virus they don’t know they have, reminding yourself not to touch your face, and signaling to others in the community the importance of social distancing.  If respirators and masks were more widely available, perhaps through DPA-induced production hikes, it would be easier for public health officials to worry less about who is getting masks and just make plenty available — for health care providers and those outside of medicine alike.  Meanwhile, grassroots groups like Helpful Engineering have been mobilizing to make face shields (relatively simple plastic guards that cover the whole face) to help meet the urgent need for PPE — a need that seems it could become more dire, as the world’s largest glove manufacturer is warning of impending shortages.  The Defense Production Act would allow the federal government to essentially conscript America’s domestic manufacturing capacity into making more of these supplies. It could be particularly potent with regard to the surgical masks, since they are simple to construct (people who know how to sew can make them easily at home) and many facilities that work with any kind of fabric could be making them, in principle.  The Trump administration has thus far been reluctant to invoke the act, suggesting that to do so would create a Venezuela-like economic situation. In practice, however, it’s the administration’s inability to get the virus under control that’s creating an unprecedentedly rapid economic collapse, and anything that helps bolster the public health situation will almost certainly improve the economy as well.President Donald Trump sent a Navy hospital ship — the USNS Comfort — to New York City Saturday afternoon, in order to help hospitals overburdened by coronavirus patients. Speaking at Virginia’s Naval Station Norfolk, Trump said the ship will arrive in New York City on Monday. The hospital ship was “rushed through” scheduled maintenance in four days, according to Trump, and will augment health care efforts in New York, where more than 23,000 Covid-19 cases have been confirmed and at least 517 people have died, as of March 28. During his remarks, Trump also suggested that the severity of New York’s Covid-19 outbreak could lead him to place the state — along with its neighbors New Jersey and Connecticut — under quarantine, something that, as Vox’s Ian Millhiser has explained, is within the federal government’s power.  The president did not definitively say whether he would take this step, only stating that he plans to make an announcement about the potential quarantine “one way or the other fairly soon.” Trump also did not give details about what a quarantine for those states would look like, but said quarantine measures would not apply to people passing through those states. As of March 28, the state of New York has more than 52,000 confirmed coronavirus cases; New Jersey has about 8,800, and Connecticut has about 1,300 cases. New York state has the largest proportion — almost 50 percent — of confirmed coronavirus cases in the country, and at least 728 people have died of Covid-19-related causes as of March 28. More than 500 of those deaths have been within New York City.  This high confirmed case count is why the Comfort is so badly needed in New York — as Caroline Hopkins has reported for Vox, New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo has said he believes the state will continue to see increases in confirmed cases for the next three weeks. And hospitals in the state are already overwhelmed: A resident at Columbia/New York-Presbyterian Hospital said her hospital’s intensive care unit (ICU) was at capacity due to coronavirus patients as of March 25, and a number of hospitals, Hopkins wrote, have begun to create plans governing which Covid-19 patients will receive care and which will not. The Comfort’s role will be to provide emergency care for those with non-Covid-19-related illnesses in order to open up ICU beds for people infected with the coronavirus. And it is expected to begin receiving patients on Tuesday. “We are here for you, we are fighting for you, and we are with you all the way and we always will be,” Trump said, addressing New Yorkers. Trump also said the Comfort’s sister ship, the USNS Mercy, was deployed on the West Coast to support Los Angeles residents, and would offer them 1,000 medical beds, a medical lab and a pharmacy, among other medical functions. The United States reached a grim milestone on Thursday when it was announced that there are more active coronavirus cases here than any other nation in the world. That announcement comes in the wake of ramped up testing measures, although diagnostic tests are still in short supply — something that could be remedied in part by a new, rapid coronavirus test recently approved by the Food and Drug Administration.  Patients and doctors have also faced a growing shortage of emergency equipment, such as face masks and ventilators, and people with non-virus-related medical needs may be at risk of exposure to the virus simply by entering a hospital, medical officials have said. In the face of overwhelmed hospitals, local and state officials have implemented their own partial quarantine or isolation measures, closing schools, entertainment establishments and restaurants, and barring large gatherings. Many governors are beginning to order travelers from hard-hit areas, particularly New York and New Jersey, to self-isolate for fourteen days upon arrival elsewhere. But as Vox’s Dylan Scott has explained, “even the most aggressive mitigation strategies — general social distancing, quarantines, closing schools — will not be enough to prevent US hospitals from being overwhelmed eventually unless we commit to such drastic measures until a vaccine becomes available,” a process that could take up to 18 months. As Zeeshan Aleem has written for Vox:  USA Today said that its most “conservative” analysis based on data from the American Hospital Association, US Census, CDC, and World Health Organization found that “there could be almost six seriously ill patients for every existing hospital bed.” But that estimate, which assumes an infection rate similar to ordinary infection rates of the flu, is based on the idea that all hospital beds would be empty. In reality, two-thirds are generally full. With that occupancy rate taken into account, there would be 17 patients per open bed. The Comfort and Mercy won’t solve this problem by themselves, but will certainly help in California and New York, both among the states hit hardest thus far by the coronavirus.  And, as Trump mentioned Saturday, there are other things the military can do in order to alleviate pressure on hospitals across the country, promising, “We are marshaling the full power of the American nation — economic, scientific, medical, and military — to vanquish the virus, and we will do that.” In particular, the president touted the four field hospitals the US Army Corps of Engineers and FEMA have built in New York, California, and Illinois. More such hospitals could be needed in the days to come. FAIRBANKS, Alaska — Early this week, Kodiak Island, part of an archipelago in southwest Alaska, issued a “hunker down” proclamation, asking residents to stay at home as much as possible. In the Covid-19 pandemic, the remote island, known for its brown bear population, might seem well-positioned — travel on or off the island is limited to the water or air. But Elise Pletnikoff, a family physician and the medical director of the Kodiak Area Native Association, says the same physical remoteness which may help protect rural communities from infection will become a liability if — and, more likely, when — the novel coronavirus arrives. “Our capacity will be the limiting factor,” she says, “meaning not just equipment, but also staff.” Her organization provides care for 5,000 patients on Kodiak; while there is a hospital on the island, it has limited resources for critical care and usually flies patients needing that kind of medical attention to Anchorage. But Pletnikoff says when Covid-19 cases surge, “we’re worried about how busy everyone will be.” 
    Related
   Many small communities around the United States don’t have a full-time doctor — and in Alaska, many aren’t connected by road. Instead, they rely on community health aides, a physician who visits a few days out of the month, and either commercial or medevac flights to larger urban centers during emergencies. Already because of the outbreak, health workers are forced to disrupt this limited care even further, transitioning to telemedicine when possible. “We’ve stopped traveling to remote villages to reduce exposure,” Pletnikoff says, and staff currently in each village are staying, “until … we don’t know when.”  Even though small towns like these may be thousands of miles from Covid-19 hotspots like New York City and New Orleans, there’s good reason for the 60 million Americans in rural areas to worry.  A new map of confirmed cases and deaths nationwide from the University of Chicago’s Center for Spatial Data Science shows a disturbing trend: While New York state still has the highest per capita rate — 1,995 cases per million people as of March 26 — there are also significant clusters of Covid-19 in rural areas in the Midwest and South, including Arkansas, Mississippi, Georgia, and South Carolina. Every US Health and Human Services region also has shown a sharp uptick in non-flu-related influenza-type illness.  On Friday, Alaska reported 85 cases and its first Covid-19-related death. Shana Theobald, another doctor on Kodiak Island, explains the grim calculus for her state: Given that experts from the CDC estimate 40 to 70 percent of the state’s 737,500 people may eventually contract Covid-19, at least 295,000 Alaskans could get sick. Based on initial reports, 20 percent, or 59,000 people, will need hospital care.  
    Related
   Alaska only has 1,500 general hospital beds. And even if as few as five percent of Covid-19 patients become critically ill (a conservative estimate), that’s a minimum of 14,750 people needing ICU beds. And Theobald estimates that Alaska only has around 200. If that many people get sick over the next one to three months, only one in 25 people who need intensive care will be able to get it. Even if you halved the number of Alaskans infected with Covid-19 to 20 percent, the system will still be over capacity — by thousands of people.  It’s these kinds of equations that make epidemiologists particularly concerned about rural America. “If we believe that the way seasonal flu spreads through the country is likely similar to Covid-19, the rural eruptions tend to be later and briefer, but more impactful than in big urban areas,” said Roger Ray, a retired neurologist, physician executive, and physician consulting director with The Chartis Group. Remote Alaska is an extreme example of rural health care, but even in the state’s comparatively large urban centers — like Fairbanks, the second largest city— physicians are worried.  “Today I’ve been at the office for 12 hours on the phone or video conferencing, doing everything I can to keep my patients from the ER or urgent care clinics,” says Jenny Lessner, a family doctor in Fairbanks. She’s had many patients she suspects of having Covid-19, but says due to limited testing availability, “we have no idea how many people in this town have Covid right now. We’re walking in the dark.” In what has become a familiar refrain, Lessner’s clinic currently has four doctors, 16 masks, and thousands of patients.  She and other doctors in the state recently put together a petition asking the state to institute a travel ban and shelter in place order. On Friday, state officials ordered shelter at home, closure of all nonessential businesses, and a ban on nonessential travel between communities in Alaska, effective Saturday.  In rural areas, social distancing can be the normal way of life, delaying the arrival and spread of disease. But once people get sick, “I am absolutely concerned about capacity,” says Ray. Overall, rural communities “tend to be older, with more chronic illness,” he adds, making people more at risk of severe disease. This includes millions of Americans with heart disease, diabetes, and asthma — all risk factors for the novel coronavirus. Various models predict slightly different rates of Covid-19 transmission, but Robert Siegel, a professor of immunology and microbiology at Stanford University, says they all “dramatically illustrate the importance of intervening early and hard, in terms of saving lives.” Density of population has been closely linked to transmission, he says, “but I wouldn’t leave people in rural communities thinking they’re safe.” He adds, “If they don’t do anything, the virus will arrive there — it might arrive slower, but it will arrive.” You can see detailed projects for transmission rates around the country at CovidActNow, a prediction tool created by a team of data scientists, epidemiologists, and public health officials to help people understand how Covid-19 will affect their area. It predicts that, with the current amount of limited action some states are taking to curtail transmission, Kansas will have more sick people than hospital beds by April 16 and Oklahoma by April 19 — in short, even states with low population densities will soon be overwhelmed. Leo Nissola, an immunologist at the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, who was not involved in the design, says, “When I look at that model, I trust the data and the source.”  Nissola agrees rural communities might not ever see rates of Covid-19 as high as New York City, but is concerned about their underlying vulnerabilities. More than half of counties in America have no hospital ICU beds, posing a particular risk for the more than 7 million people over the age of 60 living in those places, who are at higher risk of severe cases of Covid-19.  In February, The Chartis Group released a study showing that more than 450 rural hospitals are vulnerable to closure. “If you’re vulnerable enough to risk losing the ability of making payroll, how valuable can you be to the community in crisis?” Ray asks.  The delay in transmission may be longer in some places than others. Data from Johns Hopkins University suggests that rural areas with popular tourist destinations — like Blaine County, Idaho, home to Sun Valley — actually already have the highest rates of cases outside of New York City and its surrounding areas. Ethel Branch, a former attorney general for the Navajo Nation, says that underlying inequalities in rural areas exacerbate these risks as well. “When I was growing up on the Nation as a little kid, I always felt like I lived in a different country,” she says. “A third of the Nation doesn’t have running water, a third don’t have access to electricity.” Many families live in multigenerational homes, increasing elders’ risk of infection, and risk factors like diabetes and asthma are common. The unemployment rate, before Covid-19, was 42 percent.  In a pandemic, says Joseph Ravenell, a professor of population health at NYU Langone Health, “More vulnerable populations are more susceptible to having worse outcomes.” Last weekend, Branch set up a GoFundMe to buy supplies for elders who might not be able to stock up to prepare. When buying food for her mother, who lives on the reservation, she says, “I encountered shelves that were empty, really long lines. I thought about how disappointing it would be to spend so much gas money and not even be able to purchase what you need, and have to come back again” — also increasing the risk of infection. Over three-quarters of the reservation’s population have some level of food insecurity; the average resident drives three hours to buy food.  Branch has, so far, raised over $162,000, which she is allocating based on risk. “We have help request forms for people to fill out so we can identify the highest risk folks,” for food distribution, she says. As of March 27, the Navajo Department of Health reports 92 positive Covid-19 cases in the Navajo Nation. But there, as elsewhere, testing has been limited.   The ability to manage crises is also unequal in cities versus rural areas, says Aaron Clark-Ginsberg, a qualitative social scientist who researches disasters at RAND Corporation, the nonpartisan policy research group. Big urban health departments usually have teams whose full-time job is to manage large incidents, but “in rural cases, it’s often a part-time person already pressed and doing other things,” he says.  Many health departments do have disaster plans on file, Clark-Ginsberg says, but “they can be fantasy documents, paper plans that don’t necessarily match the capacity, and that first responders wouldn’t be able to put into practice.”  And the surge of Covid-19 patients is not the only health impact the pandemic will have. “Inevitably, the health care system will have to shift toward Covid-19 patients, and there will be knock-on effects,” Clark-Ginsberg says. In Fairbanks, Lessner says Covid-19 has already hurt patients with other health concerns. She describes helping the spouse of a patient with very advanced Alzheimer’s find an assisted living facility. Over the past several months, she says, “we’ve been calling, trying to figure out Medicaid, and we finally had a plan with all the boxes checked.” But this week, the facility announced it was no longer admitting new patients because of Covid-19. “Now this poor guy is at home with his spouse, who we knew was too much for him to care for,” she says. “Instead of a full-time care facility, he’s just got me on the phone.” She pauses. “What do I tell him?” She adds that her clinic has rescheduled or delayed important preventive care for other health conditions, like mammograms, colonoscopies, screening bloodwork, and more. “None of these screenings are considered urgent but they are critical, particularly from a public health perspective, to prevent or detect cancers, high cholesterol, diabetes, etc.,” she says.  On Kodiak, Pletnikoff says she’s very worried about hospital physicians “needing to care for newborns in addition to any surge of Covid-19 patients,” as the same hospital staff there manages standard inpatients, ICU patients, and OB and pediatric patients.  There’s no denying that currently, the projections all look pretty grim. But one thing the CovidActNow model illustrates is the power of social distancing measures. Already, rural communities have been taking steps to minimize their risk.  Checkpoints for the annual Iditarod dog sled race in Alaska, normally held in rural villages along the route, moved to remote locations outside of town to discourage visitors — and potential infection sources. Many people traveling with the race usually sleep in local schools, says Sarah Manriquez, a photographer who traveled with the dog teams to document the race this March — schools some of the villages also decided to close.  Prior to Friday’s shelter-in-place order, Alaska’s hospitals were predicted to be overloaded by May 14 — spiking to almost six times the hospital capacity by early June. Three months of shelter-in-place would move that date beyond the model’s range of prediction. Any extra time that social distancing buys is critical to manufacture or procure much-needed supplies, or innovate new solutions.  As Craig Smith, the surgeon-in-chief of Columbia University, wrote in a memo sent last week to his colleagues, “The next month or two is a horror to imagine if we’re underestimating the threat. So what can we do? Load the sled, check the traces, feed Balto, and mush on. Our cargo must reach Nome.” Lois Parshley is a freelance investigative journalist and the 2019-2020 Snedden Chair of Journalism at the University of Alaska Fairbanks. Follow her Covid-19 reporting on Twitter @loisparshley.  The Food and Drug Administration has approved a molecular test that can diagnose novel coronavirus infections within a matter of minutes.  The test, created by Abbott Laboratories, is highly portable and can be used in a wide variety of settings, from hospital emergency rooms to urgent care clinics to physicians’ offices. The company says it expects to start shipping the kit out to health care providers next week, and that it will be able to deliver 50,000 tests a day by April 1. Abbott’s coronavirus test will be run on its “ID NOW” platform, which is already used for rapidly diagnosing patients who are sick with things like influenza and strep throat. The test looks for fragments of the coronavirus genome in samples picked up through a throat or nose swab. It can deliver positive results in as little as five minutes, and negative results within 13 minutes. It’s about the size of a toaster, and weighs less than 7 pounds. “With rapid testing on ID NOW, healthcare providers can perform molecular point-of-care testing outside the traditional four walls of a hospital in outbreak hotspots,” said Abbott president and COO Robert Ford. If distributed effectively, the test could help expand national testing capacity, better allowing public health experts to understand which populations are most at risk of infection, and helping state and federal officials better plan response strategies.  Such a test would also dramatically reduce testing backlog — currently, many Americans who are able to access testing face long wait times. In fact, test results can take over a week, a delay that endangers particularly high-risk individuals. For these reasons, Eric Feigl-Ding, an epidemiologist and health economist at the Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, called the new test a “game changer” in dealing with the outbreak. “The Abbot Lab test will give fast point of care immediately, and hopefully more accurately than old test,” he tweeted on Friday. The Abbott test also has the potential to play a significant role in accelerating the speed at which health care providers make crucial decisions about identifying and isolating people infected with coronavirus. “This is really going to provide a tremendous opportunity for front-line caregivers, those having to diagnose a lot of infections, to close the gap with our testing,” John Frels, vice president of research and development at Abbott Diagnostics, told Bloomberg News. “A clinic will be able to turn that result around quickly, while the patient is waiting.” Currently, the wait time is much longer than the Abbott test allows for. Quest Diagnostics and LabCorp, two major private companies, say that on average they deliver results in four to five days. Many reports suggest it can take a week or more to get test results back.  That waiting time poses a particularly serious problem for high-risk patients who may need to stop treatment for other health problems to isolate. For example, a cancer patient in Ohio reported waiting over a week to get results back on a coronavirus test — and his doctors were forced to pause his cancer care while waiting for those results. Shortening wait times for tests is also a crucial tool for policymakers and public health officials — quicker diagnoses should help the government and health care system have a more accurate assessment of how many cases are actually popping up in real time — and assist them in understanding whether measures to prevent Covid-19’s spread are working.   Testing in the US is well behind the country’s international peers. In the past week, the number of coronavirus tests conducted in the US surpassed the number of tests done in Italy and South Korea — two countries that dealt with serious outbreaks and have been testing aggressively for the virus. But according to the New York Times, the US still lags behind both countries in terms of tests per capita: While South Korea has conducted about 700 tests per 100,000 people, and Italy about 600 tests per 100,000 people, the US has done fewer than 200 tests per 100,000 people.  Even with that low rate of testing, the US has more confirmed cases of coronavirus than any other country in the world, a fact some experts believe means the country has a number of unconfirmed cases that faster testing could help reveal. According to the Times report, published Thursday, about 65,000 coronavirus tests are being performed a day in the US, but experts say that 150,000 tests are needed a day to identify and separate infected patients quickly — and Abbott’s test would go a long way toward helping the US reach that number.Four national retailers touted at a White House press conference earlier this month as future coronavirus testing sites still have not rolled out their drive-through test centers, according to reporting from the Washington Post. At a Rose Garden press conference on March 13, the day he declared Covid-19 to be a national emergency, President Donald Trump appeared with leaders from CVS, Target, Walgreens, and Walmart and said those chains would provide space in their parking lots for drive-through testing to take place. The “goal is for individuals to drive up and be swabbed without having to leave your car,” Trump said at the time. But according to the Washington Post, there are only four drive-through testing sites as of last week among the 26,400 stores those retailers operate: two at Walmart locations near Chicago, one each at a CVS in central Massachusetts and a Walgreens in the Chicago area, and none at Target. Rite-Aid, which was not represented at the press conference, has also opened one drive-through site in Philadelphia. As Vox’s Alex Ward has reported, drive-through testing is one critical component of the fight against novel coronavirus, because it maintains isolation for potentially infected people and expedites the process of collecting data about who is infected. Experts have pointed to the large-scale rollout of free drive-through testing in South Korea as contributing to that country’s decline in coronavirus cases. Some local governments, including New Rochelle, a suburban community north of New York City, have implemented such testing regimens themselves. At least 19 states have some mobile testing sites, most outside of hospitals. But “an array of logistical challenges, ranging from a shortage of testing supplies to funding” has stymied the promised public-private partnership with some of America’s largest retailers, write the Post’s Elizabeth Dwoskin, Abha Bhattarai, Juliet Eilperin, and Ashley Parker. They report that a nationwide lack of testing kits led the White House to downgrade its plans, limiting tests at the retail sites to first responders and health workers. Testing is only available for those who meet specific criteria, so although the US just reached the grim milestone of having the most confirmed coronavirus cases in the world, that number is almost certainly an undercount. The CVS site can administer about 200 tests a day, according to the Post, and Walmart can administer about 150 per day at each of its two sites. Target said it is waiting on local officials before it can open up its parking lots. On March 13, Trump promised 500,000 testing kits would be available by the following week, and 5 million by April. To date, 672,449 tests have been administered nationwide, according to the Covid Tracking Project. Mobile testing units around the country are primarily operated at health care sites, such as hospitals and clinics, because the FDA has only approved nostril swabs to be administered by professionals. However, Health and Human Services Assistant Secretary for Health Brett P. Giroir told the Post that the administration has supported the launch of about 30 mobile sites, and will support retail-driven testing sites going forward.  “We are working closely with these retailers now to explore the expansion of testing sites across the county, now further enabled by the nasal self-swabbing technique recently approved by the FDA,” said Giroir. The announcement that there would soon be widespread, easily accessible testing was greeted with optimism. As one pandemic expert, Dr. Dena Grayson, told Vox’s Alex Ward, “The key to containing a highly infectious, deadly virus is you have to identify who’s infected, track down all their contacts, and quarantine them. If you can’t even detect who’s infected, then you’re done.” Grayson added that such measures would be especially effective in less-dense places, where early detection can halt the spread sooner. At the time of the White House announcement, it was already clear that a lack of testing was contributing to an undercount of how many active Covid-19 cases were in the United States. And although testing has ramped up significantly in the last several weeks, with states and municipalities unrolling their own testing programs, these programs have been affected by an ongoing lack of tests and backlogs in authorized testing centers. This lack of tests, and the resulting undercounted number of cases, contributed, in part, to delayed enforcement of social distancing measures. In the absence of widespread tests, people are encouraged to behave as though they already have the virus, staying inside to prevent the virus’s spread. Experts have said that for some people, the low reported numbers communicate less of a risk, reducing compliance rates. But Trump has recently said he wants to relax social distancing requirements in the coming weeks in order to rejuvenate the economy. If measures encouraging people to stay at home are relaxed, and people begin interacting and gathering in groups again, it will be especially important to know who actually has the virus. To be sure, drive-through testing won’t solve the need for every American to clearly understand their coronavirus status. Almost nine percent of American households don’t own cars, and younger people, city residents, and low-income people are all less likely to own cars and be served by these measures. But at a moment when asymptomatic people can spread a powerful disease to vulnerable people, implementing innovative and widespread testing programs is an important tool in mitigating this virus’s spread.President Donald Trump said on Friday that he will not adhere to a portion of the $2 trillion coronavirus stimulus bill that would authorize an inspector general to oversee how $500 billion in business loans will be spent. In a statement released early Friday evening, Trump announced that he had signed into law the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security or CARES Act, a relief package aimed at mitigating some of the economic fallout caused by efforts to allay the spread of Covid-19. That bill also establishes a Special Inspector General for Pandemic Recovery (SIGPR) within the Treasury Department to audit and investigate half a trillion dollars in loans for large businesses. In his signing statement, Trump said that this provision raises “constitutional concerns,” adding that his administration would not comply with such an official’s request for documents. “I do not understand, and my Administration will not treat, this provision as permitting the SIGPR to issue reports to the Congress without the presidential supervision required by the Take Care Clause,” part of Article II Section 3 of the Constitution that states a sitting president “shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed.” This seems to suggest the administration believes it is the president’s duty and not that of an inspector general to ensure the funds are distributed as the law intends.   The special inspector general, as authorized within the bill, would be able to request information from government agencies and report on failures to comply with those information requests. In his signing statement, Trump essentially stated that he will not let such reports reach Congress without his approval, which many fear directly undermines the provision’s goal of maintaining transparency in how that fund is handled. The $500 billion loan program was the biggest point of contention between Democratic and Republican lawmakers throughout the relief bill’s negotiation process. Democrats called this a “slush fund” that would give Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin broad authority to disburse the funds as he saw fit. The IG provision was intended as an accountability effort to alert Congress if the Trump administration was not complying with auditing measures. It was also meant to help ensure the president and his family did not directly benefit from the emergency funds through their businesses.  The addition of this transparency language was what ultimately swayed some Democrat senators to vote for the bill. The bill also establishes a congressional oversight panel to examine the IG’s reports.  Trump also said that he would not adhere to a second provision of the bill that would grant some congressional committee consultation for expenditures made by the State Department, Department of Veterans Affairs, and US Agency for International Development (USAID). “These provisions are impermissible forms of congressional aggrandizement with respect to the execution of the laws,” Trump’s statement reads. The broader coronavirus relief package also guarantees direct cash payments to many adult workers, expands unemployment insurance, and provides $367 billion in loans to small businesses. But it was the inclusion of a $500 billion corporate loan program — which includes a guaranteed $50 billion for the airline industry — that proved a key sticking point in the bill’s negotiation. Earlier this week, Democrats blocked a version of the package that they said did not contain strong enough oversight over that fund. As Vox’s Emily Stewart reported, most Americans also backed some form of “guardrails” on those corporate bailout funds, such as ensuring that companies receiving bailout funds commit to not laying off workers. Last week, more than 3.3 million people filed for unemployment, shattering the previous record of about 700,000 claims in 1982. Without oversight of how the funds would be allocated, “what’s to stop an airline from using its bailout money to give its CEO a bonus instead of paying its workers?” Stewart wrote. “Or to prevent a major hotel chain from laying off workers while engaging in stock buybacks?” In addition to establishing an inspector general, the final bill passed on Friday also prohibits businesses controlled by administration officials, including the president, vice president and members of Congress, as well as their families, from receiving loans from that fund.  Earlier last week, Trump declined to commit to exempting his business interests from bailout funds, telling reporters, “Let’s just see what happens.” Now, in his signing statement, Trump has made clear that he will decide what information about how the funds are being used Congress needs. This comes just months after the end of an impeachment inquiry into Trump that was sparked by another attempt by his administration to keep independent reports about its inner workings from reaching Congress. During the lead-up to what became Trump’s impeachment hearing, a whistleblower’s memo about a phone call with Ukrainian leadership should have, according to federal law, been reported to Congress by the director of national intelligence. It was not, but came to light in September nonetheless. Trump’s sharpest critics have already begun to raise the alarm about Trump’s plans to shrug off the new law’s transparency requirements. On Twitter, Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, who had earlier denounced the corporate fund, wrote, “This is a frightening amount of public money to have given a corrupt admin w/ 0 accountability.” It is clear that Covid-19 will have devastating effects on the economy. It’s “an economic tsunami,” one economist told Vox’s Ezra Klein, one that will affect businesses of all sizes and their employees. That includes the large companies that will benefit from the corporate fund. But allocating money to industries with little oversight to how it is being spent is not guaranteed to help the everyday workers, customers, and small-business owners expected to be most dramatically affected by the virus’s economic impact — it could, however, help the president and his businesses. Texas Gov. Greg Abbott (R) signed an executive order on Thursday that would require travelers from some coronavirus hotspots to self-quarantine: It provides that “every person” who flies into Texas from “New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, or the City of New Orleans, or in any other state or city as may be proclaimed hereafter, shall be subject to mandatory self-quarantine for a period of 14 days from the time of entry into Texas or the duration of the person’s presence in Texas, whichever is shorter.” Other states have imposed similar orders. Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis (R) imposed an order on Tuesday that requires anyone flying from New York, New Jersey, or Connecticut to self-isolate for 14 days. Alaska and Hawaii also imposed self-quarantine orders on people traveling from other states. These orders implicate one of the fundamental premises of the union among the 50 states: the right of American citizens to travel among them freely. As the Supreme Court recognized more than 170 years ago, “we are one people with one common country. We are all citizens of the United States, and as members of the same community must have the right to pass and repass through every part of it without interruption, as freely as in our own states.” The right of all US citizens to travel freely among the states, the Court later explained in United States v. Guest (1966), “was conceived from the beginning to be a necessary concomitant of the stronger union the Constitution created.” If states can decide that some US citizens are not welcome within their borders, it may cease to be a union at all. This right to travel is implicit in the notion that citizens are Americans, and not simply Texans or New Yorkers. But should that principle hold during a pandemic? Does the Constitution forbid states from taking drastic actions to slow the spread of a potentially deadly disease within their own borders? Gov. Abbott’s order, at the very least, is probably carefully drafted enough to survive constitutional scrutiny. That order applies to “every person” who flies into Texas from the designated areas, regardless of whether that person is a resident of Texas or some other state. Read in that light, it does not discriminate against non-Texans. But orders like Gov. Abbott’s do raise troubling constitutional questions. And they cut against the concept of a union of states that has prevailed in this country, especially since the New Deal.  The modern notion that every US citizen has the same rights, no matter where they travel within the nation, is rooted in a notion of nationwide solidarity that depends on a strong and competent federal government. And the Trump administration is not holding up its end of that bargain. As the Supreme Court explained in Saenz v. Roe (1999), the right of citizens to travel freely among the states has three separate components.  The Constitution “protects the right of a citizen of one State to enter and to leave another State, the right to be treated as a welcome visitor rather than an unfriendly alien when temporarily present in the second State, and, for those travelers who elect to become permanent residents, the right to be treated like other citizens of that State.” Abbott’s order largely implicates the second condition: “the right to be treated as a welcome visitor.” He does not actually attempt to bar residents of other states from entering Texas entirely.  That right, the Court explained in Saenz, flows from Article IV of the Constitution, which provides that “the Citizens of each State shall be entitled to all Privileges and Immunities of Citizens in the several States.” Yet Saenz also concluded that these “privileges and immunities” are not absolute. Rather, Article IV bars “discrimination against citizens of other States where there is no substantial reason for the discrimination beyond the mere fact that they are citizens of other States.” Thus, there are two potential reasons why Abbott’s order may be legitimate. The first is that it applies to Texans and non-Texans alike — a Houston resident who returns home from a trip to Newark will spend two weeks in isolation, just like a New York resident who travels to Dallas to visit a family member. The second is that Abbott has a “substantial reason” for imposing this order. He believes that it will reduce the number of people who enter Texas carrying a terrible disease. To be clear, that does not mean Abbott’s decision to single out four parts of the country is ideal policy. It may be the case, for example, that New York is simply testing more infected people to determine if they have coronavirus — and the virus may be quietly spreading just as rapidly in other parts of the country. Lawyers might also challenge Abbott’s order by arguing that states lack the power to interfere with interstate commerce by trying to prevent travel among the states. But courts tend to defer to elected officials and the military during real or perceived national security crises. And they are likely to show similar deference to public health officials during the coronavirus emergency. Cases like Saenz suggest that states need to be careful when drafting interstate travel bans — if Abbott had exempted Texas residents, his order would be much more likely to be struck down — but so long as state officials receive competent legal advice, such bans are likely to be upheld. But even if such travel bans are legal, they are still indicative of a greater rot within our constitutional system. The premise of our Constitution is that the states gave up some of their sovereign authority to the federal government, in return for mutual benefits such as collective national defense and free trade among the states. The premise of the post-New Deal order is that the federal government must take on additional obligations, including providing a basic social safety net. And the evolution of the right to travel played a significant role in establishing this new order. The right to travel is fundamentally tied to our conception of what it means to be a citizen of a nation. We’ve spent most of the last century fleshing out our understanding of what obligations our nation owes to its citizens. Many modern-day right to travel cases, including Saenz, involve state laws targeting poor people from other states. Saenz, for example, struck down a state law that provided less generous welfare benefits to California residents who recently moved to the state. The modern era of the constitutional right to travel was inaugurated by Edwards v. California (1941), an opinion that is imbued with the morality of the New Deal — and that also involved an effort to discourage poor Americans from entering California. Prior to Edwards, the Supreme Court had typically allowed states to enact “precautionary measures against the moral pestilence of paupers, vagabonds, and possibly convicts.” Acting under this power, California enacted a law that made it a crime to bring into the state “any indigent person who is not a resident of the State, knowing him to be an indigent person.” But Edwards, written by Justice Jimmy Byrnes, struck this law down. And, in doing so, it rejected the very idea that the primary burden of caring for the poor should rest on state or local communities. “In an industrial society,” Byrnes wrote, “the task of providing assistance to the needy has ceased to be local in character”: The duty to share the burden, if not wholly to assume it, has been recognized not only by State governments, but by the Federal government, as well. The changed attitude is reflected in the Social Security laws under which the Federal and State governments cooperate for the care of the aged, the blind and dependent children. It is reflected in the works programs under which work is furnished the unemployed, with the States supplying approximately 25% and the Federal government approximately 75% of the cost. It is further reflected in the Farm Security laws, under which the entire cost of the relief provisions is borne by the Federal government.  In a nation with a weak or miserly federal government, it may have made sense to allow states to lock out poor residents of other states so that they would have more resources to spend on their own poor. But state travel bans targeting the unfortunate no longer made sense in a society with a national safety net.  Byrnes was arguably the single most influential figure in President Franklin Roosevelt’s inner circle and he was a proud advocate for the New Deal. Indeed, Byrnes was so trusted by Roosevelt that Byrnes left the Supreme Court after only 15 months — to take on a White House job wielding such immense power that he was often labeled the “assistant president.” (It should be noted Byrnes was also a committed racist who would go on to defend segregation as governor of South Carolina — sometimes moral righteousness and great evil live in the same man at the same time).  So it’s no surprise that Byrnes’s opinion in Edwards was a tribute to the New Deal social safety net. Indeed, Edwards paints the New Deal as the culmination of the union itself. For the first time, an American who fell upon unfortunate times could travel anywhere in the nation, knowing that the federal government would lift them up wherever they settled down. At long last, we were truly one people, and one nation. All of this highlights why the stakes are so high for President Trump’s botched federal response to the coronavirus pandemic.  The premise of Edwards — indeed, the premise of the post-New Deal order — is that the federal government would provide a baseline of health, prosperity, and security to the nation as a whole. In return, the states would give up their role as the sole providers of “assistance to the needy,” and with it their power to close their borders to poor Americans. The United States was one collective community, not 50 insular communities. But Trump is slashing the safety net that holds this national community together. He spent much of the first three years of his presidency dismantling the federal government’s permanent infrastructure, that his predecessors set up to deal with a pandemic — including ordering the White House National Security Council’s (NSC) entire global health security arm shut down. He’s repeatedly proposed budgets making sharp cuts to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National Institutes of Health. Trump abdicates his role as the custodian of a nationwide safety net. Indeed, he recently told a group of governors who needed ventilators to deal with the rise of coronavirus cases to “try getting it yourselves.” Thursday night, after New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo (D) requested tens of thousands of ventilators to protect the lives of infected New Yorkers, Trump dismissed this request in an interview with Fox News’ Sean Hannity. “I don’t believe you need 40,000 or 30,000 ventilators,” Trump claimed. “You go into major hospitals sometimes, and they’ll have two ventilators. And now, all of a sudden, they’re saying, ‘Can we order 30,000 ventilators?’” Nor is Cuomo the only governor frustrated by the federal government’s inaction. After Illinois Gov. J.B. Pritzker (D) sought much needed medical gear and equipment to protect the people in his state, the federal government provided only a fraction of what his state needed. Since the beginning I’ve promised you transparency and honesty on all aspects of our response. To that end, I want to take a moment now to run you through our PPE requests with the federal government, and what we’ve received from them. pic.twitter.com/SsOw1l4UKF Moreover, as Pritzker wrote on Twitter, Trump’s inaction forces governors to compete with each other — potentially even pushing them into a bidding war. “I have medical professionals and first responders begging for the things they need to keep them safe—but so does” Cuomo. So does Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine (R). So does Washington Gov. Jay Inslee (D). Trump, meanwhile, was extraordinarily slow to use the Defense Production Act, a federal law that would allow the federal government to coordinate a national response among state and private industry. As Pritzker writes, “it’s the federal government’s job to make sure that a nurse being properly equipped in Illinois doesn’t come at the cost of a doctor being ready for work in California.” If the Trump administration is unwilling or unable to uphold its end of the post-New Deal bargain, the implications are staggering. Trump’s inaction does not simply threaten to exacerbate a pandemic. It threatens the very concept of what it means to be the United States of America.“Rationing” — a form of decision-making to allocate scarce resources — is something health care providers hope they never have to do. But already the Covid-19 pandemic has forced doctors and nurses around the world — in Italy, the UK, and South Korea — to ration lifesaving equipment and interventions: who gets a ventilator when there aren’t enough for every patient who needs one, for instance. And now, reports from overwhelmed and under-resourced hospitals across New York City’s five boroughs indicate that doctors and nurses there expect to begin rationing soon — if they haven’t already. “These decisions run counter to everything that we stand for and are incredibly painful,” wrote Meredith Case, an internal medicine resident at Columbia/New York-Presbyterian Hospital, in a March 25 Twitter thread. “Our ICU is completely full with intubated Covid patients. … We are rapidly moving to expand capacity. We are nearly out of PPE. I anticipate we will begin rationing today.” 
    Related
   A worst-case scenario that epidemiologists have warned of — patients dying because the system is too overwhelmed to care for all of them — looms for New York City as a growing number of patients with severe cases of Covid-19 seek emergency medical care, and hospitals run low on ventilators. Hospitals are also running low on beds, intensive care units, personal protective equipment (PPE) to protect their frontline staff, and staff themselves. And after being ordered by the state to increase capacity by a minimum of 50 percent, hospitals are working rapidly to prepare for an even greater influx of patients in the coming weeks. Because as bad as things are right now, they’re predicted to get worse. In a March 27 announcement, New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said that the peak in the city’s epidemic curve —  when the number of Covid-19 cases top out before declining — could be as many as 21 days away. It’s based on the fact that people infected with Covid-19 can go for days before they show any symptoms and weeks before the most severe cases require hospitalization.  There’s still uncertainty in how the outbreak will play out in New York, since it is impossible to know the number of residents who have already contracted the virus. Though the testing rate here is the highest in the country, the city still doesn’t have the capacity to test everyone with and without symptoms. But officials and medical professionals agree the official counts — as of March 27, there were more than 25,000 reported cases and more than 350 reported deaths in New York City — don’t reflect the true extent of the outbreak. “The number of patients with severe enough illness to need hospitalization and ICU-level care is expected to rise faster than our ability to fully meet the demand,” wrote Vicki LoPachin, the chief medical officer at Mount Sinai Health System, in a letter to the hospital staff on March 25. “This is the humanitarian mission of our lifetimes. And we won’t win every battle.” With more than 4,700 Covid-19 related hospitalizations as of March 26 in New York City, about 850 of which have been intensive care unit hospitalizations, hospitals are in crisis mode. Many of them have been for days. “Even for my senior attendings, it is the worst they have ever seen,” wrote Fred Milgram, an emergency medicine resident physician, in the Atlantic. “Here, the curve is not flat. We are overwhelmed.” Nurses and doctors have been reusing masks and other personal protective equipment, or PPE meant for single-use since last week, and some health providers are continuing to care for patients even while they experience symptoms of their own. “I am ending my night by delivering acetaminophen to a co-resident who spiked her first fever today,” Case wrote in another tweet. “She is one of many in recent days.” While New York City officials have not provided an official tally of how many health care providers have tested positive for Covid-19, data from other countries hit hardest by the pandemic, including Italy, reveal that providers are at a high risk of contracting the virus — especially in the absence of adequate PPE.  “As I’ve sat in a room full of coughing patients for 60 hours a week, I have worried about my own safety,” wrote Rachel Sobolev, another of NYC’s emergency resident physicians, in a letter to President Trump published on HuffPost.  On March 24, Kious Kelly, an assistant nurse manager at Mount Sinai West hospital died of Covid-19. According to social media posts from his family members and colleagues, the 48-year-old Kelly was otherwise healthy, but he had not had adequate PPE while caring for his Covid-19 patients. 
    Related
   Gov. Cuomo said in a press conference March 26 that there was “no question” that New York at large would exceed its hospital bed capacity. According to data from the Harvard Global Health Institute, the city has roughly 1,400 ICU beds total. For several hospitals in NYC, including Elmhurst Hospital in Queens, where 13 patients died of Covid-19 in 24 hours, this has already happened. “I don’t think it’s a question of ‘when’ hospitals are out of space anymore,” says Ani Bilazarian, an ER nurse at one of New York City’s major trauma centers. “It’s happening now.” The measures that NYC hospitals have taken to extend capacity and care for critically ill Covid-19 patients are extreme and unprecedented. Hospitals have begun to convert pediatric units into adult ICU rooms, transferring the children who previously occupied those rooms to other hospitals. Operation rooms previously reserved for surgery – left vacant in the wake of cancelled elective procedures – have also been converted to ICU rooms at many hospitals. In addition to dwindling physical space and hospital beds, NYC’s hospitals are running dangerously low on critical equipment. “The shortages of resources is becoming dire even outside of the news reporting of ventilators,” says Bilazarian. “We are on critical shortages of multiple medications, protective equipment, cleaning products, and space.” To intubate patients, hospitals need ventilators, the crucial machines that pump air into the lungs of patients unable to breathe properly on their own. In the face of a virus that attacks the respiratory system, these machines can be lifesaving. And yet, as of March 26, Cuomo said that New York had only about 12,000 ventilators total, just over a third of the projected 40,000 ventilators required to accommodate the inevitable increase of patients.  A shortage of ventilators would be a dire situation in the face of any respiratory pandemic, but the drawn-out nature of Covid-19 illness exacerbates the problem. “Non-Covid patients are on ventilators two, three, or four days,” Cuomo said in his March 27 press briefing. “Covid patients are on ventilators from 11-21 days.”  Bilazarian adds: “The challenge with ventilator resources is not just the high numbers of patients we are intubating but the length of time they are required to remain on a ventilator. We have been keeping patients on ventilators for about 14 days before we decrease ventilator support in a process called ‘weaning’.”  In other words, patients with Covid-19 are staying hooked up to these scarce ventilators for long and indefinite periods. Accordingly, the equipment cannot be recirculated fast enough for use in newly-admitted patients. New York City’s hospitals aren’t fighting Covid-19 alone; they are working alongside the state and local health departments and the private sector to address the shortage of space and resources. The Jacob J. Javits Center, a convention space on Manhattan’s west side, is being converted into a 1,000-bed temporary hospital. A 1,000-bed hospital ship, the USNS Comfort, is expected to begin admitting NYC patients in mid-April. Nationally, several manufacturers in the auto industry have converted to making ventilators, but the progress has not been adequate.  In a tweet on March 27, President Trump said that General Motors, the automotive company that had previously promised to manufacture 40,000 ventilators “very fast,” has since backtracked, promising 6,000 ventilators by late April.  As usual with “this” General Motors, things just never seem to work out. They said they were going to give us 40,000 much needed Ventilators, “very quickly”. Now they are saying it will only be 6000, in late April, and they want top dollar. Always a mess with Mary B. Invoke “P”. New York City’s hospital systems need resources immediately and cannot wait for these national solutions; accordingly, several are taking matters into their own hands.  Northwell Health, for example, the New York health care system with 23 hospitals, has begun 3D printing equipment to use machines that they already have in their own facilities as opposed to waiting on companies. Northwell Health has partnered with the 3D printer company Formlabs to expedite production of nasal swabs required for Covid-19 testing kits as well as 3D-printed nozzle-like devices that allow ventilator machines meant for single patients to be split between two patients.  The 3D printed nasal swabs for the Covid-19 testing kits, which are modeled after swabs that already existed, have gotten the green light for production and are currently being dispersed throughout Northwell’s hospitals and testing centers. But 3D printing ventilator splitters — which are essentially T- or Y-shaped nozzles that hook onto a single ventilator tube and redirect the oxygen flow from the ventilator into two tubes as opposed to one — is not quite so straightforward, because these designs are unchartered territory and need to be tested for safety and efficacy.   “Splitting ventilators is really a last-ditch effort,” says Todd Goldstein, Northwell Health’s director of 3D design and innovation. “The ventilators are made for one individual patient, and even though it’s been done before, it’s complicated to split them. There are a lot of factors you have to control, and there are a lot of issues that can arise.” Several other hospitals have already begun splitting ventilators between multiple patients.  “We are also trying to be more flexible in how we support patients ... to try and prevent patients from needing vents at all,” Bilazarian said of her hospital. In other words, hospitals are trying to use less invasive electronic breathing devices first (such as the mask-like BIPAP machines, which are sometimes used for people with sleep apnea) to stave off the need for full intubation.   Nowhere does the wartime rhetoric of the Covid-19 pandemic seem starkest than in the draft-like call-to-action for volunteer health providers in New York. The state’s department of health has added a form on its website for any qualified health providers to join a volunteer reserve workforce. “We are looking for qualified health, mental health, and related professionals who are interested in supporting the state’s response,” the site reads.  On March 24, New York University announced that it would allow fourth-year medical students to graduate early so as to join the frontlines of the Covid-19 response in New York City as soon as April. By March 25, nearly 70 medical students had decided to graduate early; they made the choice to enlist in the frontlines in spite of the risks. If nothing else, New York’s health workers’ dedication to the work they’re doing — saving as many lives as they physically can — is clear in their remarkable reports from the front lines. “We feel honored to continue serving our patients to the best of our abilities,” says Bilazarian. “This pandemic will require citizens to make real sacrifices. We need you to stay at home. But as our ER says, ‘we never close, we are always open, we are here for you.’”  Dr. Deborah Birx, a respected physician and experienced diplomat who seemingly serves as a voice of reason in her role as coordinator of the White House’s coronavirus task force, raised a lot of eyebrows on Thursday with her effusive praise of President Donald Trump as “attentive to the scientific literature and the details” during an interview with the Christian Broadcasting Network. “He’s been so attentive to the scientific literature and the details and the data,” Birx said. “I think his ability to analyze and integrate data that comes out of his long history in business has really been a real benefit during these discussions about medical issues.” Despite what Birx would have you believe, Trump has been pushing misleading and contradictory medical advice. On February 26, for instance, he claimed coronavirus cases would “be down to close to zero.” His claim was hard to swallow then, and barely a month later the US has more than 85,000 cases. It’s true Trump is sensitive to certain kinds of data — but those kinds generally include his own poll numbers and the stock market, not indicators of public health. Relatedly, Trump is currently pushing to reopen businesses currently shuttered by Easter — a timetable much faster than what public health experts recommend. So not only is Trump not “attentive to the scientific literature,” but, as I’ve detailed, a number of comments he’s made this week have illustrated that he doesn’t get the basics about how public health crises work.  But instead of acknowledging that reality — or at the very least dodging questions about it — Birx decided to go all in on praise. So what gives? "[Trump is] so attentive to the scientific literature & the details & the data. I think his ability to analyze & integrate data that comes out of his long history in business has really been a real benefit” -- this is shocking, hackish stuff from Dr. Birx. pic.twitter.com/c2phsRYaJs Birx is a legend in the fight against HIV and has worked for both Republican and Democratic presidents. When it was announced in late February that she’d be coordinating the White House’s coronavirus task force, she was widely seen as bringing a modicum of public health expertise to an administration desperately in need of it. For once I have to commend this Administration on an appointment. Ambassador Debbie Birx is a serious public servant and scientist who will follow the data and lead a comprehensive response without bias. She inspires confidence.  https://t.co/mEydqHqDKt But it has become clear that Birx wants to stay in Trump’s good graces. She praised Trump early on for implementing travel restrictions on China that did nothing to stop the spread of the coronavirus that was already happening within America’s borders in a largely undetected manner because of lack of testing.  During a March 13 news conference, she described the president’s lagging coronavirus response in nearly heroic terms, then lent her credibility to promote a coronavirus testing website that turned out to not really exist. If anyone knows the story behind the flowchart used by the White House to explain a website that apparently doesn't really exist, my DMs are open. Please this is literally all I want to know. https://t.co/7xByA9uKKa pic.twitter.com/JRDr71eTzS Another member of the White House coronavirus task force, Dr. Anthony Fauci, has been similarly careful to not cross Trump, but Fauci has at least admitted that the country’s failure to conduct a sufficient number of coronavirus tests represents a failure.  Fauci also hasn’t tried especially hard to hide the fact he puts up with Trump’s boorishness because he thinks it’s important for his voice to continue to be heard on the task force. To the extent that Birx is being motivated by similar considerations, her decision to do what it takes to stay in the president’s good graces is understandable. But unfortunate, some of her public remarks have started to lean into misinformation in a way Fauci’s have not.  Last week, for instance, Birx tried to explain away the US government’s ill-fated decision to try and develop its own coronavirus test by falsely suggesting that a test developed by the World Health Organization has major accuracy problems. (It doesn’t.) This week, she bragged about the US passing South Korea in total number of coronavirus tests conducted, ignoring that South Korea has a much smaller population and had much more testing capacity during the critical weeks when the virus was first spreading.  Dr. Birx is still dissembling on why US coronavirus testing remains a disaster pic.twitter.com/YD6tmZvCMu On Monday, Birx made a painstaking attempt to pretend there might be data-driven reasons underlying Trump’s desire to relax social distancing guidelines as soon as possible, even though his motivations are transparently political. Then on Thursday, she tried to downplay reports that hospitals are preparing to make tough choices between treating patients and letting them die because of ventilator shortages — despite reporting about health care providers doing just that.  "Please, for the reassurance of people around the word, to wake up this morning and hear about [hospitals] creating Do Not Resuscitate situations for patients -- there is no situation in the US that warrants that kind of discussion" -- Dr Birx on Thursday pic.twitter.com/IwSlT5nSTU Birx on Thursday made a case that models projecting as many as 60 million Americans being infected with the coronavirus are alarmist — “when people start talking about 20 percent of a population getting infected, it’s very scary, but we don’t have data that matches that based on our experience,” she said — but as explained by infectious disease epidemiologist Marc Lipsitch, her argument completely ignores ongoing problems with testing in this country that continue to make it hard to get the pandemic under control. Solving the testing problems will not be easy, despite heroic local and state efforts to make up for the feckless federal efforts on this front. Supply chains are delicate and it may not be possible to come from behind and establish Korea-level testing capacity. Trump is notoriously sensitive to criticism and has a long history of demanding complete loyalty from aides. It’s possible Birx is just doing what she thinks needs to be done to remain  a positive influence.  But Birx’s inflated compliments for Trump during the CBN interview, combined with her repeated misleading comments about the government’s capacity when it comes to testing and supplies, bring to mind a comment that Fauci made to Politico just days after Birx’s appointment. “You should never destroy your own credibility. And you don’t want to go to war with a president,” Fauci said. “But you got to walk the fine balance of making sure you continue to tell the truth.” The news moves fast. To stay updated, follow Aaron Rupar on Twitter, and read more of Vox’s policy and politics coverage.Doctors and nurses are now crying out for masks and other personal protective equipment as they’re forced to wear bandanas and scarves for masks, trash bags for gowns, and reuse all sorts of medical equipment — heightening the risk of coronavirus infection and possibly death as we all rely on these health care workers now more than ever to stem the outbreak. But the government should have seen this coming. Many people did. “When we have done exercises in the past for pandemic preparedness, supply chain issues were a well-documented challenge,” Saskia Popescu, an epidemiologist focused on hospital preparedness, told me. “This is something we’ve known about — maybe not to this extent, but this isn’t a shocker. It’s more surprising that we let it get this bad.” Health care professionals and experts say we now have a shortage of masks, gowns, gloves, and other personal protective equipment (PPE) for doctors, nurses, and other medical staff. In this environment, health care workers worry they might get sick — perhaps forcing them to take up a hospital bed that would otherwise go to someone else — or die. Privately, some say they may not be able to show up to work at all under these conditions.  The situation not only threatens health care workers’ well-being, it could limit US health care capacity even as experts warn we need to scale up to confront the rise in coronavirus cases. Different levels of government are now trying to take action — with cities, counties, states, and the federal government racing to get more PPE and send it to places and hospitals that have been hardest hit by Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus. President Donald Trump recently activated the Defense Production Act, a once-obscure law that could let the feds dictate what equipment is produced and where it goes. And the federal government has started to send out some masks and other equipment from the Strategic National Stockpile, although state and local officials argue the response has still been too slow. The problem, experts say, is that the federal government should have prepared for this months if not years ago — but it didn’t. It’s an issue that has been magnified by Trump but really transcends presidential administrations: America, along with the rest of the world, has never been ready for a major disease outbreak. “Every serious look at US pandemic readiness and global pandemic readiness has identified PPE shortages as a major issue,” Jeremy Konyndyk, senior policy fellow at the Center for Global Development, told me. “This is a known issue. We’ve seen it before.” We’re seeing the consequences of that now. Due to the lack of preparedness, we are still lacking testing capacity for coronavirus, and experts say we’re still in the dark as to how many cases there even are in the US, so the current estimate could be an undercount by many times over. The lack of testing has forced us to rely more on painful social distancing measures, requiring that everyone isolate to some extent to stop the spread of the virus.  And in hospitals, the lack of preparedness translates to a shortage of masks, gowns, and other PPE, among other problems. As health care facilities expect beds to overflow in the next few weeks of the pandemic, the shortage threatens to undermine how many doctors and nurses will be there to treat patients. More people could die as a result. As coronavirus has spread, experts have talked up “flattening the curve.” The idea is to spread out the number of coronavirus cases — through social distancing, testing, contact tracing, and other protective measures — to avoid overwhelming the health care system. Here’s what that looks like in chart form: The PPE shortage could make it harder to flatten the curve of new cases if doctors and nurses get sick. But the line representing health care system capacity also isn’t a constant. If we develop more capacity, it can handle more cases at once. If capacity falls — if doctors and nurses get sick because of a lack of protective equipment, or refuse to work without conditions that can ensure their safety — even a flatter curve will be hard for the system to handle. “If you have health care workers who don’t feel safe, you may very well have people who don’t come to work,” Val Griffeth, an emergency and critical care doctor who’s helped lead #GetUsPPE, told me. “Worse, you have people who come to work, get infected, and end up in the hospital taking up a bed and also not seeing patients that day, that week, or that month.” Despite recent government actions, experts and medical professionals warn that the protective equipment shortage is far from resolved. Report after report just in the past week found doctors and nurses having to ration and reuse medical equipment — or come up with homemade alternatives. One doctor, who asked to remain anonymous to avoid upsetting her employer, told me as she came off a shift this week that she still had to reuse masks and respirators on a regular basis.  Some hospitals are even considering do-not-resuscitate orders for dying Covid-19 patients out of fear that such intensive, close-up procedures could get health care workers without PPE infected with the coronavirus. “Even with the infusion of supplies from the strategic stockpile and other federal resources, there will not be enough medical supplies, including ventilators, to respond to the projected COVID-19 outbreak,” a March 21 letter from the American Medical Association, American Hospital Association, and American Nurses Association stated. “We have heard of health care providers reusing masks or resorting to makeshift alternatives for masks.” The problem is about both supply and demand. Prior to the coronavirus outbreak, China made half the world’s face masks. When the outbreak took off there, China started to use its supply and hoard what remained. This problem has only spread since, as more and more countries hoard whatever medical supplies they can get — with some, like Germany, even banning most PPE exports. So as demand increased due to Covid-19 — not just from health care workers but from a general public increasingly scared of infection — there was less supply to go around. Some public health officials and experts tried to tamp down on public demand by suggesting face masks wouldn’t help laypeople avoid infection. But experts told me this messaging backfired: There is evidence that masks help people avoid infection, and once the public saw doctors and nurses were using and wanted more of the masks, that likely fueled distrust toward what public officials and experts were saying — and people bought up masks anyway. The result, now, is a shortage that not only threatens doctors, nurses, and other medical professionals at the front lines of the coronavirus pandemic, but also puts us all at serious risk, since we’re relying on these same health care workers to literally save us if we get sick. The risk is big: If those health care workers get sick and are unable to care for people, more patients are likely going to suffer and die — and not just from Covid-19, but just about any other medical issue, from heart attacks to car crashes, that we’ll need health care workers for in the next few months. In the years before the coronavirus pandemic, government officials and epidemiologists regularly ran simulations and exercises to see what would happen in case of a big outbreak. One of those simulations held by the federal government, as the New York Times reported, covered a pandemic that looked a lot like the one we’re facing now: a respiratory virus that started in China and made its way to the US and the rest of the world. Among the many problems, the Times found, were “deficiencies ‘in personal protective equipment use.’” The exercise found that the US didn’t have the means to quickly produce more PPE. When states turned to the federal government for help in the exercise, there was “confusion” and “bureaucratic chaos” as requests and submissions hit multiple agencies at once. This was far from the only simulation to produce these results, experts told me. Konyndyk, in fact, pointed to a real-world example that highlighted the failures: the 2014-2016 Ebola outbreak. While working in President Barack Obama’s administration at the time, Konyndyk quickly realized that America — and much of the world — was simply not ready for a major disease outbreak. “I came away from that experience just completely horrified at how unready we would be for something more dangerous than Ebola,” he said, noting Ebola was, thankfully, relatively hard to transmit. Indeed, experts and advocates argue that the US generally underfunds disease outbreak preparedness and public health programs more broadly. It’s these concerns that led the Obama administration, after the Ebola outbreak, to attempt to scale up preparedness by establishing a White House office dedicated solely to the issue and producing a 69-page playbook in case of an outbreak. The Trump administration, however, neglected and rolled back these efforts, eventually disbanding the White House office. We’ve seen the results in the botched rollout of coronavirus testing, but PPE offers another example. America could have shored up its supplies of PPE in its strategic stockpile. It could have ensured that there would be surge capacity to boost production in case of emergency. And it should have been doing this all before the coronavirus pandemic.  But it didn’t. As of earlier this month, the US had 12 million N95 respirators and 30 million surgical masks in its Strategic National Stockpile — which officials acknowledged was just 1 percent of what the country needed in a full-blown pandemic. “The US … was not prepared,” Jen Kates, a senior vice president and director of global health and HIV policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation, told me. “A good preparedness plan would have helped address this and had things in place to allow for that increased need to be met.” The Trump administration could have started to do more in January when it became clear that Covid-19 could pose a threat to the entire world. But, Konyndyk said, the administration just didn’t do that: “What that prompted on our side was travel bans but no serious action to reinforce domestic readiness.” So now doctors and nurses are forced to resort to bandanas, trash bags, and homemade equipment instead of actual protective gear. At this point, experts warn that the US is stuck playing catch-up. But there are some things different levels of government can do and are doing to make the situation on the ground a bit better. For one, PPE production needs to be increased. Already, private companies are starting to do this — with even car manufacturers like Ford vowing to 3D print face shields and masks for health care workers. In the several bills Congress has passed and is working on to tackle the coronavirus pandemic, federal lawmakers have also committed more funds to boosting production of PPE. But scaling up production will take time — maybe weeks or months — during which the coronavirus will continue to spread. That’s why the PPE that’s already out there needs to be reprioritized for doctors, nurses, and other health care workers. The federal government says it’s now taking some action. In a statement, a spokesperson for the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), which is overseeing the response to the outbreak, said that federal agencies are “working to meet demands for personal protective equipment (PPE) through new acquisition, [Department of Defense] allocation, or Strategic National Stockpile sources.” But experts say the federal government isn’t doing enough, with multiple people describing the current response as “a systemic failure.” Local and state officials complain that they now have to outbid each other, as well as other countries and the federal government, to secure dwindling supplies, even if they need PPE more than other bidders.  Much of the criticism has focused on Trump’s use of the Defense Production Act. The law probably can’t enable much more PPE production in the short term, since new production can take weeks or months to scale. But it does let the federal government reprioritize the production that’s already out there. For example, the feds can tell factories making surgical masks to direct their products to New York — which is currently suffering the worst coronavirus outbreak in the US — over states that aren’t as hard hit. Or the federal government can buy up the supply and then direct it on its own accord. Or it can even order some factories that don’t normally make PPE to start producing it, while providing funds for these operations to get up and running (although, again, that can take time). The idea: During normal times, companies are typically guided by profits and a “first come, first serve” basis. But during an emergency, that’s not good enough; some places will need certain products first, even if they don’t have more money or didn’t place the order first. Trump signed an executive order invoking the Defense Production Act last week. But he’s wavered on fully activating the law and forcing manufacturers to scale up production in a specific, mandated way, instead arguing that he’s merely using the Defense Production Act as “leverage” to get companies to do the right thing. He’s compared fully activating the law to “socialism” — which experts say is false, because the Defense Production Act doesn’t let the government nationalize a private company or asset. The administration did say it was going to use the Defense Production Act more fully earlier this week, but it then abruptly backed down. This has led some public officials and advocates to criticize the administration for not going far enough. “I do not for the life of me understand the reluctance to use the federal Defense Production Act,” New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said at a March 24 press conference. Experts disagree on just how far the federal government should go here. James Hasik, a senior fellow at George Mason University’s Center for Government Contracting, said that the law should be used “more as a scalpel than an ax.” Rather than placing a mass order of products, he added, “You want to find where the particular problems are. You want to let industry mostly solve these problems. And when somebody is being a jerk and needs to be told, ‘No, you’re not cooperating, you’re not playing well during this national emergency,’ then you send a letter or make a phone call.” Others take a more aggressive view. Steve Grundman, a senior fellow at the Atlantic Council, told me that “this is a whole different kind of crisis.” In his view, the current outbreak requires the federal government to get more hands-on than it has in the past, compared to when he oversaw Defense Production Act implementation in the 1990s as a deputy undersecretary in the Defense Department.  That could require more aggressive, broader orders about what should be produced and where it should go. At the very least, it should require much more coordination than the Trump administration appears to be providing so far — a point that Hasik agreed with. That such aggressive action may even be needed, though, further exposes the underlying problem: America was not ready for the coronavirus pandemic. And the ongoing response to the current outbreak isn’t leading to more confidence that it’ll be ready for the next one, either. “People want to be able to feel safe,” Griffeth said. “Because the government has been so slow in responding to this pandemic, people don’t feel safe.”New York City is the current epicenter of the coronavirus crisis in the United States, in part, because of the nature of the city itself — an international hub tightly packed with people from all over the country and the world. What makes New York unique has also rendered it vulnerable to a pandemic.    The city has recorded more than 25,000 cases of coronavirus across its five boroughs as of March 27. This accounts for a large share of all confirmed cases — more than 90,000 — in the United States. This is just the beginning. Though the state, including the city, has been under strict stay-at-home orders since Sunday, New York is not expected to reach its peak in coronavirus cases for at least another three weeks. On March 25, New York Mayor Bill de Blasio predicted that, in a city of 8 million, half the population should expect to get coronavirus before the pandemic ends. There are still many unknowns about the coronavirus, but, based on current data, the current hospitalization rate is about 19 percent worldwide, with a fatality rate between 1 and 3.4 percent. Those numbers are evolving as more data becomes available. 
    Related
   What this means in reality is difficult to fathom. More than 4,500 people have been hospitalized in New York City since the start of the outbreak here. Hospitals and health care workers are already struggling to meet the surge of coronavirus patients in the city. “Mostly everything that’s coming in now is all a flavor of coronavirus,” Stefan Flores, a professor of emergency medicine at Columbia University, said of his emergency room in the city.  A doctor at Elmhurst Hospital Center in Queens — the borough that is the epicenter of the epicenter, with more than 8,000 confirmed cases — told BuzzFeed News that he estimates 60 people in the 545-bed facility have been intubated, which allows them to be hooked up to a ventilator. “Elmhurst is just getting destroyed. It’s very, very gruesome,” the doctor said. Outside the facility, lines of people stretch out, many in masks, waiting to be tested.  State and local officials are making urgent efforts to expand hospital capacity: adding more hospital beds, pleading for more ventilators. Gov. Andrew Cuomo said at a press conference on March 25 the entire state could need as many as 140,000 hospital beds. It has 53,000 right now.  Officials are frantically trying to find spaces to care for the New Yorkers they expect to become sick. The US Army Corps of Engineers is planning to build field hospitals at now-empty colleges on Long Island, and to remake the Jacob Javits Center, the convention center on the far west side of Manhattan, into a FEMA hospital. De Blasio said Thursday the city is trying to triple its capacity to 60,000 beds by May. That still may not be enough.   As the number of cases rise, so, too will the death toll. Right now, more than 365 have died in New York City from the coronavirus. On Wednesday, the city saw the largest in one 24-hour period so far, when 88 people died from coronavirus in a single day. Refrigerated trucks are being parked outside hospitals in case city morgues and hospitals are overwhelmed.  The city’s statistics are staggering, but New York City may also have a sharper grasp of the scale of the unfolding crisis. New York state has led the nation in testing, with more than 138,000 people tested, including nearly 58,000 in New York City alone. The total number of tests given in all 50 states is more than 519,000. It is a warning, and a lesson, for the rest of the United States. New York’s first coronavirus case was detected on March 1, in Manhattan. Officials identified her as a woman in her 30s who had recently traveled to Iran. At that point, New York had tested all of 32 people for the coronavirus, all negative except for this one.  “There is no cause for surprise — this was expected,” Cuomo said in a statement at the time. “I said from the beginning it was a matter of when, not if, there would be a positive case of novel coronavirus in New York.” A few days later, on March 3, the state said a second person had tested positive, a lawyer who lived in Westchester and worked in Midtown Manhattan. He hadn’t traveled or been exposed to anyone with the virus, which meant he was also the first instance of community spread in the state. Officials rushed to track his movements, but they were also direct: “This is a crisis that, it’s fair to say, will likely be with us for several months,” de Blasio said at the time. Since then, the count of confirmed coronavirus cases in New York has surged. Museums, Broadway, and once-crowded bars and restaurants have shuttered. On March 15, the city shut down all public schools until at least April 20. On Sunday, March 22, Cuomo ordered nonessential businesses to close and for people to stay at home, something the mayor had earlier proposed doing. The New York City subway and bus lines continue to operate, so they’re available to transport those essential workers. The city is even taking down basketball hoops to stop people from playing together. And yet, the number of cases in New York continues to grow, unabated. “Why does New York have such a high number?” Cuomo said of coronavirus cases at a press conference on Wednesday, a recognition of the crisis that’s happening in the state. He followed up by saying, in his opinion, there were two answers. The first was “because we welcome people from across the globe.” Cuomo said he expects the virus was in New York City much earlier than perhaps officials knew, because people came to New York from just about everywhere else.  “The second answer is because we are close,” Cuomo said. “We talk about the virus and how it transfers in a dense area, it is literally because we are close.” “Our closeness makes us vulnerable,” Cuomo added. Cuomo’s explanations — that New York is an international nexus, and an urban area where people live and commute packed together — likely does have something to do with the coronavirus’s rapid spread across the five boroughs. New York has 27,000 residents per square mile, beating second-place San Francisco with 18,000 residents per square mile, according to the New York Times. And if you’ve ever ridden a New York City subway at rush hour, imagine how a respiratory illness might fare in that environment. “New York City is often ahead of the curve when it comes to trends. It has a huge number of travelers and is densely populated — both factors that likely accelerated spread of infections here,” Tom Frieden, former director of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and former commissioner of the New York City Health Department, told Vox. Public health officials still do not know when coronavirus arrived in New York, or why it hit here so hard and so fast. Officials do not yet have the data to get a complete picture, and probably won’t for quite some time — if at all.  The state of New York is testing more far people than the rest of the country right now, which contributes to the high number of cases (beyond the fact that it’s a populous city), but it’s not testing everyone. And there still isn’t blood testing to determine who has antibodies to decipher how much of the population has already been infected. Many companies and individual labs are working on developing such testing, and some antibody tests are being used in other countries but aren’t yet available in the US, said University of Washington virologist Keith Jerome in an email. “I expect we’ll start to see these in late April or May,” he said.  “One of the challenges everybody has is trying to explain something absent the data that would really be helpful,” said Andrew Goodman, a public health researcher at NYU. New York might have these distinct factors that contributed to the rapidity and intensity of infections, but it also lacked the diagnostic testing capabilities to detect the coronavirus early on. This isn’t specific to New York; this is a problem the entire country has faced. Dr. Anthony Fauci, the federal government’s top infectious disease scientist, called this a “failing” at a congressional hearing earlier in March.  “The idea of anybody getting it easily the way people in other countries are doing it — we’re not set up for that. Do I think we should be? Yes. But we’re not,” Fauci said. The United States as a whole struggled to get adequate testing ramped up, and New York was very much included in that. “We were seeing what was unfolding overseas,” said Syra Madad, a special pathogens expert at the NYC Health and Hospitals network. “So why would we not think that we would not see cases here in the United States? And so we were obviously ill-prepared as a nation. Not as a state, but as a nation, in ramping up our diagnostic capabilities.” New York City officials were pleading with the federal government for more coronavirus tests and to expand the criteria on who could get tested, even before the first cases were confirmed in New York. “We believe that if [the CDC] would empower local laboratories, we could work with them to do high-quality testing faster that would allow us to stay ahead of the situation,” de Blasio said on February 26. On March 6, as New York already had 22 new coronavirus cases, city officials again begged the CDC for more tests, saying the lack of testing had “impeded our ability to beat back this epidemic.” As the New York Times reported, the mix of competing federal, state, and local regulations compounded the problem and might have intensified delays. But it showed just how important testing was in trying to slow the spread of coronavirus. “If we had been more aggressive earlier with testing, identifying cases, doing contact tracing to identify the people who are exposed, we could have done a lot better,” said Goodman, the public health researcher at NYU. “But for public health, often the success is the absence of something happening.” He compared it to watching a Category 5 hurricane approach. You can hope for the best, and if it doesn’t hit, it’s fine. But if it does make landfall, it’s much better to be prepared. New York implemented its statewide stay-at-home orders on March 22, following lockdowns in San Francisco and the surrounding area, and California. New York City also closed schools a lot later than other states. In hindsight, experts said, maybe New York was slower to act than it should have been in implementing aggressive social distancing measures early on.  But shutting down an entire state or city without knowing the scale of the crisis — specifically the scale of infection in the city — is extraordinarily difficult. It takes adept planning and coordination, especially in a place like New York City, which also has commuters pouring out into the suburbs, including in states like New Jersey and Connecticut. It also requires the buy-in of residents, which is still not entirely happening, based on crowds at some parks. Would all of New York City, and all of its businesses, have bought into a citywide shutdown with two cases of coronavirus? Or even 100?  That, Madad said, is why testing — hard data — is so critical, and why the failures across the US to implement it are so striking. “It has a huge economic and social toll,” Madad said of these stay-at-home orders. “You don’t want to make these decisions without having some data. And unfortunately, that data didn’t exist because diagnostic capability was not ramped up. Everything goes hand-in-hand.” And now, part of the reason New York City might look so bad is simply because it has a lot more information. “If you test a lot, you’re going to find a lot,” says Anna Muldoon, a former science policy adviser in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response at the Department of Health and Human Services. “And New York’s Department of Health managed to get testing rolled out more effectively and efficiently than a lot of places, so they may just have found more cases.”  She added that here, too, New York City’s dense population might have helped — it might be much easier to access a testing site or to reach out to a population in a place like New York City. But the bottom line seems to be: Now that the city knows the scope of the problem, it may be too late.  The grim reality in New York right now is that the coronavirus situation is likely to get worse before it gets better. While state officials say social distancing measures may be working, the governor on March 25 warned that the outbreak is expected to peak in two to three weeks. And the next day, he noted the focus is currently not on a reduction of cases but instead on a reduction in the rate of increase in the number of cases. “That’s what comes first when you’re starting to make progress,” he said.  New York put out a statewide call for retired health care professionals to sign up to be part of a reserve staff for the coronavirus response. Judy Salerno, president of the New York City Academy of Medicine, who also volunteered in Louisiana after Hurricane Katrina, signed up and gained public attention when she responded to one of the governor’s tweets asking about when she would hear back. She and thousands of other medical professionals are now part of a reserve staff on hand. “When they open up a place at the Javits Center, where are they going to get the doctors? They’re not going to pull them out of hospitals,” she said, noting that health care providers are also getting sick. “I’m ready, willing, and able to work, as are a lot of my friends.” Salerno, who is in her 60s, is in a higher risk group for serious illness because of her age. “When it’s a matter of life and death, I’ve probably been exposed to a number of people going to Morton Williams to pick up groceries. If we all in a crisis do our part, we have to take our skills and figure out what’s the best and the highest use for our skills. And this is mine right now, and so as soon as they need me, I will be there,” she said. “Is there concern? Yeah. Fear? No.” The city’s health care crisis will have ripple effects beyond what’s happening in hospitals and clinics. “Obviously, the health care crisis is going to get worse in the next couple of weeks, I think that’s already being demonstrated today,” said Isaac Weisfuse, former deputy commissioner at the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. “I also think we’re going to face a social service crisis in that as more and more people get sick, some of the social service deliveries to vulnerable populations [are] going to suffer, and New York City is going to have to be very agile in figuring out how to deal with that.” That translates, for example, to care for the elderly and others who depend on visiting nurses and home health aides to meet some of their basic needs. “If those nurses get sick and the elderly can’t be visited, or their home health aides can’t go to them, they’re going to have physical and mental problems that are just going to exacerbate the health care crisis,” Weisfuse said. The issue extends to services such as Meals on Wheels, food banks, protective services, mental health, and disability support. At a press briefing on March 26, Cuomo described the crisis in New York as a “life moment.” But, he said, the state will persist. “We’re going to get through this,” he said. “The only question is how we get through it, and when we get through it.” And, like the rest of the country, there are economic ramifications as well. All nonessential businesses across the state have been shut down, putting thousands of New Yorkers out of work and shuttering businesses big and small. It’s a “double whammy,” Cuomo said on Thursday, because the state has increased expenses to combat coronavirus and is also losing revenue because businesses are closed. “We’re spending more to take care of the Covid virus and we’re receiving less,” he said, estimating the state will lose $10 billion to $15 billion in revenue. “That’s a ton of money for the state of New York’s budget.” Cuomo also has an antagonistic relationship with President Donald Trump, which could be detrimental to the state’s ability to respond. For example, the president has cast doubt on the state’s need for ventilators and suggested New York doesn’t need as many as state officials say. There’s almost a predictable cycle around coronavirus as it spreads across the globe: It’s somewhere else, you assume because of some shortcoming there, and it won’t be that bad where you are. But then it gets to where you are, and you think your city, state, or country will do better. But will it?  As long as New York City has existed, it has dealt with outbreaks and epidemics. From cholera in the 19th century to the 1918 flu pandemic to even the brief Ebola scare in the 2010s, the city has ended up on the front lines of global health crises. And because of certain aspects of the city — it’s an international hub and a populous and dense place — it has often been stereotyped by outsiders as a dirty place full of foreigners, including by much of America.  “It actually took a lot of work to get people to think of New York as a place that connected to the rest of the country,” Muldoon said, explaining that New York’s history with infectious diseases has a lot to do with that. “It’s not just New York ego that has set that up. That is a longstanding [view].”  That sense is not entirely absent from the coronavirus outbreak, either. The White House has ordered anyone who passed through New York City to self-quarantine for 14 days, and other states have made similar orders. The president’s home state is floundering as he insists the country will be back to normal by Easter.  But if New York was first, and was unprepared, other states should try not to repeat those mistakes. If city and state officials could have acted more quickly to put social distancing measures in place and prepare for the influx of cases, other states need to do that now, too. “In New York City, we had an opportunity to act a little more aggressively sooner. Would that have helped? Possibly,” Goodman said.  New York is hardly the only place in the country where coronavirus is spreading, and it may be a signal of what’s to come elsewhere. Some states are taking proactive measures — shutting schools, ordering social distancing and stay-at-home measures. Others are not — and probably should be. “New York is a warning for the rest of the country,” Muldoon said. “Places need to be preparing in case it gets that bad, and particularly places that as they’re testing are getting a high proportion of positives. Yes, they need to get ready.” And, in many ways, New York City is better equipped than other places to deal with this onslaught. It has more doctors and health facilities than other places, which isn’t the case for other parts of the country, particularly in rural areas.  “The scale is so large here, the complexity, and the number of hospitals and people that we’re dealing with, if we can figure out how to respond to the crisis here, then there will be lots of other lessons learned that can be shared with other jurisdictions,” said Denis Nash, professor of epidemiology at the City University of New York’s School of Public Health. And other parts of the country are already seeing spikes in cases, including Michigan and Louisiana, specifically New Orleans. Officials in those states and cities are replicating the warnings voiced by those in New York: They need more protective gear for hospital workers, more ventilators, more hospital beds to meet the coming surge. “This doesn’t mean the rest of the country is spared,” said Nirav Shah, a former New York state health commissioner and adjunct professor at Stanford University. “Rather, we should work collectively to address the problem where it is. Today it is New York. Tomorrow it will be somewhere else, and only by coming together as a nation will we get this under control.”     A full day before President Donald Trump declared the coronavirus outbreak a national emergency, the mayor of Flint, Michigan, declared a state of emergency. Mayor Sheldon Neeley could see what was coming. The community has been living in crisis since the city started taking water from the Flint River in 2014, flowing it through corrosive pipes and into homes for drinking even though it was tainted and lead-ridden.  With the coronavirus pandemic sweeping across the country, the newly elected mayor knew it would only be a matter of time before Flint was dealing with an added health crisis. He would be proactive rather than reactive, he decided, for the majority African American community.  “It’s just such a crisis on top of a crisis with a side of crisis,” he told Vox by phone. “So we’re engaging on every level.” A week before declaring a state of emergency on March 12, the mayor put forth a new 14-day quarantine policy for those returning from travel. The day after the declaration, he limited public gatherings to 30 people. Four days later, he shut down city hall. Before the week was over, he issued a stay-at-home-order. As of March 27, more than 90 people have tested positive in Genesee County where Flint is, according to the state’s count, and a woman in a homeless shelter in the city has tested positive for the virus.  The mayor’s swift actions were necessary in a community as vulnerable as Flint’s: Forty percent of its 95,000 residents live below the poverty line, with nearly two-thirds of its children living in poverty, deepening the void between residents and access to regular health care, food, and clean drinking water. So while coronavirus fears sweep the nation, unlike the Americans who have the time and resources to stockpile toilet paper, Clorox wipes, and pasta, residents of Flint are already lagging.  “Your health care depends on who you are,” a 2014 Robert Wood Johnson Foundation report begins, citing disparities in coverage based on race and ethnicity, while a 2017 Health and Human Services finding ends with: “The death rate for African Americans is generally higher than whites for heart diseases, stroke, cancer, asthma, influenza and pneumonia, diabetes, HIV/AIDS, and homicide.” African Americans are also 4 percent more likely than their white counterparts to be uninsured and 7 percent more likely to fall into a coverage gap, a 2019 Kaiser Health News report found.  Citing these concerns, a group of black doctors told BuzzFeed’s Nidhi Prakash earlier this week they were calling on both the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the World Health Organization (WHO) to reveal if black communities across America were at a disadvantage in receiving coronavirus tests. Neither the CDC nor the Johns Hopkins data — which consists of CDC, WHO, and other resources — break down positive coronavirus cases by race or ethnicity.  While there may not be much national data regarding race, the coronavirus numbers coming out of Detroit, one of the blackest and poorest cities in the nation, proves how much the virus impacts low-income communities of color. Just two weeks ago, there was not a single coronavirus case reported in the city, and now there are more than 850 cases and 15 related deaths, according to the state government’s numbers. With a large number of residents not only living in poverty but also with acute health issues like diabetes, Detroit’s numbers are accelerating, Bridge Magazine reported — well beyond the state level in a state with one of the worst public health systems in the country.   “When you have undervalued communities, black and brown, by the majority of our society, we have to have an extra push, that extra fight to make sure that people are getting [their] fair share of the resources and supplies as necessary to safeguard life,” Neely said. For years, Catherine Flowers, the rural development manager for the Equal Justice Initiative, has visited Lowndes County in Alabama. Lowndes has a 75 percent black population. It does not have access to a basic municipal sewage system and its residents have contracted hookworm, an intestinal parasite often exacerbated by poor access to clean water. To divide the county even further, 37 percent of African American residents live below the poverty line compared to 4 percent of white residents.  Many of those people in Lowndes County, Flowers points out, are still working hourly jobs during the coronavirus pandemic because they do not have the economic privilege of working from home, or not working at all. Many are working retail jobs, she said, and some of those jobs don’t have workers’ protections while also having the highest level of exposure to the coronavirus. Social distancing is not possible for people who need money for their next meal. Only in recent days, Montgomery and Birmingham, two of the states’ urban cities, rolled out coronavirus tests, she pointed out, so it would be highly unlikely the tests would make it to a county of 10,000 people.  “I’m also concerned about the lack of testing in a lot of these areas, especially the rural areas, so we really won’t know the extent of their illnesses,” Flowers told Vox. “And my question is, if someone died of cardiac failure in these rural communities, and they have not been tested, we will not get a true understanding of what caused it.”  On top of that, cellphone connection and internet is spotty in Lowndes and many people do not have access to accurate, timely information. Inaccurate rumors were flying about the coronavirus, she said, with some suggesting black people couldn’t catch the virus. “I think that some people believe that, and it did mean that they didn’t protect themselves early enough,” Flowers added.  Meanwhile, in urban cities like Detroit, as the number of cases jumps closer to New York’s numbers per capita, the city’s mayor promised 400 tests would be available to residents each day, six days a week, for the next six weeks, Bridge Magazine reported. However, with more than 25 percent of the city’s population working in the service industry, and even more in the gig economy, residents might not have the choice to social distance for the next month as they need to go to work or pick up side work.  Reverend William Barber II, a board member of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and a leader of the Poor People’s Campaign, says the magnitude of the pandemic only exacerbates the fissures of equality in society. He has spent much of his career in low-income communities of color, including Lowndes County and counties in Louisiana, Mississippi, West Virginia, and North Carolina. Both the reverend and Flowers agree it is not just race playing a factor in the lack of preparation and ability to access health care: Income inequality further exacerbates these communities’ efforts.  “Prior to this virus, 140 million people were poor and low-income. Well, that’s 43 percent of your country. In the midst of this virus, the very thing that we are asking people to do we are often saying to them from a position of wealth and not understanding that because we didn’t address poverty,” Reverend Barber said. While social distancing works for those who have the privilege of working from home and ordering groceries, for some, social distancing for even one day can affect if they eat for a whole week or a whole month, he explained.  Making physicians and health centers available to these communities is a solution, said Dr. Patrice Harris, the American Medical Association’s first African American president. But at the same time, it should not be the responsibility of any one clinic or organization to reach these under-resourced communities, she said. “This needs to be an item of discussion and thoughts about how to make sure that there’s access to qualified health centers.”  Harris also points to the $2.2 trillion dollar stimulus package and the conversation around making health care available to those who might lose their jobs. The bill offers $150 billion in emergency aid to state and local governments with the premise it be used for coronavirus.  “I think states could do this, regarding Medicaid and work with the federal government, figuring out a way to make sure that folks who either lost their [health care] or now will be even more vulnerable would have access to test Medicaid.”  Coronavirus tests should also remain free and available to everyone, Dr. Harris said. But that has also been a painfully slow process across the country in both urban and rural populations as hospitals reach their capacity with patients requiring tests and care.  As they wait for aid, more resources for hospitals and doctors, and the effects of the stimulus package, those manning distribution centers in Flint or volunteering near food banks in Lowndes are stepping up.  Mayor Neely, ahead in his emergency declaration, took charge of the looming coronavirus crisis coming toward Flint. Four months into his new role, he ordered water disconnected by the previous administration reconnected. Greater Holy Temple Church, one of the three distribution centers in the city, is taking on the burden of passing out food and water to city residents, witnessing earlier and longer lines for bottled water while other cities across the country shelter in place and practice social distancing.  Flowers, in Alabama, says most residents in Lowndes and other areas like it will rely on dwindling supplies at food banks, hoping they do not have to go to the doctor for a flare-up of their diabetes or heart issues.  Like many officials, General Russel Honore, who led Task Force Katrina after the devastating hurricane destroyed New Orleans, says most of these communities — whether in Alabama, Michigan, or Louisiana — will see catastrophe because the federal government is managing a crisis engulfing the entire country and won’t be able to get to those who can’t take care of themselves: “The ones who do not have a cushion in the budget to buy extra food to stay home, those who have to pay for electricity when they have no money, or to pay for gas to get to work.”  But he says he’s seeing local and state officials in Baton Rouge, for example, try to ensure people stay home. “Kids that are out of school in the poor communities have access to food through the [schools] placing food in their [neighborhoods],” he said. “The governor has put together a plan to have the National Guard post food in communities. And if people have food, they’re more likely to stay home.”  On Facebook, people are organizing ways to drop food off for those who need it, he said. The general calls it innovative. “But,” he warned, “it’s going to get worse before it gets better. We haven’t seen the real test yet.”The House has officially passed a $2 trillion stimulus package aimed at addressing the economic fallout resulting from efforts to control the coronavirus pandemic. It now heads to President Donald Trump’s desk, where he’s expected to sign it.  The package offers significant relief for workers, small businesses, and corporations that have been affected by social distancing measures put in place to curb the spread of the coronavirus, including the closures of restaurants, bars, and schools, as well as restrictions on gatherings of more than 10 people.  The legislation guarantees direct payment to most adults, as well as expanded unemployment insurance for workers who have been laid off. However, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi acknowledged this is far from the end of the relief Congress should authorize. “This cannot be our final bill,” Pelosi said during a floor speech ahead of the vote on Friday.  
    Related
   The bill’s passage follows days of back-and-forth — and occasional conflict — between Senate lawmakers including Minority Leader Chuck Schumer and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, who played a prominent role in crafting the legislation.  Despite the objection of Republican Rep. Thomas Massie (KY), the bill easily passed by a voice vote. A voice vote means the legislation is approved if the majority of lawmakers who are present vocalize their support for it — a test of House protocol during a time when most lawmakers in the lower chamber are working remotely to protect themselves and their staffers from the disease.  On Thursday night, Democratic and Republican leadership alike suddenly called members back to Washington after Massie suggested he might force a roll call vote in an attempt to defeat the bill. Massie got plenty of blame from colleagues on both sides of the aisle who accused him of needlessly endangering the health of his fellow lawmakers. (Congress already has several confirmed cases of Covid-19, the illness caused by the coronavirus.)  President Trump also walloped Massie on Twitter for threatening to hold up the bill, calling him a “third rate Grandstander.” Ahead of the vote, the House sergeant at arms issued strict guidance about social distancing at the Capitol, limiting the number of members on the House floor solely to those who were speaking while debate was taking place. Other measures were taken to reduce the number of people congregating: Lawmakers were also put into alphabetical groups to file in and vote in waves if a recorded vote was needed.  The passage of this bill is a notable step in addressing the overwhelming economic impact the pandemic has had, though more action could be on the horizon.  While the Senate won’t physically return to the Capitol until April 20, Pelosi was hesitant to commit to a date on her side, given that lawmakers might have to come back sooner and approve further emergency legislation. Leaders in the two chambers have resisted moving to remote votes up to this point, in part because it could conflict with practices established by the Constitution for convening in person.  “I think everybody has to be on call for what we need when we need it, and we don’t know what that might be,” Pelosi told reporters at her Thursday press conference. A $500 billion loan program for businesses: The biggest sticking point between Democrats and Republicans throughout the negotiations was $500 billion in emergency loans for large businesses and municipalities grappling with the coronavirus outbreak. For instance, $50 billion of that money was allotted to passenger airlines, according to the Washington Post. Rather than trying to negotiate that figure down, Democrats instead negotiated for oversight of the “slush fund.” Instead of giving the Trump administration broad discretion to make the loans, there will be a new inspector general in the Treasury Department specifically to oversee these funds, as well as a congressional oversight panel to examine how the money is being used.  After concerns emerged about Trump personally benefiting from the loans, Schumer’s office also announced they secured a provision that will “prohibit businesses controlled by the President, Vice President, Members of Congress, and heads of Executive Departments from receiving loans or investments from Treasury programs.” The children, spouses, or in-laws of lawmakers and executive officials also cannot receive these loans. Some additional conditions championed by progressives and supported by the public, including a requirement for companies to implement a $15 minimum wage, have not made it into the final legislation. The package does limit layoffs by companies receiving the aid and bars stock buybacks. “Unemployment insurance on steroids”: Schumer announced Monday afternoon that unemployment insurance will be expanded to grapple with a new surge in claims, calling it “unemployment insurance on steroids.” The new bill will increase unemployment insurance by $600 per week for four months. This money is in addition to what states pay as a base unemployment salary. This benefit would extend to gig economy workers, freelancers, and furloughed workers who are still getting health insurance from their employers but are not receiving a paycheck. Funds for hospitals, medical equipment, and health care worker protections: The bill contains $130 billion to boost the health care system, according to Schumer. Of that, $100 billion will go to hospitals, $1 billion will go to the Indian Health Service, and the remainder will be used to increase medical equipment capacity. Increased aid to state and local governments: Schumer also said about $150 billion of federal money would be allocated for state and local governments that are dealing with the impacts of the crisis in their communities, including $8 billion for tribal governments. Direct payments to adults below a certain income threshold: The legislation includes a one-time $1,200 check that would be sent to most adults making $75,000 or less annually, according to past tax returns. A $500 payment would also be sent to cover every child in qualifying households. The final policy marks a significant change from the direct payments initially proposed by Republicans, which would have given less to many individuals who do not have taxable income. It now includes the majority of adults who are under the $75,000 threshold and phases out the payment as people’s incomes increase. Loans to small businesses: $367 billion in the bill is aimed at providing loans for small businesses, according to the Washington Post. Businesses with fewer than 500 employees will also be eligible for a payroll tax credit.  For seven years, Mike worked as a bellhop at a Marriott hotel in Florida. “I had one of the best jobs ever,” Mike, who asked to be referred to by a pseudonym because he fears retribution from his employer, told Vox. That all changed last week, when he and tens of thousands of other Marriott workers abruptly lost their jobs. The hotel conglomerate, which operates more than 6,900 properties worldwide, is one of many companies that has reduced its workforce in response to the coronavirus. Mike isn’t surprised he lost his job — if there’s one thing people likely aren’t doing amid a pandemic, it’s going on vacation — but he doesn’t agree with the way Marriott went about it. In an average year, Mike makes about $60,000, much of which comes from tips. He’s received just one week of severance pay despite his seven years on the job, calculated using his base pay instead of his tipped wage. “It’s distasteful, disrespectful, and disappointing,” he said. “Marriott’s creed is ‘Take care of our employees so they take care of our guests,’ and they’re not really living that.” A Marriott spokesperson clarified that no one had technically been laid off, but that tens of thousands of workers were being furloughed indefinitely. The company declined to tell Vox how much severance workers would receive, but an internal email sent to some employees says that full-time employees would receive 40 hours of pay while part-timers would get half that.  Hundreds of thousands of people are in a similar position, or may be soon. More than 3 million people filed for unemployment last week, according to data from the Department of Labor. It’s possible that millions more will soon lose their jobs. The hospitality industry is particularly vulnerable: The American Hotel & Lodging Association, a lobbying group for the industry, warns that 44 percent of hotel employees in the US could be laid off or furloughed because of the virus. For workers like Mike, the problem isn’t just a loss of income, it’s how employers are structuring severance packages and communicating about furloughs and layoffs.  In Houston, workers at the dining room of the Post Oak Hotel — which is owned by billionaire Tilman Fertitta, the CEO of the restaurant conglomerate Landry’s — were reportedly told they wouldn’t be able to get their sick days or other time off paid out to make up for lost hours while the restaurant was closed for eat-in service. The hotel then backtracked, telling the Houston Chronicle that employees would be able to use their paid time off.  The Starr Restaurant Group in Philadelphia, which also placed its workers on indefinite furlough, similarly told employees they wouldn’t be able to use vacation or sick days to keep getting paid after the restaurants shut down. A Starr representative later told Eater Philadelphia that the restaurant group was in the process of paying out “hundreds of thousands of dollars” in sick leave. The problem isn’t limited to restaurants and hotels. Last week, the president and CEO of Cirque du Soleil laid off 95 percent of the entertainment company’s staff via video, Jezebel reports. “I wish I had a chance to speak to you in person,” CEO Daniel Lamarre said in the video. “Unfortunately, given the current pandemic, a video was the best option for me to speak to all of you at the same time, and most importantly, protect your health.”  Full-time workers will have health insurance coverage for up to six months, but most won’t be able to use their accrued paid time off if they want to receive unemployment. According to the Jezebel report, workers asked if they would have their PTO paid out and were told no, because that would mean they had “quit” and wouldn’t qualify for unemployment benefits. (Cirque du Soleil didn’t respond to The Goods’ request for comment.) Retailers are also shutting down operations across the country, leaving thousands of people without work; even direct-to-consumer brands that primarily fulfill orders online are feeling the squeeze. Everlane and Glossier closed their physical retail locations, though both brands said workers would be compensated until the stores opened again. Workers at other direct-to-consumer brands, however, say they were let go without notice or severance.  ThirdLove, a bra brand that trades on its feminist messaging and was previously investigated by Vox, laid off the entire retail staff for its New York pop-up without any notice, a person with knowledge of the situation said. The staffers initially weren’t offered severance and didn’t even get a phone call, said the source, who spoke to Vox on condition of anonymity.   “They said online they offered severance and benefits to the team,” the source said, noting the company also posted this information on Instagram, “but they hadn’t actually formally communicated anything to the team.” The source said some staffers posted about the disparity between ThirdLove’s public statement and their experience on social media, but those posts now appear to have been deleted. “It definitely felt like the post they did was only because they were worried about the tweets and stuff becoming a thing,” the source said. “Two weeks [of payroll] shouldn’t bankrupt the company. It just seems like they’re behaving poorly.” A ThirdLove spokesperson said around 10 people were affected by the layoffs, and that the brand chose to let each person know individually rather than in a larger meeting. ThirdLove CEO Heidi Zak told The Goods all laid-off retail staffers were offered severance, but didn’t clarify how much. Workers at more established retailers aren’t safe from layoffs, either. New York City’s famous Strand bookstore laid off 188 employees, who reportedly received severance and had their vacation and sick time paid out. Powell’s, an Oregon-based bookstore, also laid off most of its staff. Oregon Live reports that employees were told their health insurance would only cover them until the end of the month they were last employed. If a worker was laid off on March 16, for example, they’d only be insured through March 31 — leaving them vulnerable during a particularly precarious time.  In a statement to Vox, ILWU Local 5, the union representing Powell’s employees, said it was “gravely disappointed” with the way the company handled the layoffs.  “While many other small businesses who are hurting have found ways to support and assist their staff during this time, reaching out to the greater community for support and ideas, the leader — arguably — of the independent bookselling world has so far done the bare minimum,” the union said. “The decision to lay workers off without reasonable provisions for their well-being will have a deep and lasting impact not only to them, but to the community at large. In this society, for any crisis event, it appears it is the workers who take the brunt of trauma.” While laid-off and furloughed workers wonder how they’ll pay the bills in the middle of a global health crisis, the retail employees expected to continue showing up to work are dealing with a different, equally pressing problem: staying healthy. Employees at Walmart and Target, both of which have been deemed essential businesses and are therefore allowed to stay open, told the Guardian their managers weren’t doing enough to protect them. “I’m 64 years old and according to the CDC, I should be staying home and practicing social distancing and in quarantine,” one Walmart employee told the paper. “So I go to work and pray that none of the hordes of shoppers I’m exposed to ... transmit it to me. The thing that scares me most is getting exposed and passing it to my 84-year-old mother.” Walmart lets workers take unpaid time off, but for employees who can’t afford it, that policy is virtually meaningless. Target gives paid leave to workers over 65 and to those with underlying medical conditions — but new reports suggest that young, healthy people are increasingly falling sick with the coronavirus too. Warehouse workers are also under pressure. Several Amazon warehouse workers told BuzzFeed News that the e-commerce company’s fulfillment centers aren’t properly equipped with cleaning supplies like hand sanitizer and disinfectant wipes. Like Walmart, Amazon is letting workers take unpaid time off — but that also means employees who are able to work have to make up for lost worker power during a surge in orders. Retail, grocery, and warehouse jobs are among the few options left for people who have lost work due to the virus; Walmart, Target, and Amazon have all said they plan to hire hundreds of thousands of new employees in the coming months. Recently laid-off workers, especially those who have barely received any severance, now find themselves in a difficult position: rely on unemployment benefits to pay the bills, or take a job where the risk of exposure to the coronavirus is even higher. For some, steady income may be more appealing — or more necessary — than unemployment checks, which are typically capped at a percentage of one’s former income. But working in the middle of a pandemic comes with its own risks when you can’t work from home. Some workers may benefit from the $1,200 stimulus checks the federal government is expected to send out soon, but those one-time payments will only go so far. Mike, the former Marriott bellhop, said he’s still weighing his options. “I haven’t figured it out yet,” he said. “I was considering getting a job at a grocery store, but I have no solid plan for the moment.”Zeba Khan hasn’t left her house in Texas in over two weeks, not even for a walk, because she is immunocompromised. Contracting the novel coronavirus and the disease it causes, Covid-19, could easily lead to her death. It’s a risk she isn’t willing to take as a mother of three kids, one of whom has special needs.  This means that she can’t get the physical therapy she needs to ease the pain that comes from the two herniated discs in her back, a symptom of her genetic defection that compromises her immune system. Instead, she’s been relying on pain medication, which simply isn’t enough.  “To be honest, it really sucks — being in pain every day, when it’s resolvable, [and] staying back because some people just won’t do what needs to be done to end this lockdown,” she said. “It’s frustrating, but I’d rather live in pain than die. I’d rather be alive and suffering than dead. I have people that I need to live for, even if I’m in pain for it. It’s the cost of staying alive.” Khan is just one of the 10 million immunocompromised people in the US who could be affected by the pandemic. Along with people over the age of 65, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has designated immunocompromised people as a group with a higher risk of serious illness. Because their impaired immune system has a weakened ability to fight infections, these people are more likely to contract the novel coronavirus and die from it. Khan said that means she has to take far more drastic measures — no walks, no visitors, and definitely no grocery runs — than able-bodied people to stay safe.  Yet there are already signals from the government that social distancing could end soon for the sake of the economy. This week, President Donald Trump repeatedly said he wanted society up and running by Easter, which is only a little more than two weeks away. It’s a timeline that many health experts are skeptical of and warn could cause an uptick in cases. And yet on Thursday, he doubled down in a letter to governors, saying that his administration is developing new, more relaxed social distancing guidelines for state and local officials. Trump’s rush to get people back to their jobs would have dire consequences for immunocompromised people. Returning to work would mean risking death. The only other option, however, would be isolating themselves indefinitely. Neither are optimal scenarios, and Khan said she’s been disheartened by the government’s narrative that prioritizes the economy over people.  “People are like, yeah, it’s okay if the immunocompromised die,” she said. “I’m not okay with my son’s mother dying. Nobody should be okay with their own parents dying. It’s heartless to be perfectly alright with someone else’s death.”  The pandemic is bringing back harrowing memories for Elyse Hale, a 32-year-old immunocompromised woman living in Michigan. She especially has to be careful around respiratory diseases because of her history of bilateral pneumonia, an infection that affected both her lungs. She doesn’t want to repeat this physical and emotional pain with Covid-19.  “Having to relearn how to breathe, having been in that boat before, it’s a horrifying experience,” she said. “Just laying down in bed it had felt like I was drowning. I don’t ever want to experience that nightmare again, so hearing the experiences of others who are currently going through coronavirus is bringing back that nightmare again for me.” She said she’s doing her best to not let the fear of her weakened immune system consume her life, and sticks to keeping good hygiene. The pandemic, however, makes that very difficult. Even a simple Amazon package can trigger anxiety, she said. She’ll end up spending hours thinking about the package — and the germs that could potentially kill her — while letting it sit at the bottom of the stairs, even though she can logically just wash her hands afterward. After episodes like this, she’s learned to make light of the situation by joking about it, but concern still lingers.  Tori Holman from Florida, who has a compromised immune system because of her liver transplant from October, has also struggled with anxiety since the pandemic. A lot of her time is spent cleaning the surfaces around her so that she’s not in contact with germs, including the groceries her mom buys. She hasn’t been able to leave the house since late February. The one time she made it outside was when she had a medical scare, and even then she was covered head-to-toe with clothes and gloves.  “It’s really, really scary,” she said. “I’ve gotten depressed because I haven’t been able to see a lot of people. ... And anxiety is a really huge factor because you never really know. Especially the whole ‘you can have it without having any symptoms,’ that one scares me a lot because you never know if someone has it.”  Alexis White, a college student with a compromised immune system, has learned to tame her anxiety due to her extensive experience with self-isolation in the past. A busy schedule helps: She said her days back at home in Missouri are still packed with practicing physical therapy moves and mindful resting.  However, she said she may have to start worrying about food supplies if the pandemic continues for an extended period of time — a concern unique to the many immunocompromised people with dietary restrictions. Although experts have assured the virus won’t cause any disruption in the food supply, White said she already had a hard time finding food items that fit her dietary needs — she is allergic to gluten and dairy — in Missouri even before the pandemic. These dietary restrictions are yet again another distinctive burden that immunocompromised people have to bear during times like this. And it’s a condition that could happen to anyone, White pointed out.  “Even if you’re healthy you can still become disabled, you can still become chronically ill,” she said. “This sickness doesn’t discriminate against anyone.” Trump prioritizing the economy above public health isn’t the only way he’s been putting immunocompromised people in danger. His irresponsible messaging has also led to a shortage in drugs that are necessary for lupus and rheumatoid arthritis patients, another group of people with compromised immune systems.  For the past week, Trump has been touting hydroxychloroquine as a miracle drug for Covid-19, even though there has been no evidence of whether it’s effective, or even safe. The president himself even acknowledged that he couldn’t predict if the drug would work, but that didn’t stop him from promoting it as a potential solution to the pandemic.  “I’m a smart guy,” he said. “I feel good about it. And we’re going to see. You’re going to see soon enough.” As a response, people have begun to hoard the drug out of desperation, according to Kaiser Health News. Doctors and dentists are writing prescriptions for their family and friends, making the supply of the drug unstable — which is a problem for lupus and rheumatoid patients who have immediate needs for it. A daily intake helps with their swelling and rashes; without the drug, their symptoms could flare and they could end up in the hospital, which is an especially dangerous setting right now for those with compromised immune systems. Even a slight exposure to Covid-19 could lead to a deadly infection.  The Lupus Foundation is looking to protect the immunocompromised community by asking politicians to ensure supply for lupus patients. While they wait for legislative action, however, some patients are only being given limited supplies, and in some cases, are being sent away from pharmacies that have run out.  On Thursday, Trump told state governors he will release relaxed socially distancing guidelines based on region. Many health experts think this is a bad idea — social distancing is about limiting the spread, and the US currently has the most confirmed coronavirus cases in the world. While many people won’t grow gravely ill from the virus, they could pass it onto those who will, particularly older and immunocompromised people.  As Jonathan Kimmelman, director of the Biomedical Ethics Unit at McGill University in Montreal, told Vox reporter Leslie Goldman, “A lot of us might be relatively healthy and think we might be able to withstand the rigors of an infection, but there’s the concern about spreading it to vulnerable individuals, as well as the pressure this outbreak will place on our health care system.” Kimmelman says this is about “social solidarity” — that “we have an ethical obligation to curtail activities, practice social distancing, and substitute activities with safer alternatives.”  Yet many able-bodied people have minimized the importance of social distancing, perhaps because of Trump’s often-unclear messaging. A video of spring breakers in Florida went viral last week for their indifference to the virus. Meanwhile, people have been sharing pictures of groups in clusters in cities like Washington, DC, and San Francisco.  Khan said it’s been frustrating to see people disregard social distancing when it's the least able-bodied people can do to flatten the curve and protect immunocompromised people. People choose to leave their houses because of boredom, she said, but that decision can risk her life.  “Other people’s aversion to boredom can kill me,” she said. “I don’t think that’s fair. I don’t think that’s right. And it certainly is selfish. And it’s disappointing that people only take the disease as seriously as it affects them personally.”  It’s a sentiment that Hale shares as well. She said immunocompromised people have been excluded from the conversation surrounding Covid-19, which has led to people’s careless behavior.  “People are forgetting that immunocompromised people exist. 32-year-olds want to live, too. 25-year-olds want to live. The 18-year-olds want to live, and the 6-year-olds want to live,” she said. “What about us?”  “America will again, and soon, be open for business,” President Donald Trump said on Monday. “Very soon. A lot sooner than three or four months that somebody was suggesting. A lot sooner. We cannot let the cure be worse than the problem itself.”   The cure, in this case, is social distancing, and the mass economic stoppage it forces. The problem is Covid-19, and the millions of deaths it could cause. On Tuesday, Trump accelerated his timeline. He said he’d like to see normalcy return by Easter Sunday, which is April 12. “Wouldn’t it be great to have all the churches full?” he asked. “You’ll have packed churches all over our country.”  Public health experts reacted with horror. But the question Trump is posing needs to be taken seriously. The costs of social distancing are tremendous. The economic forecasts now predict a GDP drop and an unemployment rate of Great Depression-level proportions. The human suffering that will be unleashed is real, and it is vicious.  It feels cold and inhuman to ask the question: “How many lives is economic growth worth?” But we ask — and answer — it constantly, even if we rarely admit it. Millions die from pollution and car accidents, byproducts of our industrial economy and transportation networks. We could close the factories, block the roads, and save those lives. But we don’t. As Trump often points out, tens of thousands die each year of the flu, but California doesn’t shutter its restaurants. Moreover, mass economic suffering poses its own dangers, both physical and political. “Right now, people are stunned by what is happening,” Frances Lee, a political scientist at the University of Maryland, wrote to me in an email. “But they will wake up soon and realize that they have been ruined economically.” When that happens, she worries, it will be “a profound threat to social peace.” Epidemiological models forecast the path of disease, not the stability of societies. Add that into the model and perhaps the cost-benefit analysis changes. Lurking at the center of this debate is an imagined world where we let Covid-19 rip through the population, killing millions and hospitalizing far more, but younger, healthier Americans keep the economy humming along as normal. “Let’s get back to work, let’s get back to living,” said Texas’s Republican Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick. “Let’s be smart about it. Those of us who’re 70-plus, we’ll take care of ourselves. But don’t sacrifice the country.” But many — myself included — question whether that’s realistic. As Bill Gates put it, “it’s very tough to say to people, ‘Hey, keep going to restaurants, go buy new houses, ignore that pile of bodies over in the corner. We want you to keep spending because there’s maybe a politician who thinks GDP growth is all that counts.’” The thinking being framed here as a grim acceptance of the economy’s primacy is questioned by top economists as both morally and empirically misguided.  “Look, I’m an economist and I am gruesomely comfortable with putting a value on a life,” says Jason Furman, who teaches economic policy at Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government and served as chair of the White House Council of Economic Advisers under Obama. “If it costs one hundred million dollars to save a life, and we have a limited budget, it may not be not worth it. But I think the right model right now isn’t that you’re trading lives off against better economic performance. It’s that if you don’t save those lives, you might have even worse economic performance.” 
    Related
   The true choice, Furman argues, is this: You can suppress the virus now and deal with a terrible economy six months from now, or you can wait two more months to suppress the virus, find yourself forced into yet more extreme quarantine measures because the virus is pervasive and the death toll overwhelming, and find yourself in an even more horrendous economy on the other side.  Before we pit economic growth against human life, in other words, we need to be sure whether that’s truly the choice we’re facing. “We’re not necessarily having a moral disagreement,” says Ruth Faden, the founder of Johns Hopkins Berman Institute of Bioethics. “If you’ve got very different empirical views of how this is going to play out, what looks like a moral disagreement ends up being a disagreement about probabilities and contingencies.” This is a debate worth having, but it needs to be had with a lot more clarity, and a lot more rigor. So let’s have it.  On Tuesday, the World Health Organization warned that America was becoming the new epicenter of the pandemic. If you plot new cases in the US against the path the disease has followed in other countries, we’re on track for the worst Covid-19 outbreak in the world.   Responsible epidemiologists will tell you not to extrapolate crudely: When caseloads rise rapidly, societies respond, imposing harsh social distancing measures to slow the spread of the disease. That’s how the curves bent in other nations, they say, and it’s how it’ll bend in America, too. But America, unusually, is led by a president advocating the opposite: Caseloads are rocketing upward, and he wants to pull back on suppression measures within two weeks.  Imagine if we did. On April 12, the Trump administration, as well as every state and locality, lifts the social distancing guidelines. Restaurants reopen. Church pews are packed. Bars throw “F the coronavirus” parties. The virus accelerates. Hospitals are quickly overwhelmed — which means the virus becomes more lethal, as people who need ventilators can’t get them. But it’s not just the virus that becomes more lethal. All medical emergencies become more lethal, because the ICUs are packed and there are critical shortages of doctors and nurses.  In a scenario like that, it’s entirely possible that the coronavirus would infect 60 percent of the country, with a case fatality rate of 1.5 percent, in a matter of months. That would mean almost 3 million deaths directly from coronavirus — roughly three times as many Americans as have died in every war we’ve ever fought combined. And that doesn’t count the deaths indirectly caused by coronavirus. With hospitals in lockdown, people would cease seeking care for chest pain, they’d put off needed surgeries, they’d try to treat at home what they would once have asked a doctor to diagnose. Many of them would die.  I have focused here on deaths, but suffering matters, too. As Scott Gottlieb, Donald Trump’s former Food and Drug Administration commissioner, notes, Covid-19 is a brutal illness that forces hospitalization and even ICU admission in a large proportion of cases, even among the young.  While vast majority of deaths from #COVID19 are age 60+ many young adults and middle aged Americans are becoming seriously ill and surviving only after prolonged hospitalizations and ICU admissions that have long term consequences. This is a dangerous virus for most age groups. pic.twitter.com/jVYWFatTDM It’s absurd to think that Americans under age 65 would go about their lives as normal, risking a disease that could force them into the ICU when the ICUs are full. And what about those of us who have immunosuppressed partners, or who want to visit our parents?  This is why so many economists are skeptical of arguments that pit the economy against the virus. They worry that if you let the virus rage unchecked, you’ll get both a worse epidemic and a worse economy.  On Thursday, a group of economic luminaries, including the past two Federal Reserve chairs, and chief economists and Treasury secretaries from both Democratic and Republican administrations, released a letter arguing that the path back to a functional economy runs through sound public health measures. “Saving lives and saving the economy are not in conflict right now; we will hasten the return to robust economic activity by taking steps to stem the spread of the virus and save lives,” they wrote. New research offers historical support for that argument. Economists Sergio Correia, Stephan Luck, and Emil Verner looked at the areas of the United States that were hit hardest by the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic. The cities that deployed social distancing measures earliest and most aggressively fared better, on both health and economic measures, than the cities with slower, weaker responses. Social distancing interventions, the authors conclude, “can reduce mortality while at the same time being economically beneficial.” There is an aesthetic of toughness to making the argument, right now, that we could keep calm and carry on in the face of an unchecked plague. But if you force yourself to imagine that world deeply, the counterfactual breaks down. There’s no normal economy, or normal polity, amid that kind of mass death. “It’s an unreal realism,” says Adam Tooze, an economic historian at Columbia University who studies financial crises. “In practice, what that will do is create such a catastrophic collapse in employment and business activity that it will be completely untenable as an economic policy or politically.”  Trump is making this argument now, when the economic and political pain of social distancing is present but the horror of 20 million coronavirus infections isn’t. As Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-SC) put it, “Try running an economy with major hospitals overflowing, doctors and nurses forced to stop treating some because they can’t help all, and every moment of gut-wrenching medical chaos being played out in our living rooms, on TV, on social media, and shown all around the world. There is no functioning economy unless we control the virus.”  If the leading voices in the “carry-on” crowd have offered a false choice, part of the reason it’s taken hold is that the social distancing crowd has, too often, offered no choice at all.  I live in the Bay Area, in northern California. We were the first locality to impose shelter-in-place rules. Those rules — their severity and their urgency — were clearly communicated. But despite closely following the news, I have no idea what is supposed to happen on April 7, when the order ends. Will it be renewed? Did we use this time to radically increase the number of hospital beds and ventilators? Do we have the capacity for mass testing, such that we can move toward something like the models we see in Taiwan or South Korea?  Social distancing itself is not a cure. This becomes sharply clear in the influential Imperial College report modeling different paths for the outbreak (with added commentary here). Yes, social distancing works to slow transmission. But the disease roars back when the restrictions ease. “This type of intensive intervention package — or something equivalently effective at reducing transmission — will need to be maintained until a vaccine becomes available (potentially 18 months or more) — given that we predict that transmission will quickly rebound if interventions are relaxed,” the authors write.  So let’s put this clearly: Comparing the cure and the disease is a false choice in both directions. If you let the disease rage, you don’t save the economy. But if you lock down the economy, you don’t cure the disease. It is understandable, in the initial panic to slow the disease, that public health messaging has emphasized the importance of social distancing, but in order to keep people bought into that strategy, it’s necessary to be clear about what comes after.  Extreme social distancing measures buy time. That’s time that needs to be used for four things: Bringing the disease’s reproduction rate down so the caseloads begin to fall. Surging health supply to handle the infections we already have and currently expect. Massively expanding testing capacity so we can track the disease going forward. And passing enough support and stimulus measures so people can survive this period economically, not just epidemiologically.  Together, these policies could, as the Center on Global Development’s Jeremy Konyndyk told Vox, move us from “sledgehammer” to “scalpel.” Or, as entrepreneur Tomas Pueyo has put it in a viral series of Medium posts, “the hammer and the dance”: If that’s done well, we could move toward a phase more like what we see in Taiwan: constant vigilance and large-scale testing, the reimposition of social distancing if cases get out of hand, but normalcy most of the time, for most of the population. That is not a sunny vision of our immediate future, but these are not sunny times. “This is one of the most significant crises that the world has ever faced in terms of the numbers of lives that could be lost and the destruction to the economies globally and nationally that will result,” says Faden. We will not escape it unscathed, and no one should pretend otherwise. But the choices we make in the coming days will decide whether it is difficult or disastrous. The grim truth, for those of us living under tight lockdowns right now, is it’s not clear that the time we’ve bought is being used well. Social distancing is likely slowing disease transmission, but there’s little evidence that the country has been sufficiently swift in surging health and testing capacity. Indeed, governors of key states are saying, daily, that they’re not getting the support they need.  Since the beginning I’ve promised you transparency and honesty on all aspects of our response. To that end, I want to take a moment now to run you through our PPE requests with the federal government, and what we’ve received from them. pic.twitter.com/SsOw1l4UKF Konyndyk says we need a “Manhattan Project effort to get this stuff in place in really a two-or three-month period.” So far, we aren’t seeing one. This is where presidential leadership really matters. If Trump had put the full weight of his presidency, and of the federal government, behind a well-sequenced coronavirus response plan, the country could understand what their sacrifice was being used for and feel confident that there was an endgame.  Instead, the opposite is happening. Trump spent a couple of days acting like the president, but he quickly reverted to his more traditional behavior of hammering his enemies and blaming the media for his problems.  The LameStream Media is the dominant force in trying to get me to keep our Country closed as long as possible in the hope that it will be detrimental to my election success. The real people want to get back to work ASAP.  We will be stronger than ever before! That most every affected country in the world either reacted more swiftly than America, or has imposed more aggressive social distancing, makes clear how dangerous it is for Trump to treat public health recommendations like a conspiracy against his reelection campaign. Israelis, for instance, are being told to stay within 100 yards of their homes or face fines or even imprisonment. Does Trump believe that’s because Benjamin Netanyahu is watching too much MSNBC? Rather than make the country’s sacrifices count, Trump is telling Americans we’ve already sacrificed too much, for too long. This is a moment that demands social solidarity, but all Trump knows is fracture. This is a moment that requires long-term thinking and sacrifice, but Trump acts on the timeline of the cable news segment in front of him. It is perhaps the most stunning and dangerous abdication of presidential leadership in the modern era.  “When the president stands on top of a table and says, ‘This is super important, super urgent, everyone must do this,’ the government works moderately effectively,” says Ron Klain, who managed the Obama administration’s Ebola response. “That’s the best case. When the president is standing up and saying, ‘I don’t want to hear about it. I don’t want to know about it, this doesn’t really exist,’ well, then you’re definitely not going to get effective work from the government.” An irony of the coronavirus crisis is that if we managed it well, it would likely feel to the public that the sacrifice wasn’t worth it. Politicians don’t get credit for the lives they saved, for the catastrophes they averted, but they do get punished for the pain they cause. An ideal response would make the cost of disease suppression visible even as it lured people into a false sense that the virus’s threat was overstated. As Dr. Anthony Fauci, head of the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases, put it, “if it looks like you’re overreacting, you’re probably doing the right thing.” But what we are barreling toward right now is much worse: an inept, fumbling response in which we fully experience the virus’s toll — in which millions die and the economy freezes and we find ourselves dearly wishing we had understood the choices better, and made the hard decisions earlier.  Slowing coronavirus will impose real costs, and immense suffering, on society. Are those costs worth it? This is the most important public policy question right now. And if the discussion isn’t had well, then it will be had, as we’re already seeing, poorly, and dangerously.   Subscribe to The Ezra Klein Show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, Stitcher, or wherever you get your podcasts.March 26 marked an unhappy milestone for the United States: It’s now No. 1 in confirmed coronavirus cases.  China, where the novel coronavirus originated, was the previous leader. The country reported 81,782 cases as of Thursday near 6 pm on the coronavirus case counter by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University. Until now, second place was held by Italy, which has reported 80,589 cases.  Now the US leapfrogged them both with 82,404 cases. And it’s only going to get worse from here.  In late February, there were 80,000 cases in China and nascent outbreaks in Japan, South Korea, Iran, and Italy. But things in the US were still looking pretty good — at least, on the surface. The US on February 20 reported only 15 cases, all travel-related.  But once officials started testing in earnest for Covid-19, the cases started coming — and coming and coming. On March 1, there were 75. On March 7, 435. On March 14, 2,770. On March 21, 24,192. Now it’s at 82,404 — and those numbers are only going to go up in the coming weeks. How did things go so wrong so fast? Much of the answer is that when the US was reporting very few cases, things were already getting bad under the radar. A disastrously mismanaged February, during which government officials, much of the media, and even some experts assured Americans there was nothing to fear, let the virus spread until it was too big to ignore. By that time, it was also too big to stop without heavy-handed social distancing measures — and their attendant catastrophic economic costs. Much of the blame lies with the president, who stripped public health agencies of the staffing, resources, and authority they needed to function, and then addressed the crisis in his usual fashion: with misinformation and bluster. It’s worked well for him against many of the scandals of his administration, but the virus was unimpressed.  But the failure wasn’t just the president’s. As Zeynep Tufekci, who has been urging us to do more for months, put it, “a soothing message got widespread traction, not just with Donald Trump and his audience, but among traditional media in the United States, which exhorted us to worry about the flu instead, and warned us against overreaction.” Even with the government sleeping on the job, there were signs from other countries that a catastrophe was arriving on our shores. But very few people said it out loud, and the ones who did were assured they were overreacting. Most people took public health experts’ reassurances at face value and assumed the low numbers of reported cases reflected reality. Meanwhile, the virus spread. Now, the world’s most powerful country has one of the world’s worst disasters on its hands. The question now is: Is it too late to turn things around? The US has more confirmed cases than anywhere else in the world. It’s a sign that our coronavirus situation is very grave indeed. However, it doesn’t necessarily mean that the US has the world’s worst coronavirus outbreak.  For one thing, while the US is still undertesting (people with milder cases are typically told to stay home and not be tested), other countries are probably undertesting by even more. Iran, by some estimates, may have millions of coronavirus cases, most of which the government has not reported.  Other hotspots that worry global development researchers include India and Indonesia — both populous countries with weak health systems and high poverty that are likely underreporting their coronavirus outbreaks by a significant margin. One study found that Indonesia is probably reporting around 10 percent of its symptomatic cases, and India between 10 percent and 30 percent.  Another important consideration is population. The US is the third-most populous country in the world. That means that, while our outbreaks are not yet worse per capita than many of the outbreaks in Europe, the top-line numbers look worse. Italy, for example, has reported one case for every 750 citizens. The US has reported one for every 4,000 (though 1 in every 400 New York City residents). Per capita numbers may better reflect how overwhelmed a country’s health system is and how badly it is impacted by the virus.  But overall numbers matter, too. Tens of thousands of people suffering and many of them dying isn’t less tragic if it happens in a large country where they’re a smaller share of the population.  So, while the US situation is very bad news, it’s the combination of a high population, a disastrous outbreak, and high testing capacity (in the past few days, the US has finally — if belatedly — started testing on a large scale) that propelled America into the No. 1 slot. We should take the situation seriously.  But it’s a misinterpretation to claim that America has the worst outbreak in the world just because it has the most reported cases in the world. (To be clear, the US could still end up with the worst outbreak in the world — but we’re not there yet.) When you test more, you’ll get more cases — but testing more is a good thing, and the United States, despite the desperate situation, is in a much better position to turn things around because of all the tests run in the past week. In late January, China locked down the country as hospitals and intensive care units (ICUs) in Wuhan were overwhelmed by coronavirus patients. In response, the United States banned foreign nationals who had recently traveled to China. That “resulted in a significant delay in the number of people coming in with infection,” Dr. Tom Frieden, former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), has said. “That bought time in the US to better prepare.”  Then, the US squandered it. “Every other step of the government response was badly fumbled,” Frieden concluded. Budget cuts and mismanagement by the Trump administration had gutted many of the agencies that were meant to address the crisis. The CDC started work on a test that would identify the novel coronavirus, but shipped the test out to labs with incorrect reagents, meaning that the test didn’t work. Guidance on when there’d be a new test was slow in coming.  Independent researchers at Seattle’s Flu Study, a research project studying flu in the Seattle region, sought permission to run their own test. They were denied it. “We felt like we were sitting, waiting for the pandemic to emerge,” said Dr. Helen Chu, who led the project. “We could help. We couldn’t do anything.” Labs around the country sought the Food and Drug Administration’s approval for their own test and met delays.  Strict rules about who could be tested for the virus were put into place. To be tested, someone had to have recently traveled from China or have been exposed to someone who tested positive. In hindsight, it’s easy to spot the Catch-22. If someone got coronavirus while traveling in South Korea, Iran, Italy, or any of the growing number of countries experiencing outbreaks, they could not be tested. If they infected anyone, those people couldn’t be tested either. Because the US had banned travel from China and would only test travelers from China (or those who had been exposed to a person who’d tested positive), it was impossible to determine whether the virus was spreading in America. It was. Virologist Trevor Bradford estimates by comparing patient genomes that the coronavirus started spreading in Washington state in mid-January. By the end of February, it had been introduced to a nursing home, and patients started rapidly dying. In the meantime, even people who should have known better took the CDC’s low case  numbers at face value. There’s no community spread in the United States, public health officials around the country reassured us.  The risk of coronavirus in the US is “just minuscule,” National Institutes of Health official Anthony Fauci, now one of the most trusted authorities leading the response, said on February 17. “We have more kids dying of flu this year at this time than in the last decade or more,” he added.  People were told that risk in US communities “remains low.” Media outlets wrote articles about how Americans were at greater risk from the flu — a serious mistake in hindsight, to be sure, but an accurate representation of what they were hearing from America’s top public health authorities.  Bedford estimates that there were more than 7,000 cases in the US near the end of February (as opposed to 68 confirmed cases), when a lab in California first detected a community-acquired coronavirus case. If officials had known about them, they could have taken the extensive but not economy-shattering measures that countries like South Korea and Taiwan have taken to stop the virus — testing extensively, aggressively tracing contacts of everyone who tests positive, increasing production of masks and making them widely available. Instead, the US proceeded as if it were safe, while the least invasive ways to beat back the virus steadily slipped out of our reach. By March, it was obvious that there was community transmission in multiple cities across America. But our response was still slow. The FDA only slowly authorized more labs to conduct testing, and revisions to make their guidelines stricter forced some labs to destroy tests they’d already collected. US testing increased, but the prevalence of the virus was increasing, too.  States, counties, and cities had to decide one by one whether to shut their schools, declare a state of emergency, urge social distancing measures, or go into lockdowns. They did so haphazardly, with insufficient data because there was still limited testing in their communities. Italy closed all its schools on March 4 and locked down the country when they had fewer than 10,000 cases; the US surpassed the 10,000 case mark (March 19) and the 20,000 case mark (March 21) and the 50,000 case mark (March 24) without any national order to reduce nonessential activities.  Some local and state officials — like San Francisco Mayor London Breed and Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine — acquitted themselves well, taking strong early measures to reduce the spread of the virus. Some didn’t, like Texas Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick, who argued that people shouldn’t take economically damaging measures because if asked “are you willing to take a chance on your survival in exchange for keeping the America that all America loves for your children and grandchildren?” grandparents around the nation would agree to risk letting the virus spread.  Lockdowns are economically devastating, but the death of thousands of Americans in overwhelmed hospitals and the decimation of our health care workforce will not be any less economically devastating for the states that take that route.  In New York, which discovered as they ramped up testing that local cases were terrifyingly out of control, Mayor Bill de Blasio and Gov. Andrew Cuomo sparred over whether the city would have a shelter-in-place order like the one implemented earlier in the California Bay Area. Epidemiologists urged us to employ social distancing, but disorganization, unclear communication from political leaders, and ongoing lack of testing likely reduced compliance rates.  That said, it would be wrong to say that the US hasn’t taken strong measures to stop the virus. School closures were ordered. They were extended to restaurants and bars. California, home to 40 million people and one-fifth of the country’s GDP, ordered its population to stay at home. Nineteen other states have followed. When all the measures go into effect, more than half the country will have been ordered to stay at home (and similar measures may go into effect in more states as the situation worsens). But the US took these steps belatedly — again, in part because of lack of testing capacity. That meant each measure wasn’t sufficient on its own, and the US had to keep escalating. It is still not clear officials have done enough for situations like New York, New Orleans, and Atlanta, which are already running out of ICU beds.  The US’s ugly start put Americans at an enormous disadvantage for the next phase of the coronavirus fight, and we spent most of March on the defensive while case numbers grew and grew. When every day the news gets worse, it’s easy to start to despair — or to start thinking we should give up, write off 3 percent of our population, and try to, as Bill Gates condemned the idea, “ignore that pile of bodies over in the corner” as we go back to work.  We should not do that.  But we shouldn’t resign ourselves to another year and a half in lockdown, either — though it’s true that it will be a long time before the country or the world returns to normal. There are lots of promising options available, and pursuing some combination of them will likely allow us to ease up on some of the costliest current restrictions.  
    Related
   “Suppression will minimally require a combination of social distancing of the entire population, home isolation of cases and household quarantine of their family members,” an influential report from the Imperial College London argued, and then more than a year of maintaining “this type of intensive intervention package — or something equivalently effective at reducing transmission.” Other researchers have criticized specific assumptions underlying that model, but there’s wider agreement on the general premise that we need to find an “intervention package” that keeps transmission low. But the details of that intensive intervention package are up to us, and some possibilities could be improvements over the current lockdowns. Countries are exploring a wide range of options for reducing transmission with minimal human costs. One option, based on South Korea’s success at managing the virus, is called “test and trace.” The idea is to get much much better at testing so that we can identify sick people sooner, isolate them and all of their contacts, and let other people go about their daily lives.   That’s the approach favored by the WHO, based on what’s worked best so far in the countries that have controlled their outbreaks. “To suppress and control the epidemic, countries must isolate, test, treat, and trace,” WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus argued last week.  “Everyone staying home is just a very blunt measure. That’s what you say when you’ve got really nothing else,” Emily Gurley of the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health told NPR. “Being able to test folks is really the linchpin in getting beyond what we’re doing now.” Accomplishing this will require making testing much more widespread. Tactics like test pooling, which Nebraska has started using and which other states may copy, can be employed to let us test more patients with the same number of tests. Developing tests with faster turnaround time will mean that sick people get answers within an hour instead of waiting for weeks. We’re a long way away from this, but that doesn’t mean that it couldn’t happen fast with enough focused attention and funding.  Another option, serological tests, will let us check who has already recovered from the virus, so some people will know they’ve developed immunity and can return to normal. The UK is aggressively exploring this option and says they plan to make millions of serological tests available within “days rather than weeks or months,” says Sharon Peacock, the director of the national infection service at Public Health England. Lockdowns affect lots of people who could be at work. Once we have better testing, we can lock down only people who’ve been exposed for the period of time that they’re at risk of spreading the virus (most countries require 14 days of self-quarantine).   Better treatments, too, might change the dynamic of our fight against the coronavirus. Several promising drugs are undergoing trials right now, including a multi-nation, thousands-of-patients, multi-drug randomized trial organized by the WHO called SOLIDARITY. The president has controversially highlighted chloroquine, an antimalarial drug, but others showing promising early results include Japanese flu drug favipiravir, HIV medication remdesivir, and others. If a successful treatment that makes the illness much less dangerous is discovered, we could return sooner to normal life.  To be clear, it’s a mistake to hype any one of these drugs as a cure-all (and please, don’t hoard them at home). And the president certainly hasn’t helped by touting them as miracle cures despite mixed early evidence.  But it’s not unlikely that our treatment options will improve dramatically as we learn more. “We need more data at every level,” UCSF biologist Nevan Krogan, who is researching drug treatments for the disease, said in March.  Finally, our manufacturing can scale up production of personal protective equipment and ventilators, and we can rapidly train more people to care for coronavirus patients, increasing our hospital capacity and our ability to cope with the virus.  “Let’s figure out testing, let’s get enough PPE [personal protective equipment] for first responders,” Tara Smith, who studies infectious disease at Kent State University, told my colleague Brian Resnick. “Let’s get enough swabs. Let’s buy more ventilators, build more ventilators — to have this second chance at not messing things up.” While all that’s happening, researchers like Stephen Kissler of Harvard have proposed that we might alternate periods of social distancing, trying to keep society functioning and our mental health acceptable while not overloading our hospitals. “Intermittent social distancing — triggered by trends in disease surveillance — may allow interventions to be relaxed temporarily in relative short time windows, but measures will need to be reintroduced if or when case numbers rebound,” the Imperial College London report concluded.  So while life as normal might be a long way off, we shouldn’t expect to be sitting in lockdown for the next year. This is a painful, temporary, weeks-long (maybe months-long) step while we progress as fast as possible on all of those fronts. There are now two months of coronavirus response behind us. We spent one of them unaware that we were under attack, and the second trying to figure out how to respond. By the time we had a good picture of the problem in front of us, we had a problem on an unprecedented scale.  But it’s not all hopeless. If the world is at war with the coronavirus, it’s encouraging to remember that the US has historically been incompetent in the early stages of a global war — but unstoppable once we set ourselves to the task at hand. This isn’t over — it is, in fact, barely getting started — and it’s up to all of us to decide how it ends. Sign up for the Future Perfect newsletter and we’ll send you a roundup of ideas and solutions for tackling the world’s biggest challenges — and how to get better at doing good. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. Future Perfect is funded in part by individual contributions, grants, and sponsorships. Learn more here.A lot of people seem to think that there’s a simple cure for the coronavirus: authoritarianism. Article after article in the Western press has touted the superiority of China’s response to the West’s, using its draconian lockdown after the Wuhan outbreak to suggest that liberal democracies simply aren’t up to the harsh tasks of preventing disease spread. It’s a message that Chinese government propaganda has been only too happy to echo.  But the unanimous verdict of political scientists and public health scholars I spoke with is that the theory of authoritarian superiority in this crisis is wrong: There is no evidence that one type of political system has performed systematically better against Covid-19 than the other. China’s response, while eventually good, was criminally slow early on — as was Iran’s, another notably authoritarian regime. Meanwhile, democracies like South Korea and Taiwan had some of the best responses anywhere on the planet. “Among all the factors, [regime type is] going to be at the bottom of the list,” says Joshua Michaud, an associate director for global health policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation. “You can have very poor public health practices in an authoritarian system or a democratic system.” The myth of authoritarian superiority is not only wrong but actively harmful in two key respects. First, it lets China off the hook for a botched early response to the coronavirus — one that likely led to the disease becoming a global pandemic in the first place. It turns what should be a damning indictment of certain aspects of the Chinese system into an ideological victory for Beijing. Second, it gives cover to leaders of allegedly democratic states to claim dangerous emergency powers during the crisis. This is happening right now in both Hungary and Israel, where authoritarian-inclined leaders are using the outbreak as a pretense to seize powers undreamed of in normal times. The myth of authoritarian superiority could well grant unnecessary legitimacy to these dangerous moves — and thus needs to be challenged. “The challenge here is seeing so many people saying authoritarianism works in these cases, when it’s so clearly not authoritarianism that makes a difference. And that’s actually a dangerous argument to make,” says Sofia Fenner, a political scientist at Bryn Mawr who has studied authoritarian-versus-democratic responses to the crisis.  When we want to examine a country’s success at containing coronavirus, we don’t merely want to look at the raw number of cases in that country but at how swiftly and effectively the government has taken measures endorsed by public health experts — mandatory social distancing measures, widespread testing, ramped-up production of masks — and whether those measures appear to have slowed the disease’s spread. On these metrics, the gold standard for a good national response comes from a cluster of three East Asian countries — South Korea, Taiwan, and Singapore (Hong Kong is also often mentioned, but it’s not exactly an independent country).  Two of those are large democracies, the other an authoritarian city-state. Yet all three acted almost immediately after the crisis began and started testing individuals, isolating those who tested positive or had contact with those who did, and working swiftly to support their stressed health care systems. This pattern undermines the notion that you need to have a single authoritarian leader in charge to act decisively. South Korea and Taiwan are both raucous democracies, yet their elected leadership still managed to mobilize swiftly. What Taiwan and South Korea share with Singapore is something political scientists call “state capacity”: the political and economic resources available to a government to implement its policies. Countries with high state capacity are marked by (among other things) effective bureaucracies, high-quality public infrastructure, and a system that centralizes political power at the national level. All three of the clear East Asian success stories have high state capacity in general. But they also have particularly powerful states when it comes to infections disease response, owing to relatively recent experience with illnesses like SARS, MERS, and H1N1 (swine flu). Their governments were prepared to organize to contain outbreaks with action plans and lessons learned allowing for a swift response. “The best outcomes so far come from higher-capacity states, regardless of regime type,” Fenner writes in a post on the international relations blog Duck of Minerva. “Many of the high-capacity East Asian cases also benefited from recent experience dealing with SARS and H1N1; they have had opportunities to develop state capacities specifically suited to this kind of crisis.” When you move from the best performers to the worst ones, you also don’t see clear variation by regime type. The hardest-hit countries outside of China — a unique situation I’ll examine in a second — are Italy, the United States, and Iran. That’s two wealthy democracies, peers of South Korea and Taiwan, and one middle-income authoritarian regime. These states have not only lower capacity than the East Asian states — America’s federalist system, for example, makes decisive whole-of-government responses to any problem more complex — but also leadership failures. In all three countries, elements of the faction in power chose to downplay the crisis early rather than immediately introduce national policies to stem the virus’s spread. When South Korea and Taiwan were aggressively combating the virus in late February, the head of Italy’s ruling Democratic Party was encouraging people to go out drinking, Trump was saying the virus would soon blow over, and the Iranian regime was permitting people to congregate at major religious sites in the holy city of Qom despite a confirmed local outbreak. Much of the perception of relative authoritarian competence during the outbreak, at least in the United States, seems fueled by high case numbers and horror stories in democratic European countries like Italy and Spain. Indeed, there are a striking number of cases in several major European countries. But treating Europe in aggregate conceals significant variation inside the continent. Germany, for example, has had a relatively large number of cases but both a low death rate and a relatively widespread testing regime. Moreover, comparing authoritarian states to democratic ones purely based on official or verifiable case numbers might be a deeply misleading exercise.  While democracies have procedures that require transparency on these issues, authoritarian states often work very hard to cover up the number of cases to make themselves look good — threatening to punish journalists, bureaucrats, and even health care workers who contradict the official line. This makes it hard to know when data on infections and testing from authoritarian countries should be treated as reliable. In Egypt, for example, there have only been 366 official coronavirus cases as of March 24. But a group of Canada-based experts developed a model, using publicly available data from early March, that estimated Egypt’s actual case number at either (depending on assumptions) around 6,000 or 19,000. Of course, not all democracies do a great job on testing either. The United States and Japan, in particular, stand out as having strikingly low testing numbers per capita — and, at least in the case of the United States, the reasons for such limited testing appear to be political in nature. But overall, in the cases where we have reliable data, there is no obviously superior performance by authoritarian states over democratic ones. And when we get a fuller picture, there’s a chance democratic states might end up looking even better by comparison. At the heart of the case for authoritarian supremacy is the idea that China should be the world’s model for responding to the coronavirus. This is certainly what its government wants you to think — but experts say the reality is a lot more complicated. The Chinese argument is that, after the outbreak began spreading rapidly in the city of Wuhan, the government did an extraordinary job of addressing the crisis. It locked down the population, set up dedicated treatment areas that kept coronavirus patients away from more general hospital populations, and put body temperature detectors around doorways that could identify a person with a fever and immediately send them to a treatment center. Today, according to the Chinese government, there are zero new cases in Wuhan. Despite the dubious reliability of such data, experts do believe that China’s government deserves credit for its approach to the Wuhan outbreak. Its intense efforts to identify and isolate the infected — at times by using surveillance capabilities, like facial recognition software, that many liberal democracies might be squeamish about employing — seem to have helped turn the tide. But defining success based on what happened only after the virus began spreading widely in Wuhan ignores China’s significant failure: an early, systematic effort to downplay and ignore the homegrown disease that allowed Covid-19 to spread rapidly in the first place. “The fact is 5 million people left Wuhan before it was locked down, and that’s why we have a global issue,” says Dali Yang, a political scientist and China expert at the University of Chicago.  Timelines of the coronavirus outbreak in China, like this one from Axios’s Bethany Allen-Ebrahimian, make clear how badly the Chinese government messed up. Not only did they not impose a lockdown in December, when it became clear that China was dealing with a new and dangerous respiratory illness, but they covered it up. The most famous example is Dr. Li Wenliang, the doctor who tried to raise the alarm but was forced to sign a confession admitting to “spreading false rumors” — and then, ultimately, died of the coronavirus. But he’s not the only one: On New Year’s Day, Chinese police hauled in eight doctors who had posted about the disease on social media for questioning. Chinese officials have tried to portray this failure as a local problem, errors by city and provincial authorities. But a recent report by the Wall Street Journal points out that Chinese President Xi Jinping was personally involved in the disease’s handling during the decisive period in the disease’s spread: It now appears that, based on a speech by Mr. Xi published in a Communist Party magazine in February, he was leading the epidemic response when Wuhan went ahead with New Year celebrations despite the risk of wider infections. He was also leading the response when authorities let some five million people leave Wuhan without screening, and when they waited until Jan. 20 to announce the virus was spreading between humans. It is hard to overstate how significant these errors were. One recent study found that if China had acted to lock down Wuhan just three weeks earlier, it would have reduced the number of cases by 95 percent — thus “significantly limiting the geographical spread of the disease.” It’s also not obvious how much the uniquely authoritarian features of the Chinese response, like its reliance on its intrusive electronic surveillance system, improved its response over and above nearby democracies. Many of China’s most effective policies, like widespread use of fever checks, were similar to those employed by South Korea and Taiwan— democratic countries that arguably implemented effective measures faster than China. The failures in China, by contrast, are quite fairly attributable to features of its political system. China’s government has a well-known tendency, both at the local and national levels, to repress information that threatens the party’s reputation and hold on power. The initial efforts to cover up the virus flow directly from its insistence on controlling politically sensitive information — something that’s much harder in a democratic state. There are some important positive lessons to be gleaned from China’s response to coronavirus. But we cannot confuse the need to learn from specific public health measures with valorization of China’s political system — one that’s responsible for the fact of the pandemic in the first place. Valorizing authoritarianism during coronavirus doesn’t just let Beijing off easy. It also makes the coronavirus crisis more dangerous for democracy: If people think the only way to fight the disease is by handing powers over to a strongman, then there’s a chance they’ll do just that. These concerns are especially acute in countries going through “democratic backsliding”: the process of moving away from a democratic political system and toward some version of authoritarianism. In these countries, initially elected leaders accumulate more and more power, eliminating checks on their authority and undermining the opposition; in the worst case, they eventually become impossible to remove through electoral means. The risk is that the exigencies of coronavirus allow these leaders to accumulate even more power — and for observers to excuse away their anti-democratic ways as necessary to respond to a global crisis. This is not a hypothetical concern. In Israel, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s opponents won enough political support after a recent election to begin the process of replacing him with a new prime minister. Yet Netanyahu, who has been in power since 2009 and has grown more and more autocratic as his time in office has gone on, is taking advantage of the coronavirus to cement his hold on power. One of his key political allies, the speaker of Israel’s Knesset, blocked the legislative body from meeting — and has been governing more or less by the prime minister’s personal orders in what some Israeli observers are terming a kind of coup. The Supreme Court issued a ruling that Netanyahu must allow parliament to reconvene by Wednesday; in response, the opposition leader struck a deal with Netanyahu to serve in his government, inexplicably handing a victory to anti-democratic implacability.  In Hungary, where Prime Minister Viktor Orbán has eliminated democracy in all but name, democracy may well die an official death during the crisis. A new bill in Hungary’s parliament, where Orbán loyalists have a two-thirds majority, would allow the strongman to rule by personal decree for an indefinite period of time. It would also allow the government to jail journalists who publish what it terms to be false information for up to five years. In both the Israeli and Hungarian cases, these power grabs are being sold as necessary steps during an emergency. It’s logic that only makes sense in a world where we believe that suspending the basic norms of democratic politics is necessary for a swift and effective response during a public health emergency. Happily, though, this argument is false. Democracies can address public health crises, including this one, without suspending the most fundamental features of a free society. It’s a fact we need to insist on — regardless of what the Chinese government wants us to think.In the early morning hours of Wednesday, March 25, negotiators in the Senate landed on a $2.2 trillion deal to rescue the economy as it falls into recession (with 3.3 million new jobless claims in one week) amid the coronavirus pandemic. In an almost unheard-of display of unity on a major bill, the measure passed 96-0. It’s a flawed package, but overall a shockingly ambitious measure from a Republican legislature — and one that can and should be made stronger in the coming weeks as the country sinks deeper into recession. To think through this stimulus, it helps to think back to the last economic crisis and the stimulus we got then. In late 2008, as the US was spiraling further into its worst economic downturn since the Great Depression, Christina Romer, the UC Berkeley economist whom President-elect Barack Obama had selected as his chief economist, prepared a memo of stimulus options for Obama to review. To fully repair the economy by the first quarter of 2011, she estimated, would require a “combination of spending, taxes and transfers to states and localities … costing about $1.8 trillion over two years.” The memo did not make it to Obama. According to Noam Scheiber’s book The Escape Artists, when Romer showed her estimate to fellow Obama adviser Larry Summers, he dismissed the number as too high. She then prepared a memo where the most expensive option was $1.2 trillion. Summers still thought it too high, telling her, per Scheiber, “$1.2 trillion is nonplanetary.” That was his way of saying “ridiculous” or “out of this world.” Congress eventually passed, and Obama signed, a $787 billion package. Summers wanted the $1.8 trillion in stimulus as much as Romer did — he just thought Congress would reject it as a joke, and prevent the Obama administration from getting anything. This was his calculation when Democrats were set to have 59 out of 100 Senate seats and a massive House majority. Fast-forward nearly 12 years. The Senate has just passed (and the House is poised to follow suit) a stimulus package costing a whopping $2.2 trillion. And the spending is set to occur within a single year, not spread over two as Romer envisioned in 2008. So given that background, how should we think about the stimulus emerging from Congress? If it’s compared to the most ambitious stimulus and recovery packages proposed in the runup to its passage, or to the most ambitious ones passed elsewhere in the world, then it leaves a lot to be desired.  Its cash checks are a one-off, with no automatic payments to kick in if and when unemployment spikes. The increase in unemployment benefits is similarly temporary and not tied to objective economic metrics that could keep them from being withdrawn early. The benefits to businesses are opaque and might be inferior to just having the government temporarily take over payroll for struggling companies, the way Denmark has done as its crisis response. There’s too little aid to state and local governments to forestall budget cuts, and no mandate for postal voting in the 2020 election to be sure it’s conducted safely if the country is still under quarantine. But how does the bill stack up to the last stimulus? It’s definitely an improvement. Even granting that the coronavirus recession is likely to be deeper than the 2008-’09 downturn, the huge increase in scale is an incredibly promising development.  Something about this crisis turned nonplanetary ideas into planetary ones. There are some decades where nothing happens, and some weeks where decades happen. We are living through many such weeks right now, right in a row, and the result is a political environment that would have been unrecognizable mere months ago. The important thing is that Congress has taken advantage of this rapid ideological movement and passed this bill. Now it needs to pass more like it in the weeks and months to come. The key question that Romer faced in putting together a stimulus package in 2008 was how big the “output gap” was: How much economic activity could exist if the economy were firing on all cylinders but didn’t because of the recession? That’s one of the major questions macroeconomists have to answer, because it responds directly to recessions like the one that hit in 2008. That recession, like many, was essentially a crisis of expectations. There were just as many workers, just as many factories, just as many retail storefronts, etc. in 2008 as there had been a year earlier, when unemployment was low and the economy was growing. The “real resources” of the economy hadn’t diminished at all. But the amount of work being done by those workers, factories, stores, etc. suddenly dropped dramatically. It became a vicious self-perpetuating cycle. Businesses didn’t want to hire or invest because they were worried they wouldn’t have enough customers. Customers were nervous to spend because times were so tight, and because so many were unemployed. The key to the 2008-’09 stimulus was to generate a surge of spending (“demand” in econ parlance) that would enable businesses to start hiring and investing again, so that the economy could return to where it was just a couple of years previous. The 2020 recession is not like that. The real resources of the economy have diminished, dramatically. Many workers, like bartenders or cooks or waitstaff or retail personnel, are physically barred from working. Physical locations — factories, stores, etc. — that were productive in January are not being staffed in March by government fiat. Workers who can work from home are, but many others can’t because their work isn’t suitable for telecommuting. In that situation, the near-term goal is not to stimulate economic activity per se. It’s to ensure that absolutely essential real resources — like food, shelter, and medical care — are being adequately provided, and that households have the resources they need to pay for those necessities. The ”phase three” (following phases one and two) stimulus package that the Senate passed Wednesday night doesn’t do as much as I’d like toward reaching that goal. But it does an awful lot, and frankly more than I ever expected a Republican president and Senate would accept. The @BudgetHawks have THE summary of the $2.2 trillion just-passed CARES Act. Read it. Use it. Retweet it. Ask Questions. https://t.co/EfPR0PVvPh pic.twitter.com/R68bN79WPD The most headline-grabbing thing it does is offer $1,200 per adult and $500 per child dependent to most households as a blank check, phasing out at high incomes (above $75,000 for singles and $150,000 for married couples). That’s an immediate influx of money that can pay bills for low-income people, including people with no incomes. I’ve covered cash policy for a long time, and the mere fact that a Republican Congress accepted payments to Americans with no taxable income, the poorest of the poor, is remarkable to me. More important, though, is the UI section: four months of unemployment insurance of at least $600 per week to everyone put out of work due to coronavirus. That means UI that actually exceeds the wages of people paid $15 an hour or less. Plus, the benefit is available to part-time and contract workers. This is a cash stimulus measure, too, but one limited to people directly disemployed by this crisis. It’s a sensible way to target assistance to the hardest-hit and make sure they can afford food and shelter. The provision is so generous that four GOP senators — Tim Scott (SC), Rick Scott (FL), Ben Sasse (NE), and Lindsey Graham (SC) — objected on the grounds that it’s too generous, threatening to derail the bill. (In the end, all four voted for the bill.) The most expensive parts of the bill are its sections “bailing out” various businesses by offering $366 billion in loans to small businesses and $504 billion in loans to larger businesses, states, and local governments. It’s hard to know what these programs will do without seeing them implemented. But in the event that Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin enforces the provisions barring layoffs for companies benefiting, this could serve as an adjunct to the UI expansion, enabling businesses to avoid payroll reductions and providing more money, overall, to workers than the government will directly. Finally there’s the question of paying for health care. The bill offers $100 billion to hospitals and $150 billion in emergency aid to state and local governments, the latter premised on being used for coronavirus (indicating it will be used for, say, Medicaid before paying teacher salaries). I don’t know if this will be enough to cover uncompensated care for the uninsured during this crisis, or if this is the best way to structure such aid. But it’s a significant investment. Overall, the scale and generosity of the package is far above what I expected from a Senate led by Mitch McConnell, who tried his hardest to sink the much smaller stimulus of around $800 billion that Obama wound up proposing in early 2009. But it could still be improved, and instead of recessing, the Senate should be working on ways to improve it. The biggest problem is that the package is too short-term. The UI provisions expire in four months. The loans are a one-off package. The state and local aid doesn’t re-up despite states like Ohio saying they’re facing budget cuts of 20 percent. The cash checks only go out once, and not as quickly as they could (ideally through EBT cards, or Social Security checks to existing recipients, for people who didn’t file 2019 or 2018 taxes because they lacked sufficient income). Indeed, some tax filers with no direct deposit information could be waiting months for their checks. A logical fix to the package is to apply a Sahm rule to it all. Named after Claudia Sahm, an economist at the Washington Center for Equitable Growth who has established herself as one of the most essential voices on coronavirus response, a Sahm rule is a policy where stimulus measures are executed automatically on the basis of objective economic data, not congressional discretion. As my colleague Matt Yglesias explains, the Sahm rule reflects the fact that “historically, when the unemployment rate over the past three months rises at least 0.5 percentage points above the average over the past 12 months, a recession is imminent.” You can see this in action in the data here. Sahm’s original idea was that the government should just send out checks to every American when this indicator kicks in. We’re past that point in the coronavirus crisis: We know we need these benefits to kick in. What we need instead is to adapt Sahm’s idea so that we extend all or most of the benefits in the congressional stimulus package until the economy is recovered. Here’s one way to do a Sahm rule: We keep sending out $2,000 checks, financed by the Federal Reserve, for each adult and child (inspired by California Rep. Maxine Waters’s plan) every month until the employment to population ratio for working-age people reaches 80.5 percent again, its level when this crisis started. Once it hits that level, the checks can start phasing out with each 0.1 point increase in the ratio. You could do the same with aid to state and local governments. Start by offering 50 percent of their 2019 state revenue as a federal grant, taking advantage of the ultra-low interest rates the federal government currently enjoys. Phase down the grant amounts as we approach full employment again. Make the process automatic, reflecting actual economic data, not Congress’s whims. And, while you’re at it, push the Fed to buy state and local debt. Unemployment insurance is a little different. Paying more than 100 percent of lost wages for low-income workers makes a lot of sense right now when we’re trying to keep people out of unnecessary work for public health reasons. But it may deter people from reentering the job market once the public health emergency is over. So in the medium-run, an automatic, Sahm rule UI program would be pegged to, say, 100 percent of wages up to a certain limit, rather than a flat $600 amount, until employment is back to normal, so there’s still an economic benefit to jumping back into the labor force. Sen. Michael Bennet (D-CO) has a bill already that would work a bit like this. It would also push states to set up “short-term compensation” or work-sharing programs, which allow companies to use UI funds to keep workers on payroll. That way people can stay attached to their work through this crisis while still getting paid. We don’t need to pass all these measures immediately. But Congress should pass them this spring so we have automatic policies in place going into the election season, and into the what could be the worst of the pandemic this summer. We cannot rely on legislators to always mobilize aggressively. We need automatic policies that get support to people whether Congress gets its act together or not. And paradoxically, the only way to do that is to have Congress pass automatic stabilizer legislation, and to pass it soon. Just because a $2.2 trillion bill has been passed doesn’t mean Congress’s work is done. Sign up for the Future Perfect newsletter and we’ll send you a roundup of ideas and solutions for tackling the world’s biggest challenges — and how to get better at doing good. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. Future Perfect is funded in part by individual contributions, grants, and sponsorships. Learn more here. The United States may soon face a dangerous shortage of health care workers to fight the sprawling Covid-19 coronavirus pandemic.  With the number of confirmed Covid-19 cases in the US surpassing anywhere else in the world, the medical workforce is more strained than ever. Doctors and nurses are reporting gear shortages, lax protocols, and a high level of stress in their workplaces — with the worst still to come. Some of them told Vox that they consider getting infected with the coronavirus an inevitability. Staffing problems are already becoming acute in New York City, the epicenter of the US pandemic so far. City officials were not able to provide any numbers on how many medical workers there have tested positive for Covid-19, but doctors work in fear for their own safety.  An internal medicine physician at New York-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan shared an internal communication with Vox that said staff are being required to wear masks “only when clinically indicated.” This person requested anonymity to avoid potential retribution from their employer. They found the potential for exposure to the virus without protective equipment upsetting. Given how extensive community spread is and how high-risk health workers are, some other hospitals are requiring all staff to keep their masks on at all times. The New York hospital is also reevaluating its current policy of not having staff wear scrubs when they treat Covid-19 patients, though that is the standard in places like China. And it has required pregnant people on its staff to continue working, though there is limited information about the risk to that population. The hospital cited the 2003 SARS outbreak, Covid-19 cases in South Korea and China, the assessment of the hospital’s senior medical staff, and the effectiveness of the protective gear in an internal communication seen by Vox. “My frustration is that I have never felt like my safety is important,” this physician said. “When I’m going to work, I could endanger me and my family and I feel like my institution doesn’t even care at all.” Reached for comment about the concerns of its staff, New York-Presbyterian said it is “treating a large influx of COVID-19 patients, as anticipated. The health and safety of every patient in our care, as well as our entire staff, continues to be our highest priority.” “We continue to implement measures to increase capacity, including triage tents and reassignment of beds and units, cancellations of all elective surgeries, and utilization of telemedicine if possible,” the hospital said in a statement. “We are also conserving supplies, including personal protective equipment, to help meet this challenge, which we expect to continue.”  New York is living through what other cities may soon experience. Morale is low and the mood anxious across the country, as the pandemic continues to worsen. Based on what we’ve seen already in other countries, a lot of doctors and nurses are highly likely to get sick. “As soon as you have the first case, you immediately have a staffing problem; you’re probably furloughing people who made the first contacts before you had test results,” Chip Kahn, president of the Federation of American Hospitals, said. “Then as you get further into it, it gets more and more intense.” And the problem that other countries face may be worse in America.   “With already lower staffing ratios plus the very real risk of losing more [health care workers] due to illness, this could spiral and get much worse,” Jen Kates, who leads the global health program at the Kaiser Family Foundation, said. If too many doctors and nurses get infected themselves and can’t care for patients, or if hospitals lay off workers because they are losing revenue with many of their other operations on hold, the health system’s capacity is going to deteriorate even further. Doctors and nurses may have a higher chance of getting seriously ill from the coronavirus if they do get infected. The numbers from the initial Wuhan, China, outbreak indicate 15 percent of the roughly 1,700 Covid-19 cases for medical personnel as of mid-February were critical or severe. Five had died. The World Health Organization’s report found that health care workers were actually not more at risk of infection than other people. But the WHO also noted that “attention to the prevention of infection in health care workers is of paramount importance in China. Surveillance among health care workers identified factors early in the outbreak that placed [health care workers] at higher risk of infection, and this information has been used to modify policies to improve protection.” “It’s not that they’re getting infected at higher rates; instead, they’re getting sicker than one might expect on the basis of their age,” says Peter Hotez, the dean of the National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College, of health care workers in Wuhan. One theory for why that could be: Medical staff are exposed to high levels of the virus as they work in hospitals and interact with patients. But we don’t know for sure. The early data from the European countries hit the hardest by Covid-19 indicates health care workers account for a significant share of their Covid-19 cases. In Spain, government officials reported on Tuesday that medical staff accounted for 14 percent of the country’s nearly 40,000 reported cases. In Italy as of March 22, almost 1 in 10 coronavirus cases was a health care worker.  And in America, given our known shortage of protective medical gear and lax protocols reported at some hospitals, we cannot necessarily expect the same resilience among our medical staff as China saw. More than 100 workers in Boston’s three biggest hospitals have already tested positive for Covid-19, according to local news reports on Wednesday. “The burden it’s placing on our hospitals, with the lack of equipment — we feel ill-prepared for it,” said Stefan Flores, an assistant professor of emergency medicine at Columbia University in New York City. “It’s like showing up to war with a knife at this point. I don’t know if I am going to have a mask the next day,” Flores said. He keeps two or three masks in a bioprotective bag at the end of the workday, washing it and preventing it from being soiled, because he doesn’t know when they’re going to get more. He leaves them in a designated section of his apartment. An ER doctor in Pennsylvania told Vox that as hospitals face personal protective gear shortages, incomplete protection from exposure means more doctors and medical staff out sick. That will lead to worse outcomes overall for coronavirus patients.  But they have no choice but to adapt to these circumstances; hospitals and ERs can’t shutter in the middle of an outbreak because they lack protective equipment. Demand for personal protective gear has been extraordinary; one health care supply company reported it had seen demand for N95 masks double during the outbreak. Some hospitals have reportedly run out of a month’s worth of supplies in just a few days.  Meanwhile, hospitals are already pushing staff to the limit in an effort to keep enough doctors and nurses on call to respond to the pandemic. One nurse at a major metropolitan hospital, who asked for anonymity to avoid angering their employer, told Vox that staff had been instructed to come to work as long as their temperature did not exceed 101 degrees Fahrenheit and they weren’t coughing, regardless of their known exposure to the coronavirus. They were given brown bags to keep their N95 mask in so the mask could be reused.  Flores said that initially, doctors and medical staff at his hospital were asked to quarantine if they were simply exposed to a coronavirus patient. “Obviously, that very changed quickly once we realized with the sheer number of people who actually were infected with [coronavirus] was so high that it was fine; you were going to be exposed. Now, it’s as long as you’re symptomatic.” It’s not just infections that could shrink hospital staff. Many hospitals are starting to postpone elective surgeries (which can include procedures for serious conditions like cancer and heart disease, as well as less urgent surgeries) so as to free up more staff for coronavirus response and to reduce the risk of more people getting infected.  Canceled surgeries mean a loss in revenue for those hospitals. One rural hospital in Georgia told Modern Healthcare it could lose half of its revenue with elective services delayed. Industry leaders have warned that hundreds of hospitals could close without a huge infusion of cash from Congress. The deal recently struck in the Senate would pump $100 billion into US hospitals in a bid to stave off disaster. Before the coronavirus ever came to our shores, America was at a hospital staffing disadvantage compared to other rich countries. Overall, US hospitals employ as many people or more per capita as our economic peers. But staffing is disproportionately tilted toward administrative work in the United States. If you focus on health care professionals specifically, US hospitals trail behind most European countries and Canada. Our hospitals employ almost as many administrative staff as medical staff, according to estimates from the Peterson-Kaiser Health System Tracker. And US hospitals were already at risk of being overrun if the number of Covid-19 cases explodes before fears about staffing shortages fully set in. America has about 924,000 hospital beds, about 98,000 of which can be used for people who need intensive care, according to the American Hospital Association. The number of Covid-19 cases that will require ICU care could expand far beyond what the US is currently capable of providing. Imperial College London projections from mid-March, while just one set of estimates among many and based largely on modeling for influenza outbreaks instead of the current facts on the ground, painted a grim picture. It found even the most aggressive mitigation strategies — general social distancing, quarantines, closing schools — would not be enough to prevent US hospitals from eventually being overwhelmed unless the country is willing to commit to these drastic measures until a vaccine becomes available. For people 60 and older, between 17 and 25 percent of cases are expected to require hospitalization; of those, 25 percent or more will require intensive care (as many as 70 percent for patients 80 and older), according to this analysis. The ability of hospitals to provide that care will be imperative if we are to protect those most vulnerable populations. Italian hospitals could provide a frightening preview of what’s to come in the US as their system is overwhelmed by coronavirus and medical personnel are put at risk. A group of doctors from a hospital in Bergamo, Italy, facing 4,305 Covid-19 cases in their city with just 48 ICU beds available, painted a grave picture in a March 21 New England Journal of Medicine op-ed: We are learning that hospitals might be the main Covid-19 carriers, as they are rapidly populated by infected patients, facilitating transmission to uninfected patients. Patients are transported by our regional system,1 which also contributes to spreading the disease as its ambulances and personnel rapidly become vectors. Health workers are asymptomatic carriers or sick without surveillance; some might die, including young people, which increases the stress of those on the front line. The toll on hospital workers will manifest in many ways. Research out of China found high levels of stress and depression among health care workers who were responding to the coronavirus outbreak.  Already, US doctors are on edge. Kevin Tien, a pediatric resident at a hospital in Houston, Texas, which has so far seen a small number of cases, described the mood as “a quiet simmering of anxiety.” “Everyone is on edge, waiting for the crest of the wave to crash.” The highest priorities right now are to prevent any more health care workers from getting sick, and to help ill hospital staff return to swabbing noses, running tests, and treating patients. But these efforts remain hampered by shortages in critical equipment, so resolving these shortfalls is essential to slowing the spread of Covid-19.  President Trump has invoked the Defense Production Act but has not yet used it to order US manufacturers to make more medical supplies to address these shortfalls. But whether there is an official order or not, it will take some time for assembly lines to spool up.  Testing could also help health care workers who were sick with Covid-19 return to the job. In particular, serologic tests can establish whether someone has been infected and has mounted an immune response to the infection. These tests look for antibody proteins to the virus. They aren’t as accurate for diagnosing active infections since it can take days for an infected person to produce antibodies, but serologic tests are useful for finding out who has fought off the virus.  Some researchers are optimistic about using these tests in exposed health workers, but only if they can know for sure that surviving the virus grants immunity from future infections.  “I’ve publicly stated that I support that if we can verify that [testing positive for an immune response to Covid-19] really is protective” against the disease, said Marc Lipsitch, a professor of epidemiology at Harvard University. “We need to check to make sure the protection is real before doing that on a large scale, but I do think that will be an important part of the strategy because we’ll need to keep health care workers in action.”  But Covid-19 tests remain in short supply, which means hospitals and health officials will have to decide whether to use what they have to find out who has the virus, or to probe past infections. States and localities are also preparing for this oncoming staffing crisis by trying to recruit retirees and even medical students to fill the voids, when they happen. In New York, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said on March 25 that 40,000 people have signed up to be part of the state’s health care reserve. New York University is allowing some medical students to graduate early help with coronavirus patients, provided they can get the proper certifications. However, one of the most important ways to protect hospital workers remains public health measures to slow the spread of the virus. Proper hand-washing and social distancing can reduce the number of simultaneous cases of Covid-19. Flattening the curve of cases will help ensure that there are enough beds, ventilators, protective equipment, and medical staff to attend to patients at a given time. That, in turn, will reduce stress on doctors, nurses, and orderlies and allow them to spread out potential exposures to the virus.  So everyone else staying home from work can help keep hospitals working. Still, new Covid-19 cases are increasing, and the situation for health workers seems poised to get worse before it gets better. “It’s almost a question, I feel like, for us as health care workers: not if we get sick, when we get sick,” Flores said.  “It’s definitely anguishing, and it’s definitely scary,” he added. “But just like anything, too, I think it will pass. I think we’re taking appropriate measures. It’s just unfortunately going to get worse before it gets better.” Eliza Barclay and Brian Resnick contributed to this report.The coronavirus has all but ground the US economy to a halt. The list of states and cities that have closed nonessential businesses and urged citizens to stay home is growing by the day. Essential workers remain in place, and some people are able to work from home, but millions of jobs — at bars, hotels, restaurants, gyms, theaters, salons, shops — are simply evaporating.  Late last week, Goldman Sachs predicted that jobless claims in the US will spike to 2 million in the second quarter, which it calls “the largest increase in initial jobless claims and the highest level on record.” The Economic Policy Institute projects that 14 million jobs will be lost by the summer. All those people with shaky or vanished jobs still have families to feed, mortgages coming due, utility bills, student debt payments, credit card payments, car payments, prescription and medical bills, and children or older relatives to care for. Already, millions of people are uncertain where they will live or how they will pay bills in the months ahead. The result is a huge, rapid, ongoing loss of purchasing power in the US economy. The same Goldman Sachs report projected a 6 percent drop in US GDP in Q1 and a 24 percent drop in Q2, which is utterly unprecedented in a major modern economy outside of wartime.  The US appears to be heading into the mother of all demand recessions. On top of that, widespread social distancing has just begun. Some estimates say at best it could last three months; at worst — if distancing proves difficult to maintain, if the Trump administration botches the ramp-up of testing and tracing, if a vaccine takes longer than expected — it could last, on and off, for well over a year, stifling any recovery. Even Republicans seem to have been terrified into action. Two short-term relief packages, with measures like limited paid sick leave and family leave for some classes of workers, have been passed through Congress. Another, reported to total $2 trillion, has just reached tentative bipartisan agreement. But no one believes that will be the end of the help the economy needs. Democrats are predicting at least two more stimulus bills; there will be much more to do. For the past few days, I’ve been talking to economists and wonks, reading various proposals, trying to wrap my head around what a good economic response to the virus would look like. But there’s a slightly surreal atmosphere to the discussion, because the crucial period for stimulus will be the next six months or so, and for the next six months, the country will be run by Donald Trump and his administration.  Trump does not think in terms of structural reforms. His instincts are to reward friends and punish enemies; he has signaled a desire to bail out airlines, casinos, hotels, and the oil and gas industry, for starters. And in this, as in all things, congressional Republicans back him completely. Democrats in Congress rejected the first version of the Senate’s phase three stimulus bill because it would have heaped half a trillion dollars on businesses with virtually no strings attached and no commensurate effort to help workers. 
    Related
   With Democrats in control of the House and Republicans in control of the Senate, both parties have veto power. It will ultimately be a game of chicken, who blinks before allowing the economy to suffer more. Whatever emerges from that process is unlikely to look like any progressive wonk’s dream.  Nevertheless, it is at least worth discussing what a proper economic response would include. We’ll start with a few principles — broad guidelines that should govern the overall effort — and then look at what constitutes effective short-term recovery and long-term stimulus. Given the dire social and economic circumstances, there are three principles that should be in legislators’ minds as they address the impacts of the virus on the economy. 1. Make it big.  Looking back, most economists agree that the 2009 stimulus was too small. Obama’s staff designed it before they knew how bad the recession was going to be, and by 2010, the Tea Party revolution had put Republicans in control of Congress, where they promptly stonewalled all further stimulus. The consequence was a painfully slow recovery that left structural problems like wage stagnation and economic inequality largely unaffected, serving as a drag on all Obama’s other efforts. One lesson of the 2009 stimulus, worth repeating again and again, is that the risks for policymakers facing recessions are highly asymmetric.  The risk of overspending is that it could theoretically generate high interest rates or inflation — but both interest rates and inflation have been persistently low for years, a “new normal” that shows no signs of changing.  On the other hand, “the risks of doing too little fiscal stimulus are huge,” writes Josh Bivens of the Economic Policy Institute, “potentially years of elevated joblessness and economic suffering.” Today’s lawmakers should learn that lesson. Economist J.W. Mason has run the numbers and estimates that the economic shortfall in the US over the next couple of years could be as much as $3 trillion. That is the immediate gap that must be filled by federal spending and the right ballpark for an initial stimulus. And it may need to be repeated over the coming years.  There is almost no chance of overheating the economy; the pressing danger is an economy with a persistent demand shortfall.  With interest rates now hovering near zero and financial markets willing to pay the feds to use their money, there has never been a better time for the US government to spend big. (See this Data for Progress op-ed on Democrats’ need to get over their pay-for-it obsession.) 2. Make it enduring.  One of the Obama team’s great mistakes was in thinking they would have more than one shot at stimulus — that if the first round didn’t work, Congress would recognize it and authorize more. They didn’t anticipate that Republicans would be craven enough to let the recession drag on in order to hurt Obama politically.  It’s now conventional wisdom that a given Congress only has so much energy, that the passage of any bill makes the passage of additional bills less likely. It is impossible to say whether there will be another round of stimulus after this phase three, even if more is obviously needed. Thus, legislators should be, to the extent possible, designing policy that will run on its own — and that doesn’t need regular congressional reauthorization. Broadly, there are two ways to do that.  The first is to implement a permanent stimulus. Paul Krugman recently argued (before the present crisis) for a program whereby the US government would spend an amount roughly equivalent to 2 percent of US GDP on public goods like education and infrastructure every year — and not pay for it. The additional growth would pay for itself, and in years when it didn’t, a little deficit spending is fine (he argues) as long as inflation remains low. “There’s a very good case for putting a sustained, productive program of stimulus in place as soon as possible,” he writes, “instead of scrambling to come up with short-term measures every time bad things happen.” Along the same lines, there’s an ambitious new green stimulus proposal making the rounds, gathering signatures, that suggests a permanent green stimulus, to be spent primarily on the clean energy transition and environmental justice programs. It would begin at $2 trillion and then be automatically renewed each year at a level of 4 percent of GDP (about $850 billion) “until the economy is fully decarbonized and the unemployment rate is below 3.5%.” The second way to make programs enduring is to include various switches and triggers, such that their spending levels are automatically adjusted over time. One example is a program proposed by Claudia Sahm, previously an economist at the Federal Reserve, now director of macroeconomic policy at the Washington Center for Equitable Growth. The “Sahm rule” would create a system of direct payments to individuals that would be triggered by rising unemployment. “Evidence from recent stimulus programs indicates that large, automatic, and salient payments have the strongest stimulus benefits,” notes the Roosevelt Institute.  Similarly, other direct payments or subsidies could be set to decline in increments as GDP reaches various thresholds. Loans and loan guarantees to various industries could be tied to the unemployment rate. Grants to states and cities could be tied to markers of regional recovery. Assistance to local public transit systems could be tied to ridership numbers. Passing anything is difficult for Congress; passing a stimulus bill is extremely difficult. If every program has to be reauthorized annually, most will end up getting cut. Insofar as possible, stimulus should be designed to continue on its own until the targeted problem is solved.  3. Make the economy better.  There’s no excuse for delaying direct aid to people who are hurting, but the fact is, the economy is currently on pause, in a kind of chrysalis. Before they try to bust it out of that cocoon, lawmakers should think about what kind of economy they want to see emerge.  “Coronavirus has basically turned off the global economy,” Jamie Henn, a climate activist and co-founder of 350.org, told me. “Let’s install a new operating system before we turn it back on.” The economic pause has served to highlight some of the dangers the economy was perpetuating. As it drags on, air pollution falls. There’s evidence the economic shutdown in China reduced particulate pollution enough to substantially reduce mortality. And the shutdown in the US has already sent traffic and pollution plummeting in cities across the country, reducing deaths from traffic accidents and respiratory illnesses. As the government considers stimulus going forward from this pause, it should see an opportunity to stimulate the growth of a cleaner, greener, more just economy. Workers should return to find jobs opened up in cleaner industries, with paid medical and family leave, better union protections, and a seat on corporate boards. (Yes, as I said, I am aware Republicans do not think this way.) With those principles in mind, let’s look at some of the specifics of what might constitute a good, green stimulus bill (or series of stimulus bills). The Roosevelt Institute, a progressive think tank, has a plan for stimulus that leans hard on short-term measures (four of their five recommendations). Let’s walk through them. 1. Get immediate help to people hurting.  Mainly, this should take the form of direct cash payments, which are easier and more effective than other financial instruments. In a March 5 op-ed, Obama economic adviser Jason Furman proposed $1,000 for every adult and $500 for every child, but in a more recent interview with Vox’s Ezra Klein, he said, “now I’d double or triple that.” Sure enough, the Roosevelt Institute proposes $2,000 for each adult and $500 for each child. (Senate Republicans are pushing, unbelievably, to give poorer people less cash assistance.) 2. Protect workers. Mandate permanent paid medical and family leave (including for workers in the gig economy), extended and increased unemployment benefits, and protections from reprisal for individuals or unions blowing the whistle on companies that aren’t complying. Prohibit foreclosures and evictions and temporarily cover car and credit card loans. (These latter two measures are under discussion in current negotiations.) 3. Help states. States are in an intense budget crunch, with tax revenue declining just as state responsibilities for emergency health care and social services are rising. Unlike the federal government, which can print money, states must balance their budgets. Very few of them have rainy-day funds large enough to cover the massive hole about to be blown in those budgets.  The federal government should take over all Medicaid payments, encourage states that haven’t expanded Medicaid to do so, purchase state debt through the Fed, and offer block grants to states for things like energy efficiency that can both save people money and employ a lot of people quickly. (Cities also need direct aid — the US Conference of Mayors has requested $250 billion for various local emergency priorities.) Fed spending should also help prepare states for the inevitable next crisis. “It’s critical that the federal government also bolster technical assistance and training to state and local governments to improve disaster and emergency response across the board,” said Jeff Mauk, head of the National Caucus of Environmental Legislators, “to ensure all states are prepared for future climate disasters.” 4. Help small and medium businesses. Tens of thousands of businesses are shuttering across the country, and many thousands more only have the resources to survive for a matter of weeks or months. If they all close for good, recovery will take much longer, as new businesses are formed and new workers hired. Corporate consolidation will get much worse. And in the end, much more will be required of the federal government.  “If firms are allowed to fail en masse — and their workers left to scatter in the wind,” writes Eric Levitz, “more-expensive and longer-term government income support will be required than if Uncle Sam spends what it takes to keep existing enterprises in the black.” Democratic Sens. Chris Murphy, Jeff Merkley, and Chris Van Hollen have put forward a plan that would funnel $600 billion in grants (not loans) to small businesses, to cover payroll, rent, and health insurance, administered by the Treasury Department. Republicans led by Sen. Marco Rubio have put forward a smaller ($350 billion) plan, with more restrictions, to be run by the Small Business Administration. (That appears to be the one in the final bill.) Much more will be needed, including ongoing low-cost loans, federal funding of local nonprofit business incubators, and perhaps even the feds becoming a “buyer of last resort” to put a floor beneath cratering demand. As I said above, to the extent possible, these measures should be explicitly open-ended, set to automatically continue until economic indicators recover.  The public is fully in support of big short-term recovery measures, across parties and geographic regions. So that’s the short-term recovery piece. Now let’s lift our eyes to the horizon. Reed Hundt chaired the economic review for the Obama transition team and had a ringside seat as the 2009 stimulus was developed and passed. He wrote a book about it called A Crisis Wasted, arguing that the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) skimped on long-term investments in economic renewal. “We need short-term measures to cope and long-term investments for rehabilitation,” he wrote in a recent op-ed. The lack of the latter, he argues, is what made the last recovery so slow. “I can’t be the only one to see — in economic terms, if not in health terms — history repeating itself,” he told me. The focus is again on short-term measures, with too little orienting against a long-term vision for a better economy. “In the midst of a devastating public health crisis and the ongoing climate catastrophe, there’s no way to go back to ‘normal’,” says Thea Riofrancos, a political scientist at Providence College and a backer of the aforementioned green stimulus proposal. “Instead, we need public policy that centers workers and communities, protects the vulnerable, slashes emissions, and creates a more caring, equal society for all.” The crisis has only just begun; between them, social distancing and the virus are likely to push the US economy deeper in a hole for months to come, maybe years. Once the country makes it through the crunch, people are able to leave their homes and go to work, and the economy begins growing again, substantial government assistance will still be needed for a long while. It is worth thinking about what kind of long-term trajectory that assistance should encourage. There are plenty of areas where the US badly needs investment — including, obviously, health care capacity and preparedness — but in this section, I want to focus on the green stuff. The key context is provided in this piece by Carbon Tracker’s Kingsmill Bond. Historically, disruptive new technologies tend to cap and begin reducing the market for incumbent technologies long before they reach anything like market parity. (“Horse demand famously peaked when cars were just 3 percent of their number,” he writes, “and gas lighting demand peaked when electric lighting was just 2 percent of supply.”) As he notes, fossil fuel industry growth has been slowing (to about 1 percent last year) as the world begins the shift to cleaner energy. Together, renewables and nuclear power now make up 12.8 percent of total global energy supply. Analysts agree that a structural shift is underway and that fossil fuels are going to peak and begin a permanent structural decline relatively soon.  What’s happening now is that the cyclical is colliding with the structural, which is to say, the cyclical downturn caused by the novel coronavirus seems to have moved forward the structural peak in fossil fuels. If they are smart [narrator: they were not], policymakers will treat this an opportunity to make sure the peak sticks, avoiding what is typical after downturns, a snapback that ends up increasing total emissions. Policymakers did not see that coming in 2009, or if they did, they did little to prevent it. “After the global financial crisis of 2008, global CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion and cement production grew 5.9% in 2010, more than offsetting the 1.4% decrease in 2009,” writes the World Resources Institute’s Helen Mountford. “In responding to this crisis, we must be careful not to exacerbate the ongoing climate crisis,” wrote a group of Democrats in a recent letter to congressional leadership. “We must strongly oppose misguided or surreptitious attempts to boost polluters at the expense of the public health.”  To avoid a post-recession surge of pollution, investments should be geared toward bolstering, and attracting private investment to, cleaner alternatives like renewable energy and electric vehicles. That is the approach Americans overwhelmingly support. Long-term economic development is obviously a capacious subject, but from the perspective of lawmakers bracing for crisis in 2020, thinking about the post-crisis economy of 2030 or 2050, here are a few guidelines worth following. 1. Attach strings to bailouts.  The hotel industry has asked Trump for $150 billion in bailout money. And it is not alone — there is a long line of needy industries forming, from cruise ships to retailers, casinos, and shale gas companies. Thus far, Trump and Republicans have pushed for a free-for-all of corporate giveaways based on cozy relationships with the White House or Congress, with no strings attached. That is ill-advised.  Decisions should be based on objective metrics of need and focused on the welfare of people, workers, not stocks. And substantial federal assistance for any industry or institution should come, as Bill McKibben argues in the New Yorker, with conditions — another key lesson of the 2009 stimulus. For business bailouts, any grants or loans should be contingent on companies keeping employees on their payroll (as in Norway), offering paid sick leave, and eschewing stock buybacks and dividend payouts. The Roosevelt Institute notes that recipients could also be required to “adopt codetermination structures in which workers are represented on the board of the company; raise wages to a certain level ($15 as a floor is a necessary start); enact responsible scheduling policies; and remain neutral toward unionization efforts.” For businesses in carbon-intensive sectors, government assistance should be contingent on measures to reduce greenhouse gases. For instance, in a letter to Congress, a coalition of environmental and workers’ rights groups asks that any airline bailout (the industry has asked for $50 billion) be tied to an industry commitment to reduce emissions by 2.5 percent a year, a demand that Democrats have included in their counterproposal. Similarly, any help for the oil and gas industry should be contingent on verifiable reductions in emissions and/or investments in carbon-free alternatives. (Ironically, large oil and gas producers have lobbied against policy assistance, because they know a recession will wipe out smaller independent producers that they can then buy up. Sen. Jeff Merkley (D-OR) has introduced legislation that would prevent Trump from bailing out oil and gas. It’s probably the first time Merkley and fossil fuel giants have been on the same page.) And some industry requests should simply be rejected. The American Petroleum Institute is taking advantage of the crisis to ask Trump to roll back environmental standards. There’s no reason to do that. The coal industry has produced a brazen wish list of its own, including reduced payments to miners with black lung and reduced royalty payments. It should receive exactly none of those things.  As journalist Mike Grunwald, who wrote the book on Obama’s stimulus, explains in Politico, any major post-recession stimulus involves triage, decisions about which companies and industries live and which die. There is no sense wasting money trying to revive an industry like coal that is already on its deathbed. There is also talk of financial industry bailouts. The big banks have already received a $32 billion windfall from Trump’s tax cuts, and now his administration is likely to use the virus as an excuse to further loosen rules. That would be a bad idea. Instead, the goal should be to prepare for the next financial crisis, which is likely to be carbon-related. “The Covid-19 moment is a potential preview of what a climate-driven financial crisis could look like, because it’s being driven by an exogenous shock that could destabilize the financial system,” says Graham Steele of the Stanford Graduate School of Business. “There is a systemic-risk case for acting preemptively in the case of climate, rather than waiting for another crisis to materialize.” Making the financial system more climate-resilient would involve some “macroprudential regulation,” i.e., rules designed to protect the stability of the system as a whole (in this case, from the threat of climate disruption). Steele suggests three rules in particular: “increased capital requirements on carbon investments to better price their risks; emissions limits on financial institutions’ lending, investment, and trading portfolios; and investment obligations to make vulnerable communities climate-resilient.” (For much more on this sort of policy, see this post by me and this one by Steele.)  These kinds of policies “would essentially remove the hidden subsidy financial regulators are currently providing for risky gray financing activities” in carbon-intensive projects, says Gregg Gelzinis of the Center for American Progress, “making green investments more financially attractive in relation.”  Any bailout of financial institutions should be conditioned on the implementation of reforms like these. It’s one of the top demands of the climate advocacy community right now. “If Wall Street takes our public dollars and funnels them into coal, oil, and gas,” says Henn, “they’re just setting up the next great global catastrophe.” 2. Invest in clean energy.  “It is very rare to be able to hit two birds with one stone,” says Michael Greenstone, head of the Energy Policy Institute at the University of Chicago, “yet clean energy stimulus spending can both help fill the serious demand shortfall and contribute to our massive underinvestment in research, development, and deployment.” During the Obama administration, lots of work was done investigating stimulus focused on investments in clean energy, finding over and over again that it would boost the economy and reduce unemployment. Indeed, Obama’s stimulus bill was in part a $90 billion investment in clean energy, and, as Grunwald chronicles in his book The New New Deal, it was a spectacular success, sparking a decline in solar and wind prices that has since transformed the energy landscape.  The priority for lawmakers today should be to stabilize support for renewable energy, which is reeling from the crisis. Before the virus, wind and solar represented the fastest-growing source of jobs in the US. Now the wind industry reports that 35,000 of its 114,000 jobs in the US — almost a third — could be lost, which could “jeopardize $43 billion in investments and payments to rural communities.” The solar industry reports that it could lose up to half its jobs in sectors like residential solar. The energy storage industry reports that the impact of the virus “has been immediate and potentially devastating to our industry.” Congress could begin by granting the industry’s top request, which is “an extension of start construction and safe harbor deadlines to ensure that renewable projects can qualify for renewable tax credits despite delays associated with supply chain disruptions.” And it asks that, at least in the short term, those credits be converted into cash grants, due to the shortage in tax equity driven by the recession. The tax credits — for renewables, electric vehicles, carbon capture and use (CCU), electric heat pumps, and more — should also be extended (and expanded to cover energy storage). One way to extend all clean energy tax credits at a stroke would be to pass the Growing Renewable Energy and Efficiency Now (GREEN) Act. And if it wanted to get more ambitious, Congress could consider converting the credits to cash grants on a permanent basis.  There is still $40 billion in the Energy Department’s clean energy and advanced vehicle loan programs, which the administration has been sitting on, having made all of one loan in three years. Despite the hype about Solyndra, those programs have a solid record of success and should be revived. Another obvious measure is the creation of a federal green bank to extend stable, low-cost loans that help finance low-carbon investments. Washington Gov. Jay Inslee suggested initially capitalizing such a bank at $90 billion, which sounds about right. Fatih Birol, head of the International Energy Agency, recently wrote an op-ed pleading with all countries to put clean energy at the center of their post-coronavirus stimulus. The US could lead the way; the public is already on board. 3. Invest in infrastructure.  The US is notoriously behind on infrastructure spending, and everyone agrees it should play a big role in long-term stimulus.  Instead of plowing more money into highways, as it typically does, this time the US could fund clean infrastructure: long-distance power transmission lines, carbon capture facilities, universal broadband internet, and buildings, buildings, buildings. (Billionaire Mike Bloomberg has been advocating for this approach.) One place to start would be the Transportation Department’s Better Utilizing Investments to Leverage Development (BUILD) program, which is behind on a backlog of projects meant to reduce emissions or increase climate resilience. Other obvious targets include electric vehicle charging infrastructure, to prepare for and hasten the transition to electric vehicles, and energy storage infrastructure, to help integrate renewable energy into the power grid. Stanford’s Dan Reicher also suggests increased hydropower.  When it comes to buildings, the opportunities are endless. Greens have been advocating for years for a nationwide building retrofit program focused on energy efficiency and resilience, which could employ thousands of people in every area of the country. The federal government could start by extending subsidies or interest-free loans to home and building owners who undertake electrification and efficiency projects. “Successful retrofit programs, such as Mass Save in Massachusetts, have demonstrated that these undertakings can be an engine for economic growth and job creation while saving consumers and businesses big time on energy bills,” says Mark Paul, an economist at the College of Florida.  Constantine Samaras, an engineering professor at Carnegie Mellon, suggests starting with schools. “A large stimulus program could renovate every school in America — removing lead and asbestos, replacing windows, changing out heating and air conditioning systems, and making these essential buildings healthy and safe,” he says. “Every community would see a benefit, building support for continued stimulus.”  One last note on infrastructure: As WRI’s Dan Lashof suggests, all this new infrastructure should be built with new low-carbon forms of steel and concrete (and mass timber!), both to hold emissions down and to accelerate innovation in those crucial fields.  4. Save public transit (and other public agencies).  Across the country, public transit systems are getting crushed by social distancing. CityLab’s Laura Bliss reports: Ridership across New York City’s MTA, the nation’s largest public transit system, fell by 60% on subways and as much as 90% on commuter trains. Washington, D.C.’s WMATA lost 100,000 riders in the course of a week. In San Francisco, rail ridership on BART was down a staggering 90% as of Tuesday, and the SFMTA’s buses and railcars had plummeted 35% by the end of last week. Intercity rail travel has also taken a huge hit: Bookings on Amtrak have plunged 50% since the outbreak. Public ferry boats have emptied out, from Seattle to Staten Island. In the US, public transit is a scarce public good in an age when (as nature seems determined to teach us) we need more public goods, not fewer. “Transit is essential to combating climate change and transitioning to net-zero” emissions, Scott Goldstein, policy director at the advocacy group Transportation for America, told Bloomberg. “And if we do not support them today in crisis, they will not be there for us in the future.”  As Vox’s Matt Yglesias argues, Congress should act to ensure that transit systems emerge from this economic paralysis stronger than they entered. MTA has requested a $4 billion bailout, and in a letter to Congress, Goldstein’s group has requested almost $13 billion for the nation’s rail and bus systems. (Calstart, a nonprofit transit advocacy group, has its own set of transit stimulus requests.) In stimulus terms, it is a no-brainer. In a post at Vice, Aaron Gordon explains the real funding difficulty facing transit systems today. It is not primarily capital costs, i.e., the costs of buying new trains or buses or building new routes. Rather, it is operating costs — fuel, labor, and electricity — that are rising even as traditional sources of funding (mainly fares) dry up in the face of the virus.  These are the systems we can expect to see entering financial crisis very soon, if not already, because of their high reliance on fares:- Amtrak- SF BART- Caltrain- NY MTA- Chicago CTA- PATCO- NJT- PATH- Metra- Sound Transit- WMATA- LA Metrolink- SEPTA- SD MTS The 2009 stimulus ended up channeling several billion dollars to transit, but it was almost all in the form of capital subsidies, which led to many transit systems having an oversupply of hardware and undersupply of labor and money to run it. Gordon reports: At that point, transit agencies pulled the only lever they had left to pull. They cut service. Some cities, like Cleveland and Milwaukee, have still not returned to the level of service they were providing before the recession. “Construction workers were getting hired,” [the nonprofit TransitCenter’s Ben] Fried summarized, “while bus drivers were getting fired.” This time, the federal government shouldn’t make the same mistake. It should offer block grants to local and interstate transit systems based on population and capacity and allow transit agencies to decide how the money is spent. Another note on transit: One easy way to secure a stimulus win-win-win is to electrify the nation’s commuter and school buses, which now primarily run on diesel, adding to noise and air pollution in urban areas. Here, the upfront capital costs of electric buses are the barrier; once they are overcome, operating costs are much cheaper. The drop in pollution also tends to benefit low-income communities, which are more likely to be located along transit routes and more likely to use transit. “The city of Shenzhen in China electrified all of its 16,000 buses in eight years,” says Samaras. “New York City has 5,000 buses. Let’s start electrifying those and all the other buses right now.”  For some more big thinking on transit, see “A Green New Deal for City and Suburban Transportation,” recently released by Data for Progress, the McHarg Center at the University of Pennsylvania, TransitCenter, and Transportation for America. It’s a plan that aims for, among other things, “putting the majority of Americans within walking distance of frequent, high-quality public transit by 2030.” (Incidentally, polling shows that large majorities of Americans support strengthening public transit.) And there are other public agencies that need help. “Our local transit agencies, housing authorities, rural electric and agriculture co-ops, and other municipal services employ millions of people and, best of all, are already publicly owned,” says Billy Fleming of the McHarg Center. “Any package that does not allow those workers to keep their paychecks and benefits — and all of us to retain access to the vital services that make life possible in our communities — should be a nonstarter for members of Congress.” 5. Try more social democracy.  As long as I’m listing ideas this Congress is unlikely to adopt, I might as well finish with a few even more ambitious ideas for stabilizing against cyclical (or virus-driven) recessions. Needless to say, these would also make certain vested interests very angry.  One is a universal basic income (UBI), whereby the government would mail regular checks to every citizen — like the cash payments Congress is about to hand out, only ongoing. Iconoclastic former presidential candidate Andrew Yang helped push this idea into the mainstream discussion, making the extremely relevant point that it would prevent millions of people from suddenly losing all their income in an economic downturn. (For more on a UBI, see journalist Annie Lowrey’s recent book Give People Money, and for more on the ins and outs of giving people money, follow Vox’s Dylan Matthews.)  Two other ideas are endorsed by the leading thinker and writer in green socialism these days, Kate Aronoff. She advocates for nationalizing the oil and gas sector so that it can be steadily and predictably wound down, ensuring that affected workers and communities are protected.  And she advocates for a federal job guarantee. “The US government would permanently become the country’s employer of last resort,” she writes, “through a program that’s always in place but kicks into high gear during an economic downturn and then shrinks when people find work elsewhere in the public or private sector.” The government could employ people on a range of environmental construction and remediation projects.  Having a guaranteed job, like having a guaranteed income, would cushion every American against sudden and unpredictable crises, which are only likely to grow more common throughout the 21st century.  Congress has reportedly reached a deal on a phase three stimulus, which would offer a range of short-term payments and loans. It is likely to be far short of what is needed, especially as the crisis worsens. (And despite Trump’s delusional gestures to the contrary, the crisis will worsen.) The political dynamic that has taken shape is, to say the very least, odd.  It is well known in political science that voters tend to blame the president’s party for whatever happens during an administration, whether or not the president has any power over it. They especially hold the governing party responsible for the economy, and especially in the runup to an election.  That’s why Republicans blocked Obama’s ongoing efforts at stimulus; they knew he, not they, would suffer voters’ wrath over the results. But this time, they are in charge. If Trump and the Republicans pass inadequate stimulus, it is Trump and the Republicans who will reap the electoral backlash when the economy continues to suffer.  In other words, it is in the GOP’s best interests to pass the biggest stimulus possible. Their electoral fortunes depend it. Voters don’t care about deficits as anything other than culture-war totems; they care how they and their communities are faring. Any realistic consultant would be telling Republicans to dump as much money on voters as possible. Yet it is Democrats who are fighting for more and better stimulus, because unlike Republicans in 2009, they are not craven enough to allow a deepening recession in order to hurt their political opponent. In fact, the best plan for responding to the crisis is the one put forward by the furthest-left candidate, Bernie Sanders. (It contains much of what I covered above, and more.) Meanwhile, Republicans are fighting for less effective stimulus, because they seem unable, at this stage in their accelerating devolution, to identify their own best interests or adapt to circumstances, even when it is their own goose about to be cooked. Regardless, even if they were capable and willing, Republicans cannot make any long-term plans or short-term tactical sacrifices because they are inextricably tied to the mercurial and mercenary rule of Donald Trump, whose only guiding principle is vanity, whose only tricks are goosing the stock market and stoking his nativist base, and whose only plans are shaped by whatever he sees on Fox on a given morning. It is not a recipe for steady leadership in a crisis. The principles and suggestions laid out above are unlikely to become policy as long as Republicans control the presidency and the Senate. But six months from now, different people could be in charge, facing an economy that is still in crisis and a planet that is still warming. They will need ideas that address both crises at once — all the ideas they can get. The world has officially separated into two camps: the rule followers, observant of social distancing and hopeful of flattening the curve; and the risk-takers, who have been storming the world’s beaches, bars, and burger joints in spite of the coronavirus — and government and public health efforts to curtail its spread.  The new virus has pushed dozens of countries to implement strict isolation methods to prevent a global health crisis. In China, coronavirus measures were hard to evade, as authorities sealed apartment buildings and scanned millions for rising body temperatures. But in the United States, Australia, and much of Europe, these restrictions are harder to devise and enforce, mostly because democratic norms and a strong sense of individual liberty prevail. And so the crisis has also revealed humanity’s tendency to flout the rules. In recent weeks, people swarmed beaches around the world, from Florida to Bondi Beach in Australia. “If I get corona, I get corona,” one spring breaker told Reuters. “At the end of the day, I’m not gonna let it stop me from partying.” (He later apologized, calling his comment  “insensitive.”)  Washington, DC, Metro officials practically begged riders not to visit the city’s iconic cherry blossoms, which they did anyway, in droves. Brits took to crowded pubs to chant “f*** coronavirus!” And one woman went viral when she tweeted about her defiant trip to a crowded Red Robin restaurant. “It was delicious,” she tweeted, “and I took my sweet time eating my meal. Because this is America. And I’ll do what I want.”  Many companies have held on, too, seemingly convinced of their own necessity. Starbucks kept its doors open even as employees organized to protect their health. “Coffee is not essential at all,” one barista told Vice. “Starbucks is not essential.” (The company has since shifted to drive-thru and delivery only.) WeWork, the coworking behemoth, is still open — and charging its members rent — even as several of its facilities were linked to confirmed coronavirus cases. “[W]e have an obligation to keep our buildings open,” company chair Marcelo Claure and CEO Sandeep Mathrani wrote in a memo.  The poor reaction of a small segment of people to ever-stricter quarantine policies comes as no surprise to psychologists, sociologists, and public health experts. No one alive today has experience with a pandemic of this severity, catching even the most experienced researchers off-guard, not to mention the average person sorting through their Facebook feed. Conflicting government messaging has only exacerbated the widespread confusion. And the prevailing public health advice around coronavirus counters the long-held wisdom that we must “carry on” in a crisis: For at least a century, citizens have believed that in the midst of a disaster, their job is to go on with their daily lives as best they can — otherwise, the enemy will win. Now, the government is telling people the best strategy is to upend their lives entirely. “We feel like we have to do something,” said Robert Wuthnow, a sociologist at Princeton University and author of Be Very Afraid: The Cultural Response to Terror, Pandemics, Environmental Devastation, Nuclear Annihilation, and Other Threats. But without a good frame of reference for the present crisis, we’ve looked to lessons learned from past calamities, including natural disasters, terrorism, war, and economic collapse, to guide us. “We’re a little bit like generals fighting the last war,” he said.  But the old rules no longer apply. Planetary problems such as a pandemic or climate change are different, said Amy Fairchild, a public health ethicist and the dean of Ohio State University’s College of Public Health. “In this moment in time, ‘carry on’ could be a formula for disaster.”  When the coronavirus first arrived in the United States, people cast about for comparisons. “So last year 37,000 Americans died from the common Flu,” President Trump tweeted on March 9. “It averages between 27,000 and 70,000 per year. Nothing is shut down, life & the economy go on. At this moment there are 546 confirmed cases of CoronaVirus, with 22 deaths. Think about that!”  Experts including Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and a regular at the White House’s coronavirus press briefings, debunked the comparison. “The flu has a mortality of 0.1%,” he told Congress on March 11. “This has a mortality rate of 10 times that.” But the analogy — intended to make an extraordinary threat look like ordinary — persists.  In reality, the coronavirus has no clear analogue. “The normal mechanisms we’re using to predict things don’t work,” said Tali Sharot, a professor of cognitive neuroscience at the University College London who studies human motivation. “Actually, nothing else that has happened before in our lifetimes is relevant or helpful here.” Many contemporary disaster mantras emerged in past wars, and they often contain a kernel of a consumerist message. At the outset of World War I, British politicians such as Winston Churchill encouraged “business as usual,” suggesting that both companies and citizens should continue to behave just as they did in peacetime. But the status quo eventually gave way to a coordinated defense effort when the state realized it would need to control manufacturing, trade, and commerce to win the war.  Twenty years later, in World War II, the British government coined “Keep Calm and Carry On” to boost morale in anticipation of a Nazi invasion. But it quickly pulped the test posters; other campaigns about courage in a crisis provoked public outcry, as many people found the messages tone-deaf. After half a century, however, the phrase was exhumed — in part as a message to those weathering the Great Recession. In times of crisis, Americans have borrowed English idioms, and coined a few of their own homespun mottos for personal and economic perseverance. During the Great Depression, President Franklin D. Roosevelt made an enemy of an emotion, telling the public, “We have nothing to fear but fear itself.”  In the aftermath of the 9/11 terrorist attacks, President Bush gave this famed aphorism a consumerist spin when he told airline employees, “When [the terrorists] struck, they wanted to create an atmosphere of fear. And one of the great goals of this nation’s war is to restore public confidence in the airline industry. It’s to tell the traveling public: Get on board. Do your business around the country. Fly and enjoy America’s great destination spots. Get down to Disney World in Florida.” “Get down to Disney World” was probably never meant to apply to the people who actually traveled to the Magic Kingdom earlier this month amid public health warnings to avoid crowds. But that hasn’t stopped some politicians from applying this logic to the coronavirus. In a White House press briefing, President Trump said, “America will again and be soon open for business,” and later suggested relaxing guidelines by Easter, despite expert predictions that social distancing rules may need to last three or more months.  Hours before California Gov. Gavin Newsom (D) shut down restaurants and bars to slow the spread of the virus, Rep. Devin Nunes (R-CA) told the American public, “It’s a great time to go out” and support the local economy. In Philadelphia, organizers of the annual St. Patrick’s Day Parade, which typically draws 20,000 participants and even bigger crowds, resisted pulling the plug until a few days before the event. “The fact is we have to continue as a population to go on with our lives,” Michael J. Bradley Jr., the parade’s grand marshal, told PBS.  “It’s almost like we don’t want the virus to win, so we’re going to go out drinking, go to parties, go out to the beach,” Wuthnow said. But these are risky responses when the enemy is not a person or a bad year for the stock market, but a virus — one that can be transmitted asymptomatically. Humans are generally terrible at assessing risk. But it’s proven especially true in the case of  the coronavirus. “It’s about our risk to others, and that might make it a little more difficult to understand,” said Cynthia Rohrbeck, an associate professor in clinical and community psychology at George Washington University. People are used to talking with their doctors about their personal health, but taking responsibility for the health of others comes up only infrequently, often in public discourse around smoking, drinking and driving, and vaccines.   Our judgment could be clouded by optimism bias, the tendency to believe you are less likely than others to experience something negative. Gallup polling in March found that most Americans say they are following social distancing practices. But in late February, researchers polled 4,348 people in France, Italy, the United Kingdom, and Switzerland and found half of them believed they were less likely to get the coronavirus than others, sans real evidence. Another poll, conducted in mid-March on more than 800 people from the US, the United Kingdom, and Germany, suggested this optimism was bolstered by people’s belief that they had fewer human interactions than their peers, making their risk of contracting the virus inherently lower.  These biases can even be institutionalized — and create confusion as the science, and related policy, evolves. Early reports suggested the virus was the biggest threat to people over age 60 or those with underlying conditions. On March 12, the United Kingdom’s Prime Minister Boris Johnson championed a “herd immunity” strategy, which seemed to encourage young people to go about their business and contract Covid-19. But as the risk became clearer (in the United States, for example, 38 percent of people who are sick enough to be hospitalized are under age 55, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention), Johnson reversed course and shut down social gatherings. When countries finally began to roll out isolation measures, they encountered additional obstacles. “One of the most important things for people is to have a sense that they are in control of their own life, that they have agency,” Sharot said. In a recent paper in The Lancet, researchers reviewed 24 past publications on the psychological effects of quarantine and found it can cause post-traumatic stress symptoms, confusion, and anger.  But the desire for agency can have an ideological component, too. In China, the authoritarian government has wide latitude to control the behavior of its citizens. But in the United States, few Americans have experienced government-imposed restrictions on when they can go out and whom they can see.  Many politicians have criticized the rules as an infringement on people’s freedom, not to mention a disaster for the economy. Arizona state Rep. Anthony Kern (R) and Oklahoma Gov. Kevin Stitt (R) both tweeted (and deleted) defiant photos from crowded restaurants. “We can’t all just shut ourselves and stay home,” Sen. Ron Johnson (R-WI) told the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. “The economy has to move forward.”  “Me, personally, I just refuse to live my life in fear,” said Katie Williams, the 30-year-old Las Vegas resident who went viral for her Red Robin tweet. “As Americans, we typically do what we want. It’s kind of that attitude we’ve always had,” she added. “I think if we’re going to start pressuring people that they have to stay home, or publicly shaming them like pariahs, I think we’re just starting to lose a little bit of our sense of country and our sense of rights.”  I just went to a crowded Red Robin and I'm 30.It was delicious, and I took my sweet time eating my meal. Because this is America. And I'll do what I want. Fairchild, the public health ethicist, said she understands these concerns. But there are other rights to consider. “As an individual, I have a right not to be infected by somebody who is not paying attention,” she said. The coronavirus isn’t the only global disaster humanity is up against. While the pandemic will eventually end, climate change is an existential crisis that keeps on giving. Neither disaster will allow us to carry on, said Susan Michie, a health psychologist and the director of the Center for Behavior Change at the University College London. “I think what this [pandemic] is showing is that collectivism is absolutely necessary,” she said. “Both in a pandemic and the climate emergency, no one can go away and protect themselves. It’s not like that anymore.”  People may bristle at being told what to do — especially when European and American coronavirus quarantine strategies look superficially similar to those used by authoritarian nations such as  China or Singapore. But Michie saw it another way: “We elect people to [make] decisions at a national level to look after ourselves. That’s not authoritarianism, that’s democracy.”  DC can close its streets and lifeguards can kick surfers and suntanners out of Bondi Beach, but officials are largely dependent on the public’s compliance in a crisis. “This is not something we are doing because we are the fun police,” an Australian official said in a press conference as he implored people to stay home. “This is about saving lives.” To convince people to cooperate, Michie said politicians need to communicate a clear sense of urgency, while providing support for everyone who is forced indoors. “We’re interconnected,” Michie said, and the coronavirus proves it. Eleanor Cummins reports on the intersection of science and popular culture. She’s a former assistant editor at Popular Science and writes a newsletter about death. She previously wrote about the “death-positive generation” for The Highlight.President Donald Trump is getting impatient with the coronavirus.  At his daily briefing on Monday, Trump started talking about getting Americans back to work — eight days into his “15-day” challenge to get the public to social distance.  “This is not a country that was built for this. It was not built to be shut down,” Trump said. “America will, again, and soon, be open for business. Very soon. A lot sooner than three or four months that somebody was suggesting. Lot sooner. We cannot let the cure be worse than the problem itself.” Trump’s daily press conferences have shifted in tone almost daily: Early on, he seemed skeptical of the severity of the situation, then he pivoted to calling himself a “wartime president,” and now he seems antsy to return to normalcy — so much so he’s dismissing his own health advisers’ advice and talking longingly about treatments as if they were ready for mainstream use.  In just one briefing, Trump gave at least six reasons that would make anyone following the coronavirus news wary of his judgment.  Trump is beginning to agitate for a return to normalcy, first tweeting the idea Sunday that workers should get back to work next week and then retweeting the idea Monday.  When asked during the press conference about whether he’s listening to his health advisers on whether that’s the best course, he responded:  “If it were up to the doctors, they’d say let’s shut down the entire world because again you’re up to 150 countries,” Trump said. “And when we shut it down that would be wonderful and let’s keep it shut for a couple of years. You can’t do that to a country, especially the No. 1 economy in the world by far.”  No doctor has gone this far. It’s a strawman argument to support Trump’s rejection of health experts’ recommendations as over the top.  However, many experts have said that to effectively “flatten the curve” of daily new infections, social distancing should last months to over a year. That’s how long it could take to develop and distribute a vaccine or establish herd immunity without severely overwhelming health systems. Deborah Birx, the response coordinator for the White House Coronavirus Task Force, did not rule out a three- to four-month shutdown in certain parts of the country. She said that the pandemic has progressed much more quickly in Washington state, which is about two weeks ahead of New York state in terms of the increase in the rate of new infections.  Trump is preoccupied by the economic impact of coronavirus — which, to be fair, has already been catastrophic. The stock market has had the fastest 30 percent sell-off ever and industries from airlines to restaurants are pleading for bailouts. It could plunge the US into a depression and leave many workers unemployed. Trump has promised publicly that the stock market will bounce back once the crisis passed, but privately, he has reportedly expressed anger that warnings from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention officials have scared the markets. He has tried to tie his hopes for the economy to his 2020 reelection prospects. As my colleague Aaron Rupar writes:  On Monday, the president followed up on his previous-night’s tweet by retweeting a number of accounts with sketchy handles like @steph93065 that urged him to get people back to work — not only for the sake of the economy, but for his reelection hopes as well. “15 days. Then we isolate the high risk groups and the rest of us get back to work before it’s all over for everyone!! #Landslide2020,” wrote @FedupMil in a post that was retweeted by the president.  Officials will have to reckon with the tradeoffs of reopening the economy and slowing the spread of the virus through social distancing at some point. But most public health experts say that it’s simply premature to talk about returning to normalcy in a few weeks.  Trump continues to tout hydroxychloroquine, a common anti-malaria drug, coupled with the antibiotic azithromycin, also known as “Z-Pak,” as a potential treatment for the virus despite the fact that it hasn’t been tested and could have adverse side effects.  “At my direction, the federal government is working to help obtain large quantities of chloroquine,” he said. “We think tomorrow, pretty early, the hydroxychloroquine and the Z-Pak I think is a combination is looking very, very good and it’s going to be distributed.”  Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases at the National Institutes of Health, has previously said that he has no data to rely on that the drug is safe for people who’ve tested positive for coronavirus, nor any data that proves it is effective.  Meanwhile, Americans appear to be listening to Trump. BuzzFeed reports that a man died after self-medicating with a fish tank treatment related to the drug. Other reports suggest there’s a run on the drug itself, with some even crossing the border to buy it from Mexican pharmacies, making it harder for people who need it to access it.  For weeks, Trump has tried to claim that the coronavirus is like the flu, and he returned to that on Monday: “We have a very bad flu season, on top of everything else,” he said. “It’s very bad. It looks like it could be over 50,000 [deaths]. And certainly, this [pandemic] is going to be bad. And we’re trying to make it so that it’s much, much less bad.” But coronavirus is far more contagious — and more deadly. Here’s one chart that explains the difference.  Trump also compared the pandemic to car accidents, insinuating that pandemic deaths are equivalent.  “You look at automobile accidents, which are far greater than any numbers we’re talking about,” he said. “That doesn’t mean we’re going to tell everybody, ‘No more driving of cars.’” The car accident comparison has come up before: On Friday, Fauci criticized the idea, calling it “false equivalence.” Then, at least, Trump seemed to agree with Fauci, saying, “You could be talking about millions of lives.” Trump might want to send workers back to work, but it’s really not up to him.  Trump can’t unilaterally reopen the economy — that power lies with states and localities, many of which have imposed “shelter in place” policies that have resulted in the closure of non-essential businesses where people typically congregate, such as bars and restaurants. In hotspots of infection and areas where the rate of new daily infections hasn’t yet peaked, that could mean social distancing could prevail for much longer than just a few weeks.  But Trump can advise states to reopen for business as usual, and at least some of them will likely heed his advice, despite what medical professionals may say. Lifting the social distancing restrictions prematurely could place vulnerable populations at risk by allowing the virus to spread too quickly and overwhelming the resources of the medical system, leading to preventable deaths.  Trump has been claiming for days that the economy would improve after the virus has been controlled. But on Sunday night, he changed tack, suggesting on Twitter that the economic toll of sending workers home could have a more devastating effect than letting the virus rip through the US population unchecked by social distancing: WE CANNOT LET THE CURE BE WORSE THAN THE PROBLEM ITSELF. AT THE END OF THE 15 DAY PERIOD, WE WILL MAKE A DECISION AS TO WHICH WAY WE WANT TO GO! He reiterated that argument during his press conference on Monday, claiming that stifling the economy could be deadly in and of itself.  “We have people with tremendous anxiety and depression, and you have suicides over things like this when you have terrible economies,” he said. “[Death] would be in far greater numbers than the numbers we’re talking about with regard to the virus.” The toll that isolation takes on people is real. So is the toll of unemployment — one reason Congress is considering a relief package. Studies have found that suicide rates do increase during economic downturns.  But it’s not clear what, if anything, backed up Trump’s assertion that social distancing would be more deadly. Research suggests some past recessions lowered overall death rates. It’s true that the suicide rate jumped during the Great Recession from 2008 to 2010, but not in the kind of numbers that would outpace the projected death toll of coronavirus. Roughly 10,000 suicides were traced to the recession. In the worst-case scenarios without social distancing, the coronavirus would kill millions.  The advice from public health experts remains the same: practice good hygiene and social distancing, refrain from traveling, and consult a medical provider if you develop symptoms of Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus. Scientists estimate this could be our new normal for a year or more. The virus is primarily spread through droplets from coughing or sneezing. The CDC consequently recommends that people wash their hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, disinfect frequently touched objects and avoid touching their face, where the virus can enter through the eyes, nose and mouth.  People should also avoid face-to-face interactions with people outside of their households. Many states have already adopted “shelter in place” policies that have shut down all but essential businesses. But this kind of social distancing even extends to small gatherings of friends and going for walks at popular times of day.  If you do develop symptoms, which typically include a fever and coughing, then you should contact a health care provider, who may recommend that you self-monitor at home or that you be tested for the virus (though there remains a shortage of available testing kits.) On day seven of the White House’s “15 days to slow the spread” initiative, President Donald Trump started talking about sending Americans back to work — an idea at odds with advice from his top health advisers. In a tweet on Sunday, the president said in all capital letters: “AT THE END OF THE 15 DAY PERIOD, WE WILL MAKE A DECISION AS TO WHICH WAY WE WANT TO GO!” On Monday, he retweeted similar opinions as news began to leak that behind the scenes Trump was sharing this view with his advisers, and one of his aides appeared on Fox News to say the same thing.  WE CANNOT LET THE CURE BE WORSE THAN THE PROBLEM ITSELF. AT THE END OF THE 15 DAY PERIOD, WE WILL MAKE A DECISION AS TO WHICH WAY WE WANT TO GO! Trump’s eagerness to end social distancing was also a major topic of his marathon news conference on Monday evening. He said he plans to reopen certain parts of the economy “not long after” the 15-day initiative ends, even if his medical and public health advisers don’t agree with him. “The doctors, if it was up to the doctors, they’d say ‘let’s shut down the entire world,’” Trump said at one point, adding at another that the shutdown “causes other problems, and maybe it causes much bigger problems than the problem we’re talking about now.” .@kaitlancollins: Did any of the doctors on your team endorse easing the federal guidelines?TRUMP: "Not endorsed." pic.twitter.com/azN4bVbg2Z The point of the 15-day initiative was to encourage social distancing to “flatten the curve” of the virus and save lives. But as of Monday, there was no sign that the pandemic was slowing. In fact, outbreaks in America are even outpacing some of the worst-hit countries in the world. Worse, most experts, like Dr. Anthony Fauci, the most prominent expert on Trump’s coronavirus task force, warn that the pandemic will get worse before it gets better. Experts fear that talk of encouraging people to get back to their normal routines quickly could hamper efforts to slow the pandemic — or even encourage its spread. Trump, however, indicated on Monday that he thinks people have already learned the necessary lessons — even though he was speaking on the day after single-day coronavirus-related deaths in the country broke 100 for the first time ever. "We learned so much discipline" -- Trump is talking like the coronavirus pandemic is in the rear view mirror, when in fact America just broke 100 deaths in a single day for the first time. pic.twitter.com/pnmFzN1QxW There is a minority opinion — one expressed in particular by economists associated with Trump — that resuming some economic activity after a 15-day period is a worthwhile risk to take. But even the most aggressive argument emerging from that camp doesn’t compare to Trump’s willingness to send people back to work en masse. It’s clear that with the Dow plummeting and unemployment claims spiking, Trump fears an economic disaster ahead of the 2020 election could doom his prospects. (He even posted a retweet suggesting his idea is directly tied to the election.)  Trump’s sudden swing from calling for a 15-day day crackdown, to doubting the science it’s based on less than halfway through, is emblematic of his reckless approach to combating the coronavirus. All signs point to the crisis getting worse — and the man in charge is putting his own political interests before the lives of Americans.  On Monday, the president followed up on his previous night’s tweet by retweeting a number of accounts with sketchy handles like @steph93065 that urged him to get people back to work — not only for the sake of the economy, but for his reelection hopes as well. “15 days. Then we isolate the high risk groups and the rest of us get back to work before it’s all over for everyone!! #Landslide2020,” wrote @FedupMil in a post that was retweeted by the president.  On Monday morning came a slew of news reports that Trump is “itching to scale back social distancing after 15-day period,” as CNN put it. The New York Times reported that “at the White House, in recent days, there has been a growing sentiment that medical experts were allowed to set policy that has hurt the economy, and there has been a push to find ways to let people start returning to work.” 
    Related
   Then came a Fox News appearance from top White House economics adviser Larry Kudlow in which Kudlow echoed points Trump made on Twitter. “The president is right: The cure can’t be worse than the disease, and we’re gonna have to make some difficult trade-offs,” Kudlow said. “I spoke with the president about this very subject late last evening.” KUDLOW teases that Trump will try to send people back to work next week: "We can't shut in the economy... POTUS is right: The cure can't be worse than the disease, & we're gonna have to make some difficult trade-offs... I spoke w/ POTUS about this very subject late last evening." pic.twitter.com/OV02aLFGxh It’s understandable that the White House is eager to reestablish a sense of normalcy. Experts are now saying that the ongoing curtailment of economic life could produce unemployment levels worse than the Great Depression and an unprecedented shrinkage of GDP.  Trump would obviously have a hard time making a case for his reelection amid that sort of economic loss. But to the extent he cares about American lives more than his political future, the responsible thing to do is wait and see — at least until there’s some semblance of improvement, not as cases mount.  The whole point of the 15-day program is to prevent the health care system from being overwhelmed by “flattening the curve” of coronavirus cases. But as the following chart indicates, the number of confirmed cases in the US continues to grow at an exponential rate. There’s no indication that the number of cases will plateau or start coming down before next week. On the contrary, New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio said on Sunday that “it’s only getting worse, and in fact April and May are going to be a lot worse.” It’s true that many of the US cases are concentrated in especially hard-hit regions like New York City, the San Francisco Bay Area, and Washington state. One might view that as contributing to an argument for the resumption of normal social and economic life in relatively better-off states like West Virginia or the Dakotas.  But the experience of Hong Kong, where the coronavirus seemed to be under control until a relaxation of social distancing resulted in a second outbreak and even more stringent measures, demonstrates the risk involved in prematurely encouraging people to go back to gyms, bars, and other places where the virus can spread. And the idea there’s much to be gained by reopening businesses in places like Grand Forks, North Dakota, while San Francisco remains under lockdown and hospitals are on the verge of overflowing in New York is dubious at best. Furthermore, while US coronavirus testing capacity has increased in recent days, the country still lags far behind others in terms of tests performed relative to the population — meaning we still don’t have a clear picture of how widely the virus has already spread. In the end, the choice Trump seems to think he faces between continuing strict social distancing measures meant to get the coronavirus under control or ending them in hopes of stopping the economic collapse is a false one.  The latter can’t happen without the former, and the former can’t happen until the number of cases levels off, while more vigorous testing gives experts the tools they need to develop a better picture of how widely the virus has already spread. Which is to say, even if you care about economic activity as the only value here, it's really not clear that anything like "business as usual" is even a possibility in the midst of a roaring pandemic, even if you let everything stay open. Marc Lipsitch, an epidemiology professor at the Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health and director of Harvard’s Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics, told the Washington Post that “every well-informed infectious epidemiologist I know of” thinks the best way forward in the short term is more restriction, not less. “We haven’t yet even seen signs that the growth [in coronavirus cases] is slowing, much less reversing. Now is the time to tighten restrictions on contacts that could transmit the virus, not loosen them,” Lipsitch said. “If we let up now we can be virtually certain that health care will be overwhelmed in many if not all parts of the country. This is the view of every well-informed infectious epidemiologist I know of.” State governors have more authority than Trump to keep people at home, but what Trump says matters. For instance, the national standardization of social distancing measures throughout the country (with some notable exceptions, like beaches in Florida) came shortly after Trump stopped downplaying the gravity of the situation just over a week ago and embraced the “15 days” program. At the very least, the president should wait until the outbreak is under control before trying to give people hope, because the trajectory of the numbers indicates there’s no good basis for doing so beyond short-term political self-interest. In fact, the quickest route back to some sense of normalcy is to stop the spread of the virus by continuing to encourage people to stay home, even if we have to do so for more than 15 days. The news moves fast. To stay updated, follow Aaron Rupar on Twitter, and read more of Vox’s policy and politics coverage.The federal tax-filing deadline has been postponed until July 15 as the nation struggles to contend with the coronavirus pandemic. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin announced the change on March 20 on Twitter. The IRS followed up and tacitly confirmed the new deadline, oddly enough, by retweeting Mnuchin and adding slightly more context. At @realDonaldTrump’s direction, we are moving Tax Day from April 15 to July 15. All taxpayers and businesses will have this additional time to file and make payments without interest or penalties. The news came days after Mnuchin very publicly declared at a White House press conference that taxpayers would have to file by April 15, though they could put off paying any taxes they owed for up to 90 days after the deadline without incurring interest or being penalized. Now, according to Mnuchin’s latest statement, taxpayers can put off filing for up to 90 days as well. Although the timing of these announcements is a bit confusing, the news isn’t much of a surprise. Mnuchin did say on March 11 that he was recommending pushing the deadline back. This doesn’t apply to state income tax returns, which, depending on where you live, may still be due on April 15 (if your state has them at all). Many states are following the federal government’s lead: California, Connecticut, Vermont, and Wisconsin, for example, extended their deadlines to match the federal one in the days following Mnuchin’s announcement. But Hawaii, which has April 20 as its tax day, is still deciding whether to move its date. In other words, find out what your state is doing and don’t assume it will push tax day back to July 15. Mnuchin urged taxpayers who are expecting refunds still to file as soon as possible to get the money they’re owed. Update, March 23, 2020, 7:25 pm: Updated to reflect new state tax return deadlines.As the Senate is embroiled in contentious negotiations for its third $1.8 trillion coronavirus package, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi just unveiled a $2.5 trillion bill of her own. Introducing the “Take Responsibility for Workers and Families Act” on Monday afternoon, Pelosi outlined a number of Democratic priorities that are not in the current Republican Senate bill. First and foremost in the bill is a priority shared with Senate Democrats — ensuring federal relief money to corporations goes to their workers, rather than to CEOs or stock buybacks. “Democrats take responsibility for our workers; we require any corporation that takes taxpayer dollars must protect their workers’ wages and benefits,” Pelosi said at a Monday speech. “Not CEO pay, stock buybacks, or layoffs.” To be clear, Pelosi’s bill is separate from the main $1.8 trillion Senate package currently being negotiated by Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, Senate Republicans, and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin. It’s also unlikely to pass the Republican-controlled Senate or be signed by President Donald Trump.  The bigger picture here is Pelosi signaling to Republicans that if they don’t like what Schumer is proposing, they will still have to deal with her down the line when the House takes up the Senate bill. Pelosi’s bill reads like a mission statement for how Democrats might govern in this crisis if they weren’t constrained by a Republican Senate and president. It calls for coronavirus treatment to be free for patients, further bolstering unemployment insurance, directing $40 billion to states to help stabilize schools and universities, student loan forgiveness, funding for the homeless, and helping boost states’ vote-by-mail capacity.  “Because of the Senate Democrats, progress has been made. We urge the Senate to move closer to the values in the Take Responsibility for Workers and Families Act,” Pelosi said in a statement ahead of her press conference. We’ve yet to see whether any of these provisions will make it into the final product that Schumer is negotiating with Mnuchin and McConnell. But the speaker of the House just made it clear she is part of the equation.  House Democrats released the text of their bill Monday night — over 1,400 pages and with a $2.5 trillion price tag. Pelosi is echoing a number of key points Senate Democrats are sticking to: If corporations are to receive federal money, Democrats want to make sure there’s oversight attached to it, and that relief is flowing to employees rather than corporate CEOs. And both Schumer and Pelosi have been adamant they want to expand federal money and resources to hospitals and health care workers on the front line of the coronavirus crisis. But Pelosi’s bill goes further in a number of different directions and contains priorities Senate Democratic leadership isn’t negotiating on right now, including helping states expand vote-by-mail systems. Here are the main points of the House bill: Pelosi’s bill is massive; at least $500 billion more than the Senate bill currently being negotiated. But the unfolding coronavirus outbreak and resulting economic shutdown is a nearly unprecedented crisis, and we still don’t know how much federal money it will take to deal with the economic crisis at hand. While Democrats in the House are certainly hoping some of these priorities make it into the final bill Congress passes and Trump signs, it’s also important to remember Democrats are signaling what their leverage is. After days of negotiation with Schumer, Mnuchin and the White House don’t necessarily have to turn around and do it all over again with Pelosi, with much steeper demands. These new priorities from the House could also have the effect of speeding up negotiations in the Senate.  Last Wednesday, President Donald Trump signed an executive order invoking the Defense Production Act (DPA). That provision requires private companies to prioritize any federal government orders for products — including masks, respirators, and other critical items needed to fight the coronavirus — over other orders. But as of Monday, five days later, even top Trump administration officials admit the government has yet to make a single order. Health care workers across the country are desperate for masks, gowns, respirators, and other basic supplies they need to treat patients with Covid-19 and to keep themselves protected from the coronavirus. They’re pleading for him to use the DPA. So what gives? Why hasn’t the Trump administration placed any orders yet?  Over the weekend, the president seemed to offer two reasons: 1) companies are already stepping up to make these products on their own; and 2) using this mechanism would be tantamount to socialism. First, Trump argued that medical device companies like Baxter and GE Healthcare, as well as automotive companies like General Motors and Ford, are working around the clock to meet equipment needs. Because of their efforts, there’s no reason for the government to intervene. “We have tremendous numbers of companies also making equipment,” Trump said during a Sunday press conference at the White House. Second, he insinuated using the DPA would somehow turn the American economy socialist. “We’re a country not based on nationalizing our business,” Trump said at the same event. “Call a person over in Venezuela; ask them how did nationalization of their businesses work out. Not too well. The concept of nationalizing our business is not a good concept.” The problem is that both these arguments are deeply flawed.  While a lot of private businesses are upping their production, the lack of federal government involvement in the procurement and distribution process means that these products aren’t necessarily going to the cities and states in most dire need of them right now. As Vox’s Jen Kirby writes, “State officials keep saying that without some sort of government guidance, they’re left competing for the same equipment (as opposed to having that equipment go where it’s most needed) and thus overpaying.” Second, the DPA, when used as intended, doesn’t involve a government takeover of industry. “It doesn’t nationalize businesses, but rather allows the US government to contract with companies to prioritize manufacturing of critical goods — in this case, medical supplies,” Kirby notes. “It’s a scalpel, not an ax,” James Hasik, a DPA expert at George Mason University, told me. It’s unclear why Trump has convinced himself using the DPA is more dangerous than not using it. Some in the White House say he’s trying to lower the likelihood that he could be directly blamed for any mismanagement. “If something goes wrong then it’s on the president,” a senior administration official told me, “and that’s something he doesn’t want to happen.” But that’s what presidents are elected to do: take responsibility for running the federal government. In the absence of that leadership, experts say, the supply shortage could get worse. Many companies are already trying to rise to the occasion to make even more of the products patients will need. As expected, some of those are top health care firms. “Our manufacturing teams are focused on making Baxter products that are in demand due to the pandemic and are needed by patients with chronic diseases,” Lauren Russ, a spokesperson for the Fortune 500 medical company Baxter International, which makes hospital care products, told me in an emailed statement.  Automotive manufacturers are also looking at ways they can use their considerable manufacturing capacity to contribute, including potentially retooling their factories to produce critical items such as ventilators.  But although Trump has been openly touting these automotive companies on Twitter, experts say it could take months for them to produce medical equipment at scale because they must train their workforces, get the right plans, and source the specific materials needed to make these new products.  Ford, General Motors and Tesla are being given the go ahead to make ventilators and other metal products, FAST! @fema  Go for it auto execs, lets see how good you are? @RepMarkMeadows @GOPLeader @senatemajldr Trump’s argument is that the government doesn’t need to tell these companies what to make, as they’re already making the needed products. That, in his mind, is reason enough not to put the DPA to use and allow states simply to order what they need from these companies. “He is currently using it to drive the private sector’s response to this crisis,” a White House spokesperson told me. “And the private sector’s response, to date, to his direction has been overwhelming, fulfilling government-identified needs faster than anyone thought possible.” But experts point to three major problems with this argument. First, a private company is either going to sell to whoever placed their order first or to the highest bidder. It’s therefore possible that the places in America that most need masks, for example, may not get them in time because a mask-making company has other orders to fill first.  “Whoever picks up the phone first is next in line,” Brett Lambert, the Pentagon’s top manufacturing policy official from 2009 to 2013, told me.  If you’re New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, that’s a problem. His state may now have to spend more on masks to outbid someone else, or simply not get them at all if the order comes in too late. This is already starting to happen in some places. “We’re competing against each other, we’re competing against other countries, it’s a wild west, I would say, out there, and indeed, we’re overpaying for [personal protective equipment] because of that competition,” Illinois Gov. J.B. Pritzker told CNN’s Jake Tapper on Sunday.  This where the DPA comes in handy.  The federal government could get involved and place an order for masks, which would get fulfilled first because a DPA order takes priority over all others. Then, because the government knows which areas have the most need for those masks, it can distribute them appropriately. New York would certainly take priority over other parts of the country not reeling as badly from the coronavirus (possibly including Illinois). The second flaw in Trump’s argument has to do with materials. Yes, many companies already involved in manufacturing medical supplies are ramping up their efforts. But in doing so, they’re going to need additional materials and may be hampered in their efforts if they can’t get those materials. Again, this is where the DPA comes in: The federal government can find other sources of those materials and then put in an order to have the company sell the materials to the federal government instead of using them to make their own products. For example, a fabric company may typically sell most of its product to a dress-making company, but the cloth could be better used for masks right now. In that case, the federal government would pay the fabric company for the materials and then give them to a mask-making company so it can continue to make even more of them. “The government would have the authority to become the deliverer-in-chief,” Lambert told me. Finally, there may be a company that wants to help build something — say, respirators — but doesn’t have the machinery or capital to do so. If the federal government thinks that company could be useful, it might give a loan or offer equipment under DPA so production can begin right away. That accelerates that company’s ability to help right now. The issue, then, isn’t that companies are sitting on their hands. Problems arise in making the product and then delivering it to where it’s most needed in a time of crisis. Only the federal government coordinating the response has the insight and resources to help with that. Steven Grundman, who served as the Pentagon’s deputy undersecretary for industrial affairs in the 1990s, told me that using the DPA won’t realize Trump’s Venezuela fears. “The use of the DPA not only wouldn’t, it couldn’t, socialize the American economy,” he said.   As noted above, DPA allows the government to identify, prioritize, and allocate scarce resources in a time of emergency. That’s a far cry from a complete government takeover of private business. “The DPA has nothing to do with nationalizing industry; it has everything to do with prioritizing industry,” Lambert said.  Indeed, the government isn’t seizing capital, labor, or equipment for itself and taking it without compensating private citizens and businesses that control them. It’s all about making sure those in trouble get what they need, and those providing the equipment still get paid for it.  Yet there are leading officials in Trump’s orbit, like trade adviser Peter Navarro, who believe the DPA is anathema to the free market. “We’re getting what we need ... without putting the heavy hand of government down,” Navarro said at the Sunday press conference. If that’s the bet the administration is making, experts say it’s a bad one — and it could have disastrous consequences. “The DPA needs to be open for business,” Grundman said.Over the weekend, Democrats and Republicans on Capitol Hill have been frantically negotiating with the White House to approve a $1.8 trillion coronavirus stimulus package. There are major policy disagreements standing in the way. Democrats are objecting to a $500 billion chunk that’s allocated for big businesses, which they say doesn’t have enough oversight. Democrats also want to secure more money for hospitals and health care workers on the front lines of the coronavirus outbreak, as well as state and local governments.  During a Sunday night procedural vote in the Senate, the bill put forth by Senate Republicans failed to get the 60 votes needed to move forward; 47 senators voted for the bill while 47 voted no. Democrats were united in their opposition; even more conservative members of the Democratic caucus like Sen. Joe Manchin of West Virginia issued statements after decrying Majority Leader Mitch McConnell’s bill for prioritizing big business over money for hospitals and workers. On Monday afternoon, that same procedural vote failed again 49-46, as Democrats maintained their opposition to the proposed package.  Republicans were always going to have to negotiate with Democrats to get to 60 votes. But to complicate matters, the GOP needs Democratic support even more given how many Republican senators aren’t able to participate in votes right now. Five Republican senators are self-quarantining due to concerns that they may have been exposed to coronavirus, including some who are doing so after Sen. Rand Paul (R-KY) announced he tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday night.  Paul’s behavior has prompted an outcry from a number of his colleagues — questioning why he continued to appear in the Senate for Republican conference lunches and other votes. Based on how infectious the disease is, it could only be a matter of time before more senators are impacted.  The main hang-up on the bill is Democrats’ objection to $500 billion that would go to big companies and industries hit hard by the coronavirus crisis. As the bill is currently written, much of the use of that money would be under the discretion of Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, and Democrats want rules and regulations around the funds to direct them to the workers — not CEOs. After the procedural vote failed on Sunday, Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer explained what Democrats were opposed to. In his words: “A giant, giant corporate bailout fund with no accountability — you wouldn’t even know what loans were made until six months later.” Two other big points that Democrats want to see movement on are increased funding for hospitals and necessary equipment like ventilators and masks, and increased federal funding for state and local governments trying to grapple with the growing crisis. McConnell’s GOP votes are shrinking. The situation increases Democrats’ leverage and makes bipartisan agreement even more paramount.  The normally reserved McConnell looked visibly angry Sunday night as he spoke on the Senate floor, laying blame at the feet of Schumer and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi. “We had a good bipartisan bill developed on a bipartisan basis with members in the Senate over the last 48 hours, until the Democratic leader and the speaker of the House decided to blow it all up and play Russian roulette with the markets,” McConnell said. “The result of what the Democratic leader just did was to prevent us from voting right after the markets open in the morning, and allow the markets to be rattled until noon.” Democrats, meanwhile, are furious at McConnell’s characterization of the legislation as “bipartisan,” since they weren’t included in much of its initial development.  Negotiations between Schumer, McConnell, and the White House continue. As both the number of coronavirus cases and the number of layoffs rise in the US each day, the need to reach a compromise is pressing. There is still no deal on the massive coronavirus stimulus package, and senators are continuing negotiations with the White House, after Schumer and Mnuchin met late into the night on Sunday. There’s another tentative vote to advance the legislation scheduled for early afternoon, though it remains uncertain if lawmakers will be able to eke out an agreement by that point.  “We will come in at noon and hopefully we will have an agreement by then,” Schumer said in a floor speech on Sunday.  A major reason for the impasse is pretty extensive disagreement over who exactly the stimulus would benefit.  In the form that was proposed by Senate Republicans as of Sunday afternoon, the legislation included some relief for workers, but focused heavily on providing assistance to major corporations in affected industries — and offered little transparency on how these funds could be doled out. Some of the key planks of the legislation, which is now being negotiated, are as follows: Despite Republicans billing this process as “bipartisan,” Democrats made clear this weekend that they were not satisfied with how they’ve been cut out of its development. Democrats are particularly interested in seeing a boost in funding to help states stem losses they’ve encountered and cover costs like the increased need for food assistance and unemployment insurance.  Even Manchin, one of the most conservative Senate Democrats, who sometimes sides with Republicans, could not be persuaded to vote yes on the package. Manchin issued a statement shortly after hitting Senate Republicans for not providing enough funding for hospitals and front-line health care workers. “It fails our first responders, nurses, private physicians and all healthcare professionals. ... It fails our workers. It fails our small businesses,” Manchin said in the statement. “Instead, it is focused on providing billions of dollars to Wall Street and misses the mark on helping the West Virginians that have lost their jobs through no fault of their own.” This bill doesn’t just need Senate approval; it’ll have to get through the Democratic-controlled House, too. And on both fronts, it’s facing serious pushback.  In the Senate, the legislation needs at least 60 votes to even advance procedurally — meaning at least seven Democrats would have to vote in favor of it, if all 53 Republicans were present and united. That math is further complicated by the fact that five Republicans are currently self-quarantining because they’ve been directly exposed to individuals who have tested positive for Covid-19. And at least one Republican senator — Rand Paul — is the epicenter of a new wave of exposure fears. After Paul’s office announced his coronavirus diagnosis, Utah’s two senators — Mitt Romney and Mike Lee, both Republicans — announced that due to their recent proximity to Paul, they would self-quarantine and be unable to vote. Romney, who sits next to Paul in the Senate, will be tested for coronavirus. Lee’s office said while he is showing no symptoms and has therefore been advised he doesn’t need a test, he will still self-quarantine for two weeks. Sens. Cory Gardner (R-CO) and Rick Scott (R-FL) are also in self-imposed quarantine after coming into contact with other individuals who tested positive for coronavirus. (Sen. Amy Klobuchar announced her husband tested positive, but she has not seen him in two weeks so she is not being tested.) Given the number of Republicans who are self-quarantining, the GOP majority for a physical vote has now dwindled down to 48-47, making the party even more reliant on Democratic support.  Even with the complex Senate voting math McConnell is up against, there’s yet another test once the bill passes the Senate: the House of Representatives. On Sunday, Speaker Pelosi announced the House is finalizing its own coronavirus stimulus package, separate from the Senate bill — titled the “Take Responsibility for Workers and Families Act.” Pelosi has not been a direct part of Senate negotiations thus far but is in close contact with Schumer. And the final package in the Senate will need her approval before it is passed and sent to the president’s desk. Pelosi has a litany of disagreements with the current Republican bill. In addition to the ones laid out by Senate Democrats, House lawmakers are concerned with the lack of additional SNAP funds and the lack of Occupational Safety and Health Administration language to protect workers. “There is at this time a big difference between the Take Responsibility for Workers and Families Act and what the Senate Republicans are proposing,” Pelosi said in a Dear Colleague letter Sunday night.  Monday will be critical to see if the gap between Democratic and Republican demands can close.  Correction: A previous version of this article stated that the proposed $1,200 direct payments would apply to all adults under a specific income threshold. There are still a segment of adults who would not be covered by these payments. Senate Republicans are facing a major challenge when it comes to passing the $1.8 trillion coronavirus stimulus bill: They don’t quite have the leverage they once did as senators self-quarantine in response to the virus. When the full Senate is able to vote, Republicans have a 53-47 majority. But Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul announced on Sunday that he tested positive for Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, prompting several other Republican senators to self-quarantine. Since five GOP senators are now in isolation because they’ve either been diagnosed with Covid-19 or exposed to someone who did, the party margins in the upper chamber has shifted to 48-47.  The change matters because it means that Republicans are in even greater need of Democratic support in order to pass what is shaping up to be a massive $1.8 trillion bill. To get through the Senate, the stimulus needs 60 votes. Previously, that meant convincing at least seven Democrats to back the legislation. Now, it means winning over at least 12. Right now, Republicans don’t even have more conservative Democrats on board. Democrats were unified in their opposition to the bill on Sunday, when they shot down a procedural vote to allow the stimulus bill to move forward on a final vote of 47-47. Paul’s positive test for Covid-19 could have major implications for how many Republican senators are able to be physically present for votes in the coming days, especially if Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell continues to oppose any form of remote voting. After Paul’s office announced his diagnosis, Utah’s two senators — Mitt Romney and Mike Lee, both Republicans — said they would self-quarantine due to their recent proximity to the Kentucky senator and would thus be unable to vote. Romney, who sits next to Paul in the Senate, will be tested for the coronavirus. Lee’s office said that while he is showing no symptoms and has been advised he doesn’t need a test, he will still self-quarantine for two weeks. Sens. Cory Gardner (R-CO) and Rick Scott (R-FL), meanwhile, are also in self-imposed quarantine after coming into contact with other individuals who tested positive for coronavirus. (Sen. Amy Klobuchar’s husband has tested positive, too, but as she has not seen him in two weeks, she is not being tested.) Paul’s diagnosis has also spurred criticism from his colleagues, including Sens. Kyrsten Sinema (D-AZ) and Martha McSally (R-AZ), who called him out for taking a test roughly six or seven days ago but continuing to socialize and interact with other lawmakers in the interim. It’s possible that other Republicans, including those who’ve been near Paul in recent lunches and meetings, could also decide to self-quarantine.  The rapidly changing dynamics of the Senate voting math aren’t the only thing that Republicans have to worry about. There’s yet another test once the bill passes the Senate: the Democratic-controlled House of Representatives. On Sunday, Speaker Nancy Pelosi announced the House is finalizing its own coronavirus stimulus package, separate from the Senate bill, titled the “Take Responsibility for Workers and Families Act.” Pelosi flew back to DC to participate in discussions this weekend, and the final package in the Senate will need her approval to make it through the House and to the president’s desk. Pelosi has a litany of disagreements with the current Republican bill. In addition to the ones laid out by Senate Democrats, House lawmakers are concerned with the lack of additional SNAP funds and the lack of Occupational Safety and Health Administration language to protect workers. “There is at this time a big difference between the Take Responsibility for Workers and Families Act and what the Senate Republicans are proposing,” Pelosi said in a “Dear Democratic Colleague” letter on Sunday night. Monday will be critical to see if the gap between Democratic and Republican demands can close. The changing voting margins in the upper chamber — not to mention the urgency of the crisis — could very well put pressure on Republicans to offer more concessions to their colleagues on the other side of the aisle. President Donald Trump loves to blame China for the coronavirus pandemic, but new information surfaced over the weekend that the administration eliminated a position last July that potentially could have helped the US get an earlier jump on a response to the crisis, suggesting the president may need to place blame a little closer to home. The Trump administration told the United States’ embed at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) that the position would be defunded, causing her to leave her post in July 2019, according to a report from Reuters’s Marisa Taylor. The embed helped train Chinese public health experts and served in part as a liaison between Chinese officials and their counterparts in the US.  With the administration planning to discontinue the role, the embed return to the US about five months before China began to see its first Covid-19 cases. Under normal circumstances, the embed likely would have passed information about the novel virus to US officials. Instead, Chinese officials were able for weeks to conceal the virus and the threat it posed, leading to a delay in the world’s response to what was then a matter of great concern and is now a pandemic.  When asked about his administration’s role in this decision during Sunday’s daily coronavirus press conference, Trump called on US CDC Director Robert Redfield to answer the question before attacking the press, saying, “This is just like the other stuff that you, not you, but the press was asking. We actually gave CDC more money, not less money — they said we defunded, it turned out it was more money. Every one of those things that was said were 100 percent wrong, and this sounds like another one.” REPORTER: Your administration eliminated a key position in China in July -- a medical epidemiologist embedded in China's disease control agency. Why did you do that?TRUMP: "Well, I could ask, uh, anybody ... do you want to take that one Bob?" pic.twitter.com/u4VSYZqrmh CDC funding has in fact gone up under the Trump administration — but in direct opposition to the president’s wishes. All of his budgets have requested that funding be cut, requests Congress ignored. It was only last week that the administration retracted its request for CDC funding cuts for 2021. And it has successfully eliminated public health positions it has control over. Redfield came to the podium to claim, “The China office is actually being augmented as we speak. And we’ve been embedded there for over 30 years. There’s a reason they call it the Chinese CDC, because we’ve had that productive partnership.”  It isn’t clear what those augmentations are or when they will take effect. But Trump’s final word on the matter only served to underscore why the position was so critical.  “I wish [China] told us three months sooner that this was a problem,” the president said. “We didn’t know about it, they knew about it, and they should have told us, we could have saved a lot of lives throughout the world.” As Redfield mentioned, the US and China have long collaborated on matters of public health. As part of that collaboration, China has allowed the US to embed a public health official in its CDC. Until July 2019, that embed was Dr. Linda Quick, an epidemiologist. Quick led a program that trained Chinese epidemiologists in methods for discovering, tracking, researching, and containing diseases — like Covid-19. She reportedly came back to the US after being told her position would be discontinued in September 2019 in part due to the ongoing trade war between the US and China, and chose to return early, in July.  Once she came back to the US, she was not replaced by the US or any other foreign government, leading to a series of events that Bao-Ping Zhu, who held Quick’s position during the Obama administration, told Reuters was “heartbreaking to watch.” “If someone had been there, public health officials and governments across the world could have moved much faster,” Zhu said. Essentially, governments around the world might have been able to begin responding in early December, when the first Chinese cases were reported, rather than in late December, when China informed the World Health Organization it had begun to notice cases of a novel illness.  The US CDC has been dismissive of this view, and told Reuters that Quick’s absence “had absolutely nothing to do with CDC not learning of cases in China earlier.” It is true Quick likely would have had to rely on those she’d worked with and others in her network to get information about the virus as China worked to minimize it. Former CDC epidemiologist Scott McNabb told Reuters that in his view, “based on circumstances in China, [Quick being on the ground] probably wouldn’t have made a big difference.” But given the work Quick was doing, it isn’t out of the realm of possibility that she would have had access to those aware of what was going on, and that she could have passed that intelligence to the US. Questions over what Quick could have done had she been allowed to stay in China come as the Trump administration faces numerous questions about its handling of the coronavirus pandemic, and as it weathers a great deal of criticism from health care providers and state and local officials about the speed and seriousness of its response.  When the Trump administration first realized the coronavirus would be a serious problem has been an open question. Redfield has said the CDC learned of the threat it posed on December 31; Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar said he learned January 3; Trump has said he was told sometime in late January or early February — a claim officials told the Washington Post is very much at odds with reality.  Regardless of when the administration learned, had the embed been in place, the US — and its allies — could have received factual information about the virus and Covid-19 far sooner than they did. Learning earlier may have led the administration to act earlier, and certainly would have given it more time to make plans around testing and the stockpiling and distribution of medical equipment that is currently in great demand and in short supply, like masks and ventilators.  And to Trump’s point, being able to act earlier would have led to lives saved — not just in the US, but in other countries as well.  It is, of course, impossible to definitively say that Quick’s position not being eliminated would have allowed us to avoid deaths or social distancing or a grim economic outlook. The coronavirus pandemic is a dynamic situation, with many, many factors affecting how we’ve ended up where we are. But it certainly seems that had Quick been in place as she was meant to be, the impact the virus has had might have been lessened.  The US Senate is still at odds over its multitrillion-dollar bill meant to help Americans, small businesses, and corporations deal with the economic fallout from Covid-19. Senate Democrats blocked the bill on Sunday, wanting more limits on bailouts to corporations and more extensive measures expanding the safety net for individuals. The bill is known as the “phase three” bill in Congress’s coronavirus response. The phase one bill, signed on March 6, offered $8.3 billion to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, vaccine development, and other public health measures. The phase two bill, signed on March 18, cost on the order of $104 billion, expanded paid sick leave for a subset of workers, offered free coronavirus testing to Americans, and gave modest boosts to unemployment insurance and food stamps.  The “phase three” bill, also called the CARES (“Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security“) Act, is more on the order of $1.8 trillion, or 18 times the last bill. It’s a sprawling stimulus measure including roughly $300 billion in direct cash checks to American households, $350 billion in loans to small businesses to cover interruption in business, and $500 billion in other relief to businesses, largely through loan guarantees. The bill also dramatically expands unemployment insurance. Independent contractors and the self-employed, typically not eligible for unemployment insurance, will be temporarily eligible for special “Pandemic Unemployment Assistance”; the federal government will take on a greater share of states’ unemployment payments; “work-sharing” programs where unemployment insurance pays companies to reduce workers’ hours rather than lay them off are expanded; and unemployment checks are increased by $600 a week across the board, a huge spike given the median weekly pay in the US is $936. However, the bill is not on President Trump’s desk for signing yet. There are still a number of sticking points for Senate Democrats, who blocked the bill on Sunday. Here are the problems Democrats still have with the measure, per leaked talking points: The bill’s $500 billion in business support includes $425 billion in loan guarantees, $50 billion for airlines, $8 billion for cargo air companies, and $17 billion for firms “critical to national security.” The fund is overseen by the Treasury Department and Secretary Steven Mnuchin has wide latitude over how to use it. While there is language meant to protect workers and prevent the money from being used on giveaways to investors, such as stock buybacks, Democrats think that language is far too weak; Mnuchin himself can waive it in some cases. “We’re gonna give $500 billion in basically a slush fund to help industries controlled by Mnuchin with very little transparency? Is that what we ought to be doing?” Sen. Mazie Hirono (D-HI) asked Politico. Add to this the fact that on Sunday, Trump specifically refused to rule out offering assistance to his own companies (“let’s just see what happens”), and you have Democrats worried not just about a corporate bailout but about potential corruption by a president they already voted to impeach. The latest version of the Senate bill offers its full cash benefits — $1,200 per adult tax filer, $500 per child — to even the poorest Americans, correcting a big problem with the first GOP draft of the bill that left out low-income people entirely. But you need to have filed taxes for 2018 or 2019 to get the benefit, which leaves out millions of Americans who do not typically need to file. Nonfilers typically either rely on mostly nontaxable income — like Social Security retirement or disability benefits or retirement income from a Roth account — or do not have enough money to owe taxes. Either way, they tend to be among the most economically vulnerable people in the country. Democrats want to use tools the federal government has to get cash directly to those people without requiring them to fill out unnecessary paperwork. The Democratic talking points note that the bill doesn’t do anything to strengthen the food stamp program — one of the most effective economic stabilizers we have — or to provide cash to state and local governments that, unlike the federal government, operate on balanced budget constraints and so are likely to raise taxes or cut spending as the crisis goes on. Democrats also want funding for uninsured people who fall sick during this crisis. The Trump administration has already taken actions to prevent foreclosures of mortgages insured by the Federal Housing Administration or Fannie May/Freddie Mac. But that hardly covers all homeowners and doesn’t do much for renters. Democrats objected that the Senate bill has “no specific provisions to protect individuals from eviction, foreclosure, or forbearance.” Democrats, up to and including presumptive Democratic nominee Joe Biden, are demanding at least $10,000 in federal student loan forgiveness per student as part of the package. Trump has suspended payments on student loan payments for the next 60 days and frozen interest, but he has stopped short of forgiving the underlying debt.President Donald Trump won’t commit to exempting his business from emergency coronavirus stimulus legislation that Congress is negotiating — an episode that would represent one of the most blatant instances of presidential self-dealing in American history.  “Let’s just see what happens,” Trump said during a news conference on Sunday, in response to a question about whether he’d commit to no stimulus money going to the Trump Organization.  REPORTER: Will you commit that no money from the emergency stimulus bill will go to your own properties?TRUMP: "I have no idea what they're talking about. Everything is changing. But I have no idea ... let's just see what happens."(That's definitely not a yes!) pic.twitter.com/PoMw96bFAi Those comments marked the second straight day that Trump was evasive in response to questions about his business. Asked during a news conference on Saturday if he expects the Trump Organization to to seek government assistance, Trump said, “I don’t know.” REPORTER: Do you expect your business to seek government assistance?TRUMP: "I don't know." pic.twitter.com/VE2I9n3YKE As experts say the coronavirus economic shutdown could result in unemployment hitting 30 percent and gross domestic product dropping by an unprecedented 50 percent in the second quarter of this year, Congress is negotiating a stimulus package that could provide hundreds of billions of dollars to workers and the businesses that employ them — including the one owned by the president. Parts of Trump’s business — like the rest of the hotel, restaurant, and hospitality industry — have been especially hard hit by the coronavirus pandemic and social distancing measures it has necessitated. The Washington Post reported last week that the Trump Organization has already laid off more than 200 workers across Las Vegas, New York, and DC as his properties have either been forced to shut down or, in the case of the Trump International Hotel located just blocks from the White House, been faced with occupancy rates as low as 5 percent. But the fact that Trump finds himself in a position where he can sign legislation directly enriching himself illustrates why the precedent had been for presidents to divest themselves from their business interests when they took office. Trump refused to do that, merely ceding day-to-day operations of the Trump Organizations to his two adult sons, whom he speaks with frequently and who serve as key political surrogates for him. REPORTER: Did you or anyone in your administration talk to anyone at the Trump Organization about the potential effects of the coronavirus?TRUMP: "No. I didn't speak to anybody. I speak to my sons." (Trump's sons are running his business) pic.twitter.com/hemAUUYjDA The question of whether the president’s business stands to gain from a stimulus bill he signs into law is more than an academic one. The bill championed by Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (but rejected in a party-line vote on Sunday by Senate Democrats) included a $500 billion “Exchange Stabilization Fund” that would’ve given Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin broad authority to decide which businesses benefited, and Congress limited authority to oversee it or even know where the money was going. “We’re not here to create a slush fund for Donald Trump and his family, or a slush fund for the Treasury Department to be able to hand out to their friends,” Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-MA) said in a statement, referring to McConnell’s bill. “We’re here to help workers; we’re here to help hospitals. And right now what the Republicans proposed does neither of those.” 
    Related
   Trump has financially benefited from legislation he’s signed into law before — he reportedly saved somewhere between $11 million and $22 million annually in tax payments thanks to Republicans’ 2017 tax cut bill. But rerouting money directly from taxpayers to his pockets would take the self-dealing up a notch, and his comments on Saturday and Sunday seem to indicate he’s feeling less shame about that than ever. “What’s interesting here is that Trump doesn’t even pretend not to own and profit from his businesses anymore,” Robert Maguire, research director for Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington (CREW), said in response to Trump’s comments on Saturday. “Remember the early days? The stack of documents. The claims of separation. ... All pretense is gone now, and now his businesses might get bailed out with taxpayer money.” The news moves fast. To stay updated, follow Aaron Rupar on Twitter, and read more of Vox’s policy and politics coverage.A long foreseen shortage of personal protective equipment (PPE) — including masks, N95 respirators, and gowns — is crippling health workers’ ability to respond to the coronavirus pandemic in the United States. And as doctors and nurses are forced to reuse gear in ways that put themselves and patients at risk of infection, they’re begging the Trump administration to use readily available legal tools to solve the crisis. In a joint March 21 letter to President Trump, the American Medical Association, the American Hospital Association, and the American Nurses Association called on the administration to “immediately use the Defense Production Act to increase the domestic production of medical supplies and equipment that hospitals, health, health systems, physicians, nurses and all front line providers so desperately need.” The Defense Production Act of 1950, originally signed during the Korean War, gives the president the authority to demand that businesses manufacture much-needed wartime supplies. In this case, the supplies aren’t titanium artillery; they’re equipment to protect frontline health workers from a highly contagious virus. In using the DPA, the president would order “the diversion of certain materials and facilities from ordinary use to national defense purposes, when national defense needs cannot otherwise be satisfied in a timely fashion.” In other words, he would direct factories that typically make other goods to start making medical resources ASAP.  Although Trump tweeted March 18 that he had signed the DPA, he said he would only be using it in a “worst case scenario in the future.”  I only signed the Defense Production Act to combat the Chinese Virus should we need to invoke it in a worst case scenario in the future. Hopefully there will be no need, but we are all in this TOGETHER! And, when asked in a March 21 press briefing why he had not yet compelled companies to manufacture and sell supplies in accordance with the DPA, he said, “We have the Act to use in case we need it, but we have so many things being made right now by so many … they are volunteering.” Yet the joint AHA-AMA-ANA letter makes it clear that current voluntary efforts are insufficient, and that the “worst case scenario” is already here. “Even with the infusion of supplies from the strategic stockpile and other federal resources, there will not be enough medical supplies, including ventilators, to respond to the projected COVID-19 outbreak,” the letter reads. “We have heard of health care providers reusing masks or resorting to makeshift alternatives for masks.” Interviews with doctors and nurses on the frontlines of the Covid-19 pandemic, many of whom requested anonymity because they did not have permission from their hospitals to speak with the media, show that there is no time for the confusion surrounding whether Trump actually plans to use the DPA. Doctors, nurses, and hospital administrators have been warning that they might run out of PPE for weeks now, but the warnings have become more urgent in recent days. For many hospitals, running out of masks is no longer something that “might happen.” The shortage is here.  Among the resources running dangerously low are N95 respirators, the masks that cup the face closely and have been approved by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) to block the inhalation of 95 percent of small airborne particles.  According to NIOSH guidance for extending N95 supply, hospitals should advise their staff to, “discard N95 respirators following close contact with, or exit from, the care area of any patient co-infected with an infectious disease requiring contact precautions.” But as the shortage worsens, reusing these masks is becoming the go-to method of preservation.  “Initially, we had single-use N95 masks,” says one nurse who has been treating Covid-19 patients at Cape Cod Hospital in Hyannis, Massachusetts. “Now we reuse our N95s five times before discarding.” The eye shields she uses are also meant for single use, but nurses are being asked to wear the same eye shield for 12 hours. “We’re bringing them between different patient rooms, which isn’t exactly ideal,” she says.  In cases where providers must reuse PPE such as N95s, the CDC recommends measures such as hand-washing before adjusting the masks and storing them in clean paper bags when not in use.  The shortage of hospital masks, gowns, and eye shields poses a health risk to both providers and the patients they’re treating. Reusing masks or wearing the same eye shield when treating multiple patients further contributes to the spread of Covid-19 at a time when the country desperately needs to be slowing down the rate of new infections, or “flattening the curve.” While it’s unclear exactly how many health providers in the US have been infected with Covid-19 so far specifically due to the reuse of PPE or for other reasons, Italy’s experience is telling. Equipment shortages have also been dire there, and over 4,000 health care workers have been infected and over a dozen have died. Over 3,000 health workers in China were infected as well, with several deaths.  In Italy, 4,824 medics contracted #coronavirus, at least 18 doc diedIn China, >3,400 medics were infected, at least 13 doc diedIn Spain, 3,475 medics been infected, at least 1 nurse diedYet in US, we're still not doing everything we can to protect our frontliners?!#COVID19 https://t.co/uHztLtnFq8 In the US, the shortage is affecting small clinics and large, well-funded hospitals alike. The nurse from Cape Cod Hospital, who shared that she and her colleagues had been reusing N95s, said, “We are one of the more fortunate hospitals right now. We have definitely not peaked in this area yet, [but] it’s only a matter of time before we run out of masks. We definitely need more.” Ani Bilazarian, 25, an ER nurse at a New York City trauma center, says the protocol at her hospital is “truly changing every hour of every day in terms of what we’re wearing.” She says the original protective protocol for nurses at her hospital included wearing an N95 mask layered beneath another mask, layered beneath a disposable face shield, which was to be discarded after treating each patient. “Now it’s definitely getting more drastic, even just within the week,” she says. “We got an email yesterday saying we have one mask to keep for our entire shift, and that we should bring it home with us … that’s our one mask. For I’m not sure how long.” To avoid having to reuse N95 masks, many hospitals are allocating them only to staff members who are directly entering patient rooms — which, in turn, means limiting the number of staff members who enter patient rooms in the first place.  “Before, if I forgot a medication or had to leave a patient’s room, I would have to take off [all of my PPE] and put it all back on,” says Bilazarian. “But we’re trying to combat that with innovative solutions. We now have people outside the rooms — we’re calling them runners — who can go get you stuff. So we’re definitely trying to limit the number of people requiring PPE and who need to be exposed at all.” A spokesperson from the Boston Medical Center said his hospital is taking similar measures. “We’re limiting the number of staff that go into patient rooms and the number of times we enter and exit to preserve supply [of PPE],” he said. “We’re looking closely at alternate sources of supplies like construction shields, and thinking creatively to clean, disinfect, and reuse equipment to preserve supply.” Other hospitals are limiting the use of N95s at all, turning instead to less protective options. 
    Related
   ”The management is telling the nurses to wear masks that are not N95, even though most of us would feel more comfortable and safer with the N95,” says another nurse, who works at Baptist Health in Miami. “We are trying to fight for what’s right but when the CDC says you can wear a bandana or scarf in the place of a mask, it’s hard,” referring to the CDC’s guidance for optimizing the supply of facemasks. It notes, “In settings where facemasks are not available, HCP might use homemade masks (e.g., bandana, scarf) for care of patients with COVID-19 as a last resort.” While health care workers are working to stretch their own supplies, some local officials are rallying other industries that use PPE to funnel it to local hospitals and clinics. Oregon Gov. Kate Brown signed an executive order requiring all hospitals, ambulatory surgery centers, outpatient clinics, dental clinics, and veterinary clinics with surplus PPE supplies to notify the state’s PPE coordinator to arrange for a handoff. Vets, dentists, and the like are ordered, by law, to participate in the reallocation of this excess equipment to the nurses and doctors directly treating patients. According to the executive order, any person found to be in violation would be subject to the penalties of a Class C misdemeanor. As for industries that use PPE in other capacities, like construction and farming, the Oregon executive order “strongly encourages” — though does not mandate — that these individuals and entities “cancel or postpone non-essential uses of PPE during the ongoing state of emergency, so that the equipment can be conserved and redirected to the state’s Covid-19 response.” For the federal government’s part, Vice President Mike Pence has said that “industrial masks that they use on construction sites are perfectly acceptable for health care workers to be protected from a respiratory disease,” and is urging construction companies to donate their supply of N95s. The Families First Coronavirus Response Act, which President Trump signed into law March 19, includes protections for industries manufacturing personal respiratory protective devices — meaning that the government will protect these companies from lawsuits if they sell the masks to health workers.  But as the AHA-AMA-ANA letter to Trump noted, protecting these companies from lawsuits is not enough — the government, they say, must use the DPA to directly order them to manufacture these supplies.  As the PPE shortage continues to affect more of our nation’s hospitals — and the DPA-ordered manufacturing remains in limbo — public officials like New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo are also calling on individuals and companies to generate unconventional solutions.  NY has a critical need for PPE including gloves, gowns & masks We need companies to be creative to supply the crucial gear our healthcare workers need. NY will pay a premium and offer funding.Need Funding?  212-803-3100Have Unused Supplies?  646-522-8477SHARE widely. In its guidance, the CDC says that “homemade masks are not considered PPE, since their capability to protect HCP is unknown,” and suggests that “homemade masks should ideally be used in combination with a face shield that covers the entire front (that extends to the chin or below) and sides of the face.” The homemade option is nonetheless listed as a last resort — and one that many hospitals are exploring.  Take for example, Dr. Mark Lewis, a hematologist and oncologist at Intermountain Healthcare in Utah, who shared a step-by-step sewing tutorial on Twitter: So as has been widely reported, personal protective equipment (PPE) is running low for medical personnel during #coronavirus #Covid_19 Today my awesome pediatrician wife & my mother-in-law used at-home materials to sew masks STEP-BY-STEP TWEETORIAL1/ Bilazarian, the New York trauma nurse, says she is grateful for the creative DIY solutions people are coming up with, but has doubts about whether they will be effective enough to protect providers like herself and the patients they’re caring for. “We have about 15 nurses out now from the ER, and more professionals are getting sick,” she says. “For now, we are managing with the resources that we have, but we are increasingly concerned for staffing and physical resources — not just PPE, but also ventilators, fluids, and pain medication as the virus intensifies, especially here in New York. We have to ask, ‘Is our frontline staff prepared to fill in the gaps in care when we need them?’ I hope so, but I’m not quite sure at this moment in time.”  To safely and adequately protect providers and patients as the pandemic inevitably spreads further, large-scale PPE manufacturing efforts are needed to resupply hospitals with the safest gear. But doing so — and then distributing the gear— could take days and weeks that nurses and doctors don’t have to spare.  
    Related
   “We are desperate,” said another nurse who works at a New York hospital, who said she had spent her one day off running around collecting donations for PPE. “Please urge anybody who can donate any masks, but most importantly N95s, to do so.” Caroline Hopkins is a Brooklyn-based health and science reporter. She has written for National Geographic, the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) Daily News, SurvivorNet, and Women’s Health Magazine. She has a master’s degree in journalism from Columbia University and can be found on Twitter at @Ch_Hops. Do you work in health care? Vox wants to hear about your coronavirus experience. Fill out this Google form to share your story.  To combat the growing coronavirus pandemic, US cities and states are beginning to impose strict measures meant to encourage social distancing and to limit the spread of infection.  Friday, New York and Illinois joined a number of other states, including California and New Jersey, in asking residents to go outside only for necessities. The requests mean by the end of the weekend, more than 70 million people — around one in five Americans — will be under orders to stay home.  “No, this is not life as usual,” New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Friday. “Accept it and realize it and deal with it.” Commonly referred to as “shelter in place” orders, the measures vary slightly by state. However, they largely bar people from leaving home except for exercise and for essential travel: to and from work, hospitals, or the grocery store. The orders can be enforced by law enforcement, but it’s not clear how frequently police will cite people who violate the orders. Police in San Jose, California, for instance, have said they currently are trying to educate those they observe refusing to comply — a stance the city’s police chief said will evolve: “Our current plan is to move from an educational stance to an enforcement stance on any business that has been contacted, warned, and then reopens,” Chief Eddie Garcia said Friday. Other officials have taken a sterner stance, like Cuomo, who said Friday, “These provisions will be enforced ... These are not helpful hints.” States that do try to enforce the orders face a numerical challenge, however. Wendy Mariner, a professor of health law at Boston University School of Public Health, told Vox: There are far fewer police than there are citizens. “All large-scale measures present obstacles to enforcement,” Mariner said. Other states are not yet mandating residents not leave home, instead closing restaurants, bars, gyms, and other businesses as an early attempt to stop people from coming into contact with one another.  Here are the rules in some of the US’s largest and most affected states.  The most populous state in the US, encompassing 40 million people, went under a “stay at home” order Thursday, March 19.  New York’s policy goes into effect at 8 pm ET on Sunday, March 22. This order and others put into place in recent days affect 20 million New York residents. Beginning at 5 pm CT Saturday, March 21, all of Illinois’ 13 million people are under a stay at home order.  Gov. Phil Murphy ordered the state’s 9 million residents to remain home Saturday, March 21, as confirmed cases climb above 1,000. According to reporting by the New Jersey Star-Ledger:  The state of 3.5 million people has nearly 200 confirmed cases, and Gov. Ned Lamont issued a stay at home order on Friday. Beginning Monday, March 23 at 8 pm: Washington, which has been the focal point of early confirmed coronavirus cases in the US, has more than 1,300 confirmed cases and 74 deaths. The state is not yet under a stay at home order, but Gov. Jay Inslee has said he may impose more restrictive measures soon because “we still are seeing people behaving as if this virus was not a mortal threat to people in this state,” NPR affiliate KUOW reported. Right now:  The state of 21 million has more than 500 confirmed cases and 9 deaths to date. There’s no statewide shelter in place policy; Gov. Ron DeSantis has said he believes local measures are more effective. “If you go too hard, then I think people lose confidence and they rebel against it,” he said, according to the Sun Sentinel.  The nation’s second-most populous state, with nearly 29 million people, faces restrictions that went into effect at midnight on Friday, March 20, and will last through April 3.  As Vox’s Dylan Scott has explained, officials hope these measures will “flatten the curve” — that is, reduce the rate of infections quickly enough to both drastically limit the number of new cases and ensure the US hospital system isn’t overwhelmed by people seeking treatment.  And as Vox’s Ezra Klein has explained, experts believe the best way to flatten the curve is to limit interpersonal contact: Adam Kucharski, the mathematical epidemiologist, has a very simple calculation on this point. He calculates that if each Covid-19 case leads to 2.5 more infections over five days, then a single case leads to 244 more cases over the course of a month. But if social distancing measures cut that number in half to 1.25 new infections for every case, that’s only four new cases over the course of a month.  This kind of exponential math is really unintuitive. This isn’t about you or even the people directly around you. It is also about the chain you start. If you infect somebody and they have connections, you kick off in that chain that could be very deadly. How long the shelter-in-place orders will need to stay in effect isn’t yet clear. But experts believe social distancing will likely need to be practiced for some time — at least until a vaccine becomes available, something that could take up to 18 months.   President Donald Trump continued to play up an unproven treatment as a promising remedy for Covid-19, contradicting the advice of his top public health officials at a press conference Saturday — one in which he also rebutted reports that he knew about the dangers of the coronavirus pandemic well before taking action.  In recent days, Trump has been promoting the potential of a drug called hydroxychloroquine — a common anti-malaria drug — as a treatment for Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus. The off-the-shelf drug is easy to produce and has been, anecdotally, effective in China and South Korea.  He highlighted the treatment on Twitter Saturday, citing a study that, as Vox’s Umair Irfan has explained, had design issues most scientists would see as problematic, including a small sample size and a lack of randomization. Those issues did not stop the president from retweeting the research, or from using it to support his claim that “HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE & AZITHROMYCIN, taken together, have a real chance to be one of the biggest game changers in the history of medicine.” At his daily coronavirus press conference Saturday afternoon, Trump made a similar claim, and told reporters the hydroxychloroquine along with azithromycin, an antibiotic the study suggested be used in concert with hydroxychloroquine, is “going to be distributed” to New York and other states.  Both drugs are already widely available, but are not currently recommended by experts as viable coronavirus treatments. Trump disagreed with those experts Saturday.  “What do we have to lose? I feel very good about it,” the president said. “We’re going to find out very shortly whether or not it’s going to work.” After Trump left the conference, Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease at the National Institutes of Health, explained that it isn’t possible to “find out very shortly” whether the drugs are effective against the virus — at least not without conducting a number of randomized trials.  “I’m not totally sure what the president was referring to,” Fauci said. “Many things you hear out there are what I call anecdotal reports. They may be true, but they’re anecdotal. .. If you really want to definitively know if something works, you have to do the kind of trial that you get the good information with.”  Nevertheless, Fauci said he understands Trump’s optimism, saying, “The president is talking about hope for people. And it’s not an unreasonable thing to hope for people.” It is, however, unreasonable to give people false hope, and as Irfan wrote, “Right now, the most effective way to fight the virus remains not getting infected in the first place, which means using good personal hygiene like hand-washing and social distancing measures.” Trump has faced a great deal of criticism over the speed of his administration’s coronavirus response, and Saturday, once again claimed — despite evidence to the contrary — that he acted rapidly to contain and limit the spread of the virus.  Specifically, he denied a Washington Post report published Friday indicating that intelligence officials warned him about the potentially far-reaching spread of the coronavirus within the US as early as January, and that the administration dismissed that intelligence.  “They write inaccurately about me every single day, every single hour,” Trump said of the Post. “It’s so insulting when they write phony stories that they know are fake news.” When asked directly about the Post report and when he learned just how concerning the coronavirus is, Trump said, “When I learned I started doing the closings, so, you know, probably around that time. We didn’t learn much.” The administration first began “doing the closings” — that is, limiting travel — on February 3,  about a month after reportedly first receiving the intelligence briefings. An official told the Post, “Donald Trump may not have been expecting this, but a lot of other people in the government were — they just couldn’t get him to do anything about it.” Saturday, Trump claimed the opposite, saying, “I acted far before anybody thought I should be.” Even if the official quoted in the Post was somehow mistaken, Trump is incorrect in saying he acted before others said he should. He faced calls throughout February to take more aggressive action against the virus. And experts — like New York University epidemiologist Celine Gounder — have argued Americans are already living with the consequences of the administration’s delayed response. Misrepresenting the past is an unhelpful thing to do in a time of crisis when trust is paramount. But there is little Trump — or anyone — can do about the administration’s initial response right now; what is more important is ensuring the current response meets the challenges the virus presents now. And while Trump was, on the whole, more solemn compared to recent press conferences, giving the public unfounded medical advice is certainly not the way to do that. Ellen Hietsch made quite a life for herself in Spain over the last three years. She and her boyfriend would walk together in Madrid’s parks. She’d wake up certain mornings regretting the money she spent at bars. And when it was time to work, she enjoyed teaching English to her young students at Colegio Madrigal. Amidst the fun, the 25-year-old Pennsylvanian expat kept an eye on the news. Watching Italy struggle to contain its coronavirus outbreak gave her pause, she said, but she “never thought something like that would happen over here.” But it did.  Spain now has the world’s fourth-largest Covid-19 outbreak and is second only to Italy in all of Europe. To stop the spread, the government — slow at first to respond to the crisis — imposed a country-wide lockdown last Saturday. Now the life Hietsch built is on hold. To pass the time, she meditates, does yoga, and chats with her three American roommates. She used to run up and down the building’s stairs for exercise — a neighbor’s young daughter would sometimes cheer her on — but other tenants just put up a sign asking her to stop. Hietsch’s new normal is fine for the moment. Other than missing her boyfriend, she makes turmeric lattes for her roommates and online videos for her students. The sudden change, though, remains jarring. “It’s been one of the oddest weeks of my life,” she told me.  Keep your mind busy these days!     Ellen started a diary about how she feels. What about you? What are you doing to... It’s similarly odd for the rest of the nearly 50 million people in Spain, where one-fifth of the population is over 65 and thus at increased risk of “getting very sick” from Covid-19, according to the CDC. Not only does everyone in Spain have to stay inside, but also they have to live with police and drones patrolling the streets to keep pedestrians at home. They have to put up with an uneasy, rare silence. And they have to watch one of Europe’s best health care systems struggle to treat patient after patient. “What makes me most angry is that we had a month and a half to get ready after our first case, and we had weeks to prepare after watching what’s happened in Italy,” said Ángela Hernández Puente, a top official at a health labor union in Madrid, the country’s outbreak epicenter. The problem is that Spain’s long-standing political, economic, and historical problems are making a coherent response difficult. The politics alone are daunting. Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez, weak after forming a minority government, likely didn’t want to risk his fragile hold on power by banning large gatherings, experts say. Instead, he allowed thousands to attend soccer games last week, as well as permitted a 120,000-strong feminist rally in Madrid to proceed. Hietsch was at that demonstration. “I regret going,” she told me, fearing it may have accelerated the spread. “I’ve felt anxiety ever since that I could be a carrier of the disease.” So far, though, she’s healthy. The crisis has now reached even the highest levels of Spanish power. On March 14, Begoña Gómez — the wife of the prime minister — tested positive for coronavirus. That news came after two government ministers also contracted the disease. As a precaution, Sánchez does his best to keep away from others as he works and conducts press conferences over a video link. Even Semana Santa (Holy Week) — one of the country’s most cherished traditions and religious ceremonies — had to be canceled for the first time since 1933. What’s especially worrying is that Spain isn’t an anomaly. Like Italy, it’s a grim warning of what’s to come in countries around the world, including the United States, if their governments don’t act aggressively or quickly enough to confront the crisis. In that sense, Spain is a glimpse into much of the world’s new normal. “Nobody is ready for this,” Evangelina Martich, a health policy expert at the University of Carlos III in Madrid, told me. The Spanish government confirmed the nation’s first case of coronavirus on January 31 in the Canary Islands, which lie to the west of Morocco. That same day, Spaniards evacuated from Wuhan, China — where Covid-19 first emerged — arrived in Madrid. Nine days later, another case was reported, this time on the island of Mallorca. The first positive cases of coronavirus on the Spanish mainland came on February 26, including in both Madrid and Barcelona, the country’s two most important cities. It was then that the heads of Spain’s largest public hospitals told the Health Ministry “more tests had to be done, and as soon as possible.” 
    Related
   Ramping up testing was easier said than done. “The [health care] system was not prepared for the seriousness of what was coming,” a doctor in a southern Spanish hospital told El País newspaper this week. “Up until at least a week ago, we weren’t able to do a PCR [a diagnostic test] for coronavirus without asking for authorization. I could order a PCR for the flu, but not for the coronavirus.” Even today, large hospitals, including ones in Madrid, can’t process more than 400 tests a day. “We would like to test everyone but with the diagnostic capability and number of kits we have, that is not possible,” Rafael Cantón, the microbiology chief in the city’s Ramón y Cajal hospital, also told El País. Cinta Moro, a doctor in the southern city of Seville, believes the lack of foresight and planning doomed Spain from the start. “With tests, we would’ve stopped a lot of the problems we have now,” she told me.  But it wasn’t just a testing failure, it was a cultural and political failure, too. Those I spoke with noted two aspects of the Spanish lifestyle that complicated the public’s own response. First, the country has a deeply embedded late-night culture, with everyone staying out late to hang out at bars or simply eat dinner. Second, a paranoia stemming back to Spain’s decades-long dictatorship created a palpable friction between the public and law enforcement. The result was that few in Spain felt compelled to change their ways despite signs of chaos. “The Spanish character is not to believe a crisis is coming,” Moro said. “Once you see people die, that’s when you react — but by then it’s too late.”  Government inaction didn’t help. As mentioned above, Prime Minister Sánchez refused to stop large gatherings like soccer matches and political rallies from proceeding. Some experts I spoke to said that allowing so many people to congregate almost surely spurred a larger outbreak. But Martich, the health policy expert at the University of Carlos III, cautioned that it’s too early to know if that’s truly the case. Still, it was only last week that the Spanish government really ramped up its response as the number of cases and deaths rose. It shut down the soccer league, closed schools, and asked people to stay home. But even then, people I spoke to said few took it seriously. Many were still going to bars, walking outside, and carrying on as if not much had changed. The central government had to take more drastic measures. Last Friday, Spain declared a state of emergency, giving the central government the authority to override any decisions made by Spain’s 17 autonomous regions (think of them as more powerful US states). And the next day, Sánchez took an even bigger step, one others in Europe had already taken: imposing a 15-day complete lockdown of the entire country. Some believe it will ultimately last for longer. Everyone now has to stay home unless they’re going to the grocery store or pharmacy, getting medical treatment, caring for an older or sick person, or walking a pet. To enforce these rules, police and drones roam the streets to reprimand and fine anyone caught wandering outside. Authorities have also set up about 30,000 roadblocks so no one secretly drives to another location. Spanish Cop: “Walking around is prohibited. This is very serious. Lots of people are dying.” https://t.co/WXfxEAe7P4 Now, millions are stuck inside as they wait for the government to lift the restrictions. The hope is that the draconian measures will help stop the spike in the thousands of positive cases and hundreds dead. While understandable, those moves angered and surprised people like Erika Tepler, a 35-year-old from Maine living in Seville. “It all changed so fast,” she told me. “I’m in Spain, and it sucks.” Moro, the 35-year-old doctor from Seville, has a deeply personal connection to the crisis.  Her partner Sebastián, also a physician, was in contact with someone who tested positive for Covid-19. For at least the next week, he’s self-quarantining in a separate bedroom and using his own bathroom.  He finally got permission to do that after the Spanish government on Monday authorized doctors who’d been exposed to the virus to stay home. Before then, he’d been forced to keep treating patients even while possibly carrying the disease himself. That leaves Moro alone to care for her 11-year-old daughter. It hasn’t been too hard, she says, because her child doesn’t require as much attention as a toddler. Were her daughter younger, the quarantine — while necessary — would’ve proven a greater burden on the family. What bothers Moro most, though, is that people can do little more than sit around and wait for this all to be over. But the nation’s medical workers are anything but idle. Night and day, they contend with patients flooding into their hospitals, and it doesn’t look like that’s going to end any time soon. “The crisis is overwhelming the system,” said Martich, the health policy expert. Part of the problem is that while Spain has a national health care system, each of the 17 regions actually administer it separately. That, according to health labor leader Hernández Puente, caused a lot of coordination issues early on, including leaving doctors ill-supplied to provide care. The central government has now tried to address this disconnect by temporarily nationalizing all the country’s private hospitals. Those physicians who receive incoming patients lack masks, gloves, and other protective gear. And those doctors who treat patients with the most severe coronavirus symptoms are short of beds to put them in and respirators to help patients breathe, all in understaffed intensive care units. The central government still hasn’t addressed these critical needs, Hernández Puente said. “The general feeling among doctors and nurses is anger and abandonment.” To ensure there are enough workers and resources for coronavirus care, some hospitals in Madrid and elsewhere are suspending services like general family care or cancer-related surgeries. That’s a tough position for health care providers to be in. “I wouldn’t want to be in that situation,” Martich told me.  Fourth-year medical students are also being called in to help address the staffing shortfall, and companies that can produce medical equipment must now contact the Ministry of Health for an assessment of how they might contribute to the national response. When care fails, Moro says physicians put the dead bodies in special biodegradable bags. They’re closed tightly to ensure bodily liquids don’t spill out and spread the virus on surfaces or onto other people. No autopsies are performed to minimize droplets from landing on a healthy person, possibly getting them sick. There’s at least a shared national sense of the struggle. Every day, at 8 pm, Spaniards stand on their balconies and clap together for health care workers returning home from their day shifts. At first, that happened at 10 pm, but the time was moved earlier so children could join in. That includes Moro’s daughter. ¡GRACIAS a todos los profesionales sanitarios que estos días trabajan sin descanso aquí nuestro pequeño homenaje! #QuédateEnCasa pic.twitter.com/09KODoYUJW When she needs to go to the grocery store, Tepler, the American living in Seville, is surprised by what she finds. The streets are eerily quiet, save for the police officer asking her where she’s going. When she finally arrives, she finds the shelves of toilet paper stocked up while the wine aisles are empty. “It’s so demoralizing,” she said. But there are some signs of optimism.  A social media movement with the hashtag #YoMeQuedoEnCasa — “I’m staying at home” — has found some success convincing people not to yearn for the outdoors. Even police who make announcements on empty roads reminding people to stay inside are now met with applause and chants of “bravo!” Coruña hoy. Cuando pasan estas cosas te das cuenta que el mundo es un lugar increible. Que grandes dando ánimo #heroesquenollevancapa #Graciascuerposyfuerzasdeseguridaddelestado. #CuarentenaCoronavirus #estadodealarma #coruña pic.twitter.com/Cun1KVAsO0 And a doctor from Granada in southern Spain has become something of a national folk hero for boosting the message of what needs to be done to combat the virus in the country. With his YouTube videos, which he posts under the name Spiriman, Jesús Candel especially reprimands the country’s youth. “I ask young people to stop watching stupid shit on their phones and look up information on the coronavirus,” he says in one of his more famous videos. “Young people need to fucking understand what they have to do.” “There are young people going to the hospital with some symptoms who ask for a coronavirus test because all they care about is themselves,” he continues. Medical professionals will likely tell you to go home, he explains, “so we can attend to the severely sick people, like the woman I just attended to who was drowning alive, who had a week-long fever, and who’s in bad shape.” Spaniards have also taken a cue from the Italians and have begun singing together from their apartments. The song most often heard blaring across the country is an old Spanish hit called “Resistiré” (I will resist). Part of the chorus is particularly relevant to life these days: I will resist, to stay aliveI’ll resist the blows and won’t give upEven though my dreams might tear me to piecesI will resist, I will resist Of course, many are still worried about what’s next. Spain just barely recovered from the 2008 financial crisis and will struggle to climb out of another recession. The country has a lot of elderly people that will remain susceptible to the coronavirus for the coming months. And political polarization, which has stymied Spanish politics over the years, is likely to get worse during the crisis.  “The hardest is yet to come,” Sánchez told a near-empty Parliament on Wednesday. But in some ways Spain might be one of the lucky ones. It has an advanced economy, a health care system that won’t entirely implode, and many of its citizens have enough resources to weather the crisis.  As the disease spreads further around the globe, those living in less-prepared nations will struggle to even sing from their homes. “It’s going to be much worse in other countries that aren’t as advanced,” Martich told me, referring mostly to countries in Latin America and Africa. “Spain is better prepared than most.” The hope is that people who will soon face a similar reality can, like those in Spain now, resist.As I’m writing this on Wednesday, March 18, the big question in Washington, DC, is not if the federal government is going to send checks to most or all Americans to help them weather the coronavirus pandemic.  The questions are how big, how many, and to whom those checks will go. To casual political observers — and even to people like me who cover cash policy for a living — this feels like a shocking turnaround. Just a few months ago, entrepreneur Andrew Yang’s presidential campaign fell badly short while running on a promise of $1,000 monthly checks for every American adult. And yet now Sen. Mitt Romney’s running around demanding $1,000 for every adult. What happened? No, Romney’s and Yang’s plans are not the same — Yang called for recurring checks, not a one-time unconditional transfer. But Romney’s plan is a break from past stimulus ideas.  Remember those stimulus checks that went out in 2001 and 2008 to help stave off economic downturns? They weren’t direct cash transfers — those were, for the most part, refund checks for past taxes; you had to have at least some income to receive them. Much of the “47 percent” whom Romney famously decried during the 2012 presidential campaign for not paying federal income taxes were left out. The cash bills being considered now would be truly open to the poorest Americans, a radical departure from those stimulus measures. It’s a stunning turn for an idea that has frankly been on the fringes of the policy discourse for years. It took a major crisis like coronavirus to make it feasible, but credit should go to a group of policy entrepreneurs, lawmakers, and advocates who have paved the way for its acceptance in the governing mainstream. Here’s a rundown of what Congress and the White House are proposing, how this big idea came to be, and why the politics of the moment allowed for its emergence.  First, let’s be clear about how new the idea of truly unrestricted cash is. Conservative advocates of cash in the coronavirus moment sometimes point to the refund checks sent out as economic stimulus by the Bush administration in 2001 and 2008 as precedents. But these aren’t very good precedents at all. The 2001 checks were sent as part of Bush’s first round of tax cuts. The main middle-class benefit in that package was the introduction of a new 10 percent tax bracket (from 15 percent) that would apply to the first $6,000 of income for singles and $12,000 for couples. Because of the light recession that year after the dot-com bubble burst, Bush wanted to front-load the benefits of the 10 percent bracket. So in the summer, he sent out checks to households that had paid taxes for the year 2000, worth half the benefit of the new bracket. For singles, that meant up to $300 each; for couples, up to $600 each. But that meant that poorer Americans — with taxable incomes below, say, $12,000 for a couple — got less from the checks, and some didn’t get anything. There were nuances to how the checks worked that enabled a few more poor households to get benefits, but for the most part, the worst-off were excluded.  The 2008 stimulus check was a little more expansive, but just barely. Per the IRS, you had to have “either an income tax liability or ‘qualifying income’ of at least $3,000,” to get a refund check as part of the Bush-Pelosi stimulus package that year. People with no income tax burden were limited to half the normal benefit ($300 rather than $600 for a single person), and the poorest of the poor, with income below $3,000, got nothing.  Many people with no income tax burden were additionally left out because you had to file a tax return to get the refund check; that effectively left out many people who didn’t file because they didn’t owe anything and who simply didn’t hear about the prospect of a refund check amid the chaos of that year. The Making Work Pay credit enacted as part of the 2009 Obama administration stimulus was not much better for folks at the bottom. That credit was worth 6.2 percent of income, up to a maximum credit of $400 for singles or $800 for couples, for the years 2009 and 2010. It was thus closer to the Earned Income Tax Credit, which offers a similar refund on the first $10,000-20,000 of earnings depending on family size, than to the 2001 or 2008 refunds. It lacked a $3,000 minimum salary, which was a big advantage. But people with no cash income still got nothing from the credit, a real problem during a crisis that swelled the ranks of the long-term unemployed. It was also implemented through changes in withholding, so few people knew they were even getting the benefit. The Obama administration opted for this on the advice of “behavioral economists,” whose psychological theories predicted that people would be likelier to spend money that just popped into their bank account through withholding. Subsequent research suggested that the approach actually increased spending by less than just mailing out checks in 2008 did. The proposals for cash checks being weighed right now are dramatically more generous, and more inclusive of America’s poorest residents, than the 2001, 2008, and 2009 stimulus checks were. The plans are coming so fast and furious that it’s hard to keep track of all of them, but here are the main proposals from actual politicians that I’m aware of as of Wednesday: The idea of cash payments as a response to the crisis was pitched in a closed-door meeting of House Democrats, and initially Speaker Nancy Pelosi reportedly expressed skepticism, concerned that rich Americans could receive benefits. But her deputy chief of staff has clarified that she’s on board for cash, just averse to distributing it without means-testing: As Congress considers the next steps, the Speaker believes we should look at refundable tax credits, expanded UI & direct payments—but MUST be targeted. As the slew of plans above suggests, Congress is currently in a bit of a bidding war to see who can develop the most attractive, and perhaps the most expansive, cash plan for the moment. But let’s back up. How did unrestricted cash first become such a focus on Capitol Hill and the Treasury Department, to the point that it now feels inevitable? The story starts all the way back in 2010, when a little-known Bush administration economic aide named Robert Stein started making an argument that found wide purchase in the conservative think tank and magazine world: Social Security and other benefits to older adults represented an economic distortion because they reduce the need to have children who can take care of you in old age. This led to less childbirth than would be ideal.  To correct this distortion, you need a bigger child tax credit to encourage people to have more kids. Stein did not want to give the credit to very poor parents, but he did want to make it refundable against payroll taxes, which would slightly increase the credit’s availability to moderately poor families. Stein’s idea made it into an influential tax plan released by Sen. Mike Lee (R-UT) in 2013, and then into a plan coauthored by Lee and Sen. Marco Rubio (R-FL) in 2015. Some elements of the plan — like doubling the child tax credit from $1,000 to $2,000, and lowering the minimum income poor people must earn to receive it — made it into the tax cut package Trump signed into law in 2017, but Rubio and Lee’s amendment establishing refundability against payroll taxes failed badly.  Amid that discussion, two Democratic senators, Michael Bennet of Colorado and Sherrod Brown of Ohio, brought their own amendment, which would dramatically expand the child credit to as much as $3,600 a year for young kids, and would be fully refundable: no phasing in, no exclusion of the poor at all. In 2019, Bennet and Brown, along with Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-CT) (who had pushed for the idea for years) and Rep. Suzan DelBene (D-WA) reintroduced the legislation. This time they successfully whipped the vast majority of Democrats to support the idea: 38 out of 47 Senate Democrats are on board, as are 186 out of 232 House Democrats. A slightly more modest proposal designed to appeal to moderates, the Working Families Tax Relief Act, has support from all but one Senate Democrat; even Joe Manchin, the conservative Democrat from West Virginia, is on board. Mitt Romney even got on board the fully refundable child credit bandwagon in late 2019, joining with Bennet to put together a plan offering a guaranteed $1,500 per child under age 6, and $1,000 per child ages 6-17, as the Senate debated legislation extending various tax breaks. Romney-Bennet did not wind up passing, but it set the stage for both Romney and Bennet to offer expansive cash bills amid the coronavirus crisis. As this conversation was developing in Congress, a parallel discussion was happening among policy economists about how to build out “automatic stabilizers,” or government programs that can offer automatic stimulus during a recession. One idea that proved widely influential was the “Sahm rule,” named for Claudia Sahm, who in 2019 was working as an economist for the Federal Reserve Board. Sahm proposed direct cash transfers to individuals, in one big lump sum, whenever economic data suggested a recession was looming. The checks would go out, per Sahm, when “the three-month average national unemployment rate rises by at least 0.50 percentage points relative to its low in the previous 12 months.” She noted this rule would have automatically triggered stimulus in February 2008 without Congress needing to do anything. When the coronavirus crisis loomed, Sahm’s idea, already the topic of wide discussion in DC policy circles (see for instance her appearance on Vox’s The Weeds), started to feel like a real possibility. Jason Furman, who served as Obama’s chief economist during his second term, pitched direct cash transfers as a response to the crisis in a closed-door briefing before House Speaker Nancy Pelosi. Pelosi was initially hesitant, thinking the checks had to be means-tested, but the idea has gained momentum despite her hesitation. Finally, credit should also go to the broader basic income movement. The Economic Security Project (ESP), co-founded by vocal basic income advocates Chris Hughes, Natalie Foster, and Dorian Warren, was an early backer of Khanna and Ryan’s cash bill, the first introduced in Congress. And Yang, by helping make basic income a household idea, arguably normalized the concept, making it politically safer as an emergency measure. ESP and Yang are big believers in cash as an ongoing measure, and not just for children, separating their ideas from the above. But they were influential all the same. All these tendencies, together, created a political environment where the previously unthinkable now feels inevitable. Sign up for the Future Perfect newsletter and we’ll send you a roundup of ideas and solutions for tackling the world’s biggest challenges — and how to get better at doing good. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. Future Perfect is funded in part by individual contributions, grants, and sponsorships. Learn more here. Congress has officially passed a major package guaranteeing free coronavirus testing for all Americans as well as an expansion of paid sick days for a subset of workers. The legislation now heads to President Donald Trump’s desk, where he’s expected to sign it.  The wide-ranging legislation is the second of at least three proposals lawmakers are working on to address the economic fallout that’s resulted from the coronavirus pandemic. This latest bill is focused on providing more paid sick days to certain workers — and giving states a funding boost for unemployment insurance and food assistance. In total, it’s set to cost roughly $104 billion.  The bill is the byproduct of a compromise between House Democrats, the administration, and House Republicans — which has led to the bill’s original provisions being scaled back and some pretty significant omissions in coverage.  As Vox’s Anna North reports, millions of workers will not be covered by the paid sick day and paid leave provisions in the legislation, which do not apply to companies with more than 500 employees. Companies with fewer than 50 employees can also request exemptions from the bill’s paid and sick leave regulations, as can institutions that employ health care workers — including hospitals and nursing homes — regardless of size.  Despite these limitations, the legislation will provide some economic relief for workers affected by the coronavirus outbreak that has already led to temporary closures of many businesses and reduced spending across an array of industries including restaurants and airlines.  
    Related
   Workers who are covered by the guarantee of 10 paid sick days during this outbreak include all federal government employees, gig economy workers, and self-employed workers, according to the Washington Post’s Heather Long. Those who are not include workers at larger companies such as Amazon and McDonald’s — though some of these firms have committed to providing sick pay for their employees during this time.  Next, Congress is turning its focus to a third stimulus package, which could include direct payments to all Americans below a certain income threshold and could cost up to $1 trillion.  The legislation that just passed includes funding to support workers who get sick as well as those who have to care for children who are out of school because of the coronavirus response. It also includes money intended to expand programs for workers who have been laid off from their jobs, including additional funding for states’ unemployment programs.  Here’s a high-level rundown of what’s included, as reported by Vox’s Ella Nilsen, though the updated version has some differences with the original House deal — as indicated below:  Free coronavirus testing: Democratic leaders propose making coronavirus testing free to increase access by requiring private health insurers (plus government programs like Medicare and Medicaid) to cover the cost of testing, including emergency room visits and doctor fees. This will also cover Americans without insurance. Emergency paid sick days: The bill would give workers [10] days of paid sick leave to be available immediately during the coronavirus (many employers are asking employees to work from home for that amount of time). It ensures sick leave to [those who are ill or] impacted by quarantine orders [depending on the business they work at.] Emergency paid leave: The bill would create a new federal emergency paid leave program for those ... caring for a child due to coronavirus-related school closings. Eligible workers would receive benefits for a month (the program goes up to three months), and the benefit amount would be two-thirds of the individual’s average monthly earnings. Those receiving pay or unemployment compensation directly through their employers aren’t eligible. There is some precedent for this: Congress expanded unemployment benefits for up to 99 weeks for Americans left unemployed by the 2008 financial crisis. Expanded unemployment insurance: The bill would direct $2 billion to state unemployment insurance programs. Expanding food security: The bill would direct $1 billion to expanding access to programs like SNAP, WIC and the emergency food assistance program throughout the coronavirus pandemic. Progressive economists have long believed that expanding existing safety net programs is a highly effective way of stimulating the economy because the low-income people who benefit from them are highly likely to immediately spend any extra money they get — helping stabilize economy-wide demand. The 2009 stimulus bill featured many provisions along these lines. Conservatives, who are critical of those programs in general, tend to be highly skeptical of putting more money into them. The passage of this bill signals major progress in Congress’s response to the coronavirus, though there are still many gaps it does not address. Lawmakers’ next package is intended to provide direct financial support for workers, small businesses, and affected industries — though the exact details have yet to be worked out.  Two days ago, President Donald Trump suddenly stopped referring to the Covid-19 coronavirus by its common name, which experts and laypeople and the president himself had been using for months, and started using a racist designation: the “Chinese virus.” The world has been trying to move past the racist disease-naming conventions of the past in recent years, making it all the more telling that Trump has revived them in a moment of crisis. He might be annoyed that Chinese officials and media have, for their part, tried to blame the virus on America. He might want to deflect blame onto anybody else given the harsh criticism his administration has faced for being slow to respond to the outbreak. But whatever the reason, it appears the term he’s been using — with all of its potentially dangerous consequences, particularly for Asian Americans — is now the preferred nomenclature of the White House. Looking at Trump’s Twitter account, his megaphone to the nation, he tweeted about “coronavirus” about 40 times between January 24 (the first mention) and March 15. But on March 16, his rhetoric flipped: He hasn’t referred to the “coronavirus” at all and has instead tweeted using his new preferred racist name five times in the past two days. I always treated the Chinese Virus very seriously, and have done a very good job from the beginning, including my very early decision to close the “borders” from China - against the wishes of almost all. Many lives were saved. The Fake News new narrative is disgraceful & false! Other variations among administration officials and Republicans in Congress include “the Chinese flu” or “the Chinese coronavirus” or “the Wuhan coronavirus.” Some of the reported comments from people around Trump are even less decorous. This morning a White House official referred to #Coronavirus as the “Kung-Flu” to my face. Makes me wonder what they’re calling it behind my back. There is a long history of racializing pandemics by attaching them to a specific place and people, othering a pathogen that originated in another land in much the same way white Americans have historically othered people of color who came to (or whose ancestors came to) the United States from somewhere else. Trump’s comments are yet another example of this lamentable instinct and another illustration of his xenophobia in office. This is the same president who referred to some African countries as “shitholes” in advocating for restrictive immigration policies. Trump defended his comments at a Wednesday press conference as simply striving for accuracy, after a journalist asked him about reports of prejudiced acts taken in the United States recently against people of Asian descent. “Because it comes from China. It’s not racist at all, not at all,” the president said. “It comes from China. That’s why. It comes from China. I want to be accurate.” But the virus and the disease it causes in humans have been referred to by experts as the novel coronavirus, Covid-19, and SARS-CoV-2, so Trump’s name for it is not at all accurate. But it does fit with the president’s history of xenophobia and of blaming problems in the US on outside actors. It is dangerous rhetoric, unbecoming of a national leader in this time of crisis. Whenever a pandemic pops up, we need a name for it. There are usually those used in the common parlance (like coronavirus) and then the scientific names (like SARS-CoV-2). The latter is usually produced through some kind of formula — this article in Nature explains how the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses came up with SARS-CoV-2 — but the former is more happenstance. “Coronavirus” entered the lexicon even though it covers a family of viruses, including the one that causes the common cold, and it’s stuck. When naming the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, international leaders actually went out of their way to avoid a name with any reference to people, places, or even animals, as Vox’s Umair Irfan reported. “We had to find a name that did not refer to a geographical location, an animal, an individual, or a group of people, and which is also pronounceable and related to the disease,” Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the director-general of the World Health Organization, said in February. But you’ll still see some of Trump’s defenders refer to the history of colloquial names that (seemingly) relied on a disease’s place of origin — like the Spanish flu, Ebola, etc. — as evidence that the president is simply following a long-held practice. This tweet from Sen. Chuck Grassley (R-IA) is a good example of this misconception: I don’t understand why China gets upset bc we refer to the virus that originated there the ”Chinese virus” Spain never got upset when we referred to the Spanish flu in 1918&1919 The White House has cited this history to accuse its critics of trying to divide America at a time when unity is needed. Spanish Flu. West Nile Virus. Zika. Ebola. All named for places.Before the media’s fake outrage, even CNN called it “Chinese Coronavirus.” Those trying to divide us must stop rooting for America to fail and give Americans real info they need to get through the crisis. But the Spanish flu didn’t get that name (real name: H1N1!) because it started in Spain. It actually started in Kansas. It became commonly known as the Spanish flu because in the middle of World War I, in which Spain remained neutral, Spain was one of the only Western nations willing to report frankly on the pandemic. As Rachel Withers wrote for Slate in 2018: The misnomer, according to an episode of the podcast BackStory, came about as a result of geopolitical forces. When the pandemic broke out during World War I, neither side wanted the other to find out they were sick—nor did they want their own troops to lose morale or their publics to panic. News of the outbreak was suppressed or heavily underplayed in Germany, France, the U.K., and the U.S. But Spain, like Switzerland, was neutral in the war, and its media had no qualms about covering the contagious outbreak weakening its population, creating the false impression that this was a Spanish disease. As virologist John Oxford put it: “And the rest of the world I think looked around and said, ‘What’s going on in Spain?’ And so since that time, much to the annoyance of the Spanish and much to the annoyance of Spanish virologists, I can tell you, we’ve all called the Spanish flu ever since.” Or take the Ebola virus, which, despite being named for a river in Africa, actually got that name because the scientists who discovered it wanted to avoid stigmatizing the village where the disease first appeared.  One team member suggested naming it after the village, known as Yambuku, but the other scientists pushed back. As Bahar Gholipour wrote for Live Science in 2014: But naming the virus Yambuku would run the risk of stigmatizing the village, said another scientist, Dr. Joel Breman, from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). This had happened before, for example, in the case of Lassa virus, which emerged in the town of Lassa in Nigeria in 1969. They ended up going with Ebola because an inaccurate map led them to believe it was near Yambuku and it seemed “suitably ominous.” The Ebola wasn’t actually the nearest river to the village, as they found out once they saw an accurate map, but the name stuck anyway. We have seen other recent outbreaks, like the 2015 Zika virus, also take the name of nearby natural features but not the name of the place or the people associated with where they originated. So Trump’s preferred names are not simply an adoption of the usual formula for naming pathogens — at least not a formula the world is currently interested in following. Instead, they reflect a dark history of blaming disease on outsiders. Though Trump and his allies are certainly wrong that calling the coronavirus “the Chinese virus” is simply following long-standing naming conventions, it is very much in keeping with a history of disease drawing out a fear of foreigners. (And let’s remember Trump has his own much more recent history of accusing immigrants of bringing infectious diseases into the country.) “The language of disease has always been linked to our discourse around immigration,” Natalia Molina, a professor of history and American studies at the University of Southern California, told Vox’s Sean Illing. “I think it’s pretty clear that our fears about immigrants and outsiders have always been bolstered by fears about disease and contamination.” Chinese people in particular have been the targets of outbreak-related fearmongering before in the United States. As historian James Mohr, who authored a book on the 1899 outbreak of the bubonic plague in Honolulu, Hawaii, wrote recently for Oxford University Press’s blog: Since the early victims were Chinese, ugly cries arose for the destruction of all Asian neighborhoods on the pretext that they seemed to be breeding grounds for plague; blaming victims and increased hostility toward minorities had been hallmarks of health-related panics since ancient times Local officials did resist the mob mentality, but their good intentions still went awry. They tried to do a controlled burn of the houses where plague victims had died to eradicate the disease, as CityLab pointed out in a recent story, but the fire grew out of control and ended up destroying 5,000 homes in the city. Here in 2020, we’ve seen people arrested in New York City for hate crimes against Asian Americans as coronavirus fears mount. Researchers in San Francisco found more than 1,000 reported cases of xenophobia toward Chinese Americans and their communities between January 28 and February 24; one of the researchers found in an informal survey of small businesses owned by Chinese Americans that they had lost between 50 percent and 70 percent of their business in recent days. We all have to do our part to protect against prejudice spiraling out of control in a moment of crisis. The media must be vigilant too, as Vox’s visuals editor Kainaz Amaria recently pointed out. It has become common to stick a photo of an Asian person on top of a coronavirus story, whether or not the underlying article had anything to do with an Asian country: “In regard to editorial accuracy, meaning how close does the photography relate to the content of the story, this picture [referring to this New York Post story] is from a different location and does not relate to any element of the story,” she says. “As picture editors, we need to apply what we know about the history of xenophobia and public health into our editorial decisions when it comes to stories about coronavirus.” But the president is not doing his part at all and doesn’t seem to grasp the gravity of his words. Instead, he risks making the situation worse.