TOP OF THE HOUR: 
 — Minneapolis to ban chokeholds by police, require officers to report illegal restraint. 
 — Four Indianapolis police officers off street after use of force during protest. 
 — French to investigate racist comments in police Facebook group. 
 — Trump invokes Floyd’s name in trumpeting jobs report. 
 ___ 
 MINNEAPOLIS — Negotiators for the city of Minneapolis have agreed with the state to ban the use of chokeholds by police, and to require police to report and intervene any time they see an unauthorized use of force by another officer. 
 The moves are part of a stipulation between the city and the Minnesota Department of Human Rights, which launched a civil rights investigation this week in response to the death of George Floyd in police custody. The City Council is expected to approve the agreement Friday. 
 The agreement, which will be enforceable in court, would require any officer, regardless of tenure or rank, to immediately report the use of any neck restraint or chokehold from the scene to their commander or their commander’s superiors. 
 Similarly, any officer who sees another officer commit any unauthorized use of force, including any chokehold or neck restraint, must try to intervene verbally and even physically. If they don’t, they’d be subject to discipline as severe as if they themselves had used the prohibited force. 
 The agreement also requires authorization from the police chief or a designated deputy chief to use crowd control weapons, including chemical agents, rubber bullets, flash-bangs, batons, and marking rounds. And it requires more timely decisions on disciplining officers. 
 ___ 
 INDIANAPOLIS — Four Indianapolis police officers who were caught on video using batons and pepper balls to subdue two women at a protest over the death of George Floyd have been assigned to support duties pending the outcome of an investigation. 
 Indianapolis Metropolitan Police Department spokeswoman Aliya Wishner said the officers “have been reassigned to a support position while the investigation proceeds.” She said that reassignment does not involve them being placed on administrative leave. 
 Police Chief Randal Taylor and Mayor Joe Hogsett were expected to address that investigation and other issues stemming from last weekend’s unrest in Indiana’s capital during a news conference later Friday. 
 ___ 
 ROME — The highest-ranking American cardinal at the Vatican says the killing of George Floyd has laid bare that the Christian principles of the U.S. Constitution aren’t being applied to blacks, and is evidence that divisive, demonizing language can kill. 
 Cardinal Kevin Farrell, who heads the Vatican’s laity office, told The Associated Press on Friday that the brutality of Floyd’s death at the hands of a white police officer was so unreal as to seem like it was a movie. 
 “We would never think that that could possibly happen,” Farrell said. “They are trained individuals who knew that in that position, that person was not going to survive. 
 “Now, what brings a person to that point?” he added. “We all have to ask ourselves: What has brought us to that point?” 
 Farrrell on Friday was presiding over a prayer service organized by the Sant’Egidio Community, a Rome-based Catholic charity that is close to Pope Francis. 
 ___ 
 PARIS — France’s top security official ordered an investigation Friday into racist, sexist and anti-LGBT messages allegedly posted by police in a private Facebook group. 
 Interior Minister Christophe Castaner asked the Paris prosecutor’s office to look into the messages and the group, according to an Interior Ministry official. 
 Castaner promised earlier this week to be “unforgiving” toward racist comments among police forces, at a time when George Floyd’s death in the U.S. has ignited protests around France and worldwide about police violence and racial injustice. 
 The website Streetpress published a string of messages Thursday that it said were posted in a private Facebook group for French police officers. The site acknowledged it is unclear whether the authors were actual police officers or those pretending to be. 
 Some of the reported comments mocked young men of color who have died fleeing police, or a singer who has denounced police violence. 
 Separately, six police officers in the Normandy city of Rouen are under internal investigation over racist comments in a private WhatsApp group. Both incidents have prompted public concern about extreme views among French police. 
 ___ 
 PORTLAND, Ore. — Thousands of protesters marched for the seventh consecutive night in Portland to decry the death of George Floyd. 
 Damian Lillard of the NBA’s Portland Trail Blazers walked at the front of the crowd arm-in-arm with young demonstrators as they crossed a bridge over the Willamette River and made their way to a large riverside park for a rally and speeches. 
 Hours later, several hundred people splintered off and set fires, engaged in street racing, threw projectiles and pointed lasers at officers’ eyes. 
 Police used a sound device that emits loud, high frequencies to deter those people. Twelve people were arrested. 
 ___ 
 WASHINGTON — President Donald Trump invoked George Floyd’s name as he delivered remarks trumpeting the latest unemployment numbers, which showed the U.S. economy unexpectedly adding 2.5 million jobs last month. 
 Trump mentioned equal justice under the law means everyone needs to receive fair treatment. He referenced Floyd, whose death in police custody has sparked protests across the world. 
 Trump says, “Hopefully George is looking down right now and saying this is a great thing that’s happening for our country,” adding: “This is a great day for him. It’s a great day for everybody.” 
 Trump is also calling an improving economy “the greatest thing that can happen for race relations” and the African American community. 
 ___ 
 MINNEAPOLIS — A man with George Floyd says his friend didn’t resist arrest and tried to defuse the situation when officers began screaming at Floyd. 
 Maurice Lester Hall, a longtime friend, was a passenger in Floyd’s car when police approached him on May 25 while responding to a call about a possible use of counterfeit money. Hall told the New York Times that Floyd was trying in his “humblest form to show he was not resisting arrest in no form or way.”  
 Hall, 42, was arrested Monday in Houston on outstanding warrants.  
 He has been interviewed by Minnesota authorities and is a key witness in the state’s investigation into the four officers who apprehended Floyd. All four officers were fired and charged, including Derek Chauvin, who pressed his knee into Floyd’s neck. 
 Hall told ABC’s “Good Morning America” the situation escalated and police grabbed Floyd, put him in a squad car, dragged him back out and then “jumped on the back of the neck.”  
 Hall says Floyd was crying out for help because he was dying. He says he’ll always remember seeing the fear in his friend’s face.  
 Hall didn’t know Floyd had died until the next day, when he saw the bystander video. 
 ___ 
 ORLANDO, Fla. — Two state lawmakers say a Florida deputy used unnecessary force by smashing a woman’s window, causing a cut on her face, after she stopped alongside a group of demonstrators protesting police abuse and later refused orders to get out of her car. 
 Body-cam video released by the Orange County Sheriff’s Office in Orlando shows Wednesday’s incident, which caught the attention of protesters who shouted at deputies, “What did she do?” 
 The video shows the deputy pulling the woman over in a nearby parking lot, where he shouts “Get out of the car!” 
 When the woman asks why through her partially rolled-down driver’s side window, the deputy says “Do you want to go to jail? Seriously? Either get out of the car or you’re going to jail.” 
 The deputy later explains that she had committed a traffic violation by stopping next to demonstrators in the street. The woman says she wasn’t doing anything wrong. 
 “Your choice. I’m trying to be nice,” the deputy says, then reaches through her window to open the door. The woman tells him to stop and rolls up the window on his arm. He then smashes it with his baton, shattering the glass before handcuffing her and putting her in a squad car. 
 “I’m bleeding, I need an ambulance,” she later repeats, spitting blood from her mouth onto the pavement after he calls to get her medical help. 
 Sheriff John Mina described the incident as “troubling” at a news conference on Thursday, adding that an internal inquiry had been opened. 
 Two Democratic state lawmakers from Orlando, Rep. Carlos Smith and Rep. Anna Eskamani, criticized the deputy. Smith called it “disgusting behavior” in a tweet, saying the deputy “unnecessarily escalates the situation from 0 to 1000 in seconds over a stupid traffic violation.” 
 ___ 
 MINNEAPOLIS — Minnesota’s county attorneys want to give the state attorney general the authority to handle all cases of police-involved deaths. 
 The Minnesota County Attorneys Association voted Thursday in transferring that power during an emergency meeting, which included Attorney General Keith Ellison. The attorney general is leading the state’s case against the four police officers involved in George Floyd’s death instead of the Hennepin County Attorney’s Office. 
 State lawmakers would need to pass legislation during this month’s special session to give the attorney general the ongoing authority. 
 The county attorneys are also calling on the Legislature to provide additional funding to the state Attorney General’s Office and create a unit within Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension to investigate police killings of civilians. 
 “If this is the path the Legislature and governor choose to take, my office will accept the responsibility,” Ellison said. “But it must come with resources sufficient to do the job thoroughly and to do justice in the way Minnesotans have a right to expect.” 
 Ellison is one of 18 Democratic attorneys general who are asking Congress to grant their offices “clear statutory authority under federal law” to investigate “unconstitutional policing by local police departments” in their respective states, the Star Tribune reported. 
 ___ 
 MINNEAPOLIS — The Minneapolis City Council is preparing to vote on changes to the city’s police department in response to the death of George Floyd. 
 City leaders and the Minnesota Department of Human Rights are working out an agreement for a temporary restraining order to force some immediate changes and set a timeline for the state’s civil rights investigation into the Minneapolis Police Department. 
 The council meets Friday afternoon. If the council approves the agreement, the order would require court approval. 
 The state human rights department opened a civil rights investigation into allegations of racial discrimination by the police department on Tuesday. The investigation into policies, procedures and practices seeks to determine if the force has engaged in systematic discriminatory practices toward people of color and ensure that any such practices are stopped. 
 ___ 
 FREDERICKSBURG, Va. — A 176-year-old slave auction block has been removed from a Virginia city’s downtown and will be displayed in a museum.  
 The 800-pound stone was pulled from the ground at a Fredericksburg street corner early Friday after its removal was delayed for months by lawsuits and the coronavirus pandemic, The Free Lance-Star reported.  
 The weathered stone was sprayed with graffiti twice and chants of “move the block” erupted this week during local demonstrations over the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis, city officials said in a statement announcing the removal.  
 A local chapter of the NAACP called for the stone’s removal in 2017, saying it was a relic of “a time of hatred and degradation.” 
 In 2019, the City Council voted for its removal and relocation to the Fredericksburg Area Museum. A judge upheld that decision in February after two businesses near the auction block sued to stop the relocation. 
 The museum plans to display the knee-high stone in an exhibit chronicling the “movement from slavery to accomplishments by the local African American community.” 
 ___ 
 BRUSSELS — European Union lawmakers are expressing concern about U.S. police action linked to the death of George Floyd. 
 The incidents were debated by the EU parliament’s Subcommittee on Human Rights as the protest movement since Floyd’s death gathered pace in Europe and around the world. 
 Finnish Greens lawmaker Heidi Hautala says “the police should not be there to shoot when some loot. The police should be there to protect, and it is clear that widespread reforms in the law enforcement in the United States are needed.” 
 Irish EU lawmaker Sean Kelly says some of the problem is due to a failure of leadership. He says what happened in the United States is “chilling in the extreme. I think it indicates what can happen when you have poor leadership.  
 “Leaders can either divide or unite. Good unite. Bad divide. That’s what we see unfortunately in America at the moment.” 
 Swedish liberal parliamentarian Karin Karlsbro says “America has a long and tragic history on police brutality. At the heart of this lies racism and segregation based on history. This is a systematic problem that needs to be addressed at all levels in the U.S.” 
 ___ 
 Follow more AP stories on the George Floyd protests and reaction at https://apnews.com/GeorgeFloyd 
ATLANTA (AP) — Protesters stirred by the death of George Floyd vowed Friday to turn an extraordinary outpouring of grief into a sustained movement as demonstrations shifted to a calmer, but no less determined, focus on addressing racial injustice.  
 By early afternoon, demonstrations resumed for an 11th day around the country with continued momentum as the mood of the protests largely shifted from explosive anger to more peaceful calls for change. Formal and impromptu memorials to Floyd stretched from Minneapolis to North Carolina, where family were gathering Saturday to mourn him, and beyond. Services were planned in Texas for the following week.  
 Josiah Roebuck, a Kennesaw State University student and organizer of a demonstration that drew about 100 people Friday in an Atlanta suburb, said he was confident that momentum will be maintained. 
 “Once you start, you’re going to see this every day,” said Roebuck, who said he attended multiple other Atlanta-area protests. He added: “I just want minorities to be represented properly.” 
 Organizers have used various organizing tools including social media, which Roebuck said he used to gather people for the demonstration outside a Kennesaw store selling Confederate memorabilia. “Social media is a big influencer today,” he said.  
 Protests around the country had initially been marred by the setting of fires and smashing of windows, but Friday marked at least the third day of more subdued demonstrations, including a  heartfelt tribute to Floyd Thursday in Minneapolis  that drew family members, celebrities, politicians and civil rights advocates. At the service, strong calls were made for meaningful changes in policing and the criminal justice system. 
 And in a sign the protesters’ voices were being heard, more symbols of slavery and the Confederacy came down. Alabama’s port city of Mobile removed a statue of a Confederate naval officer early Friday after days of protests there, while Fredericksburg, Virginia, removed a 176-year-old slave auction block from downtown after several years of efforts by the NAACP. Other Confederate symbols have come down around the South in recent days as calls to remove them intensified during protests over Floyd’s death. 
 Also Friday, in Jacksonville , Florida, a large group of players, coaches, front office officials from the city’s NFL team and their families wore Black Lives Matter T-shirts as they walked from TIAA Bank Field to the sheriff’s office headquarters to raise awareness of racial injustice.  
 At demonstrations around the country, protesters said the quieter mood was the result of several factors: the new and upgraded criminal charges against the police officers involved in Floyd’s death; a more conciliatory approach by police who have marched with them or taken a knee to recognize their message; and the realization that the burst of rage is not sustainable. 
 “Personally, I think you can’t riot everyday for almost a week,” said Costa Smith, 26, who was protesting in downtown Atlanta. 
 Despite the shift in tone, protesters have shown no sign that they are going away and, if anything, are emboldened to stay on the streets to push for police reforms. 
 In New York City, Miguel Fernandes said there were “a lot more nights to go” of marching because protesters hadn’t got what they wanted. And Floyd’s brother Terrence  appeared in Brooklyn to carry on the fight for change, declaring “power to the people, all of us.” 
 At the first in a series of memorials for Floyd, the Rev. Al Sharpton urged those gathered Thursday “to stand up in George’s name and say, ‘Get your knee off our necks!’” Those at the Minneapolis tribute stood in silence for 8 minutes, 46 seconds — the amount of time Floyd was alleged to be on the ground under the control of police. 
 Sharpton vowed that this will become a movement to “change the whole system of justice.” 
 As the protests have taken root over the past week, they have become communities unto themselves.  
 In New York, where residents have been stuck at home for nearly three months because of the coronavirus pandemic, residents who can’t go to restaurants are happy to be able to go a protest. People bring their dogs and share snacks and water bottles. They have been heartened by police who have joined them. 
 “It’s great to be alive, it’s history right now,” said protester Kenyata Taylor.  
 In Los Angeles, Billy Black, a 25-year-old African American attending a demonstration at City Hall on Thursday, said the recent calm of the protests helped lure him out to lend his voice after being concerned in previous days over TV images of marchers clashing with police in riot gear, police cruisers set ablaze and stores ransacked in broad daylight. 
 “I didn’t like knowing that people were outside taking a stand for something I believe in, while I was in air-conditioned comfort,” Black said. 
 Still, there were skirmishes in the Bronx borough of New York City and elsewhere Thursday. In Buffalo, a police commissioner suspended two officers after video from WBFO showed a 75-year-old man being shoved after walking up to police as they were enforcing a curfew Thursday night. The man appeared to hit his head on the pavement and blood leaked out as officers walked past. The man was hospitalized. 
 But in Texas, protesters cheered as Fort Worth officers joined the front of a march. Police in Austin also walked with dozens of members of the University of Texas football team as they made their way from campus to the state Capitol to honor Floyd’s memory. Once there, the group and police officers took a knee for nine minutes. 
 “This protest won’t just stop here,” junior safety Caden Sterns said. “To the white community ... if you want change like you say you do, you must change. What I mean is, you must realize, and the oppressor must realize, you are oppressing.” 
 ___ 
 Mahoney reported from New York. AP journalists contributed reporting from around the United States. 
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) — Television. Sewing machine. Motorcycle. These are the things Edda Marchan’s children sold to keep their mother breathing. In the far stretch of northern Peru where the family lives, medicinal oxygen to treat the coronavirus has become a scarce commodity. Eventually, they could not find any. “It’s the greatest desperation in the world,” said her daughter, 39-year-old Fiorella Sorroza. “We are praying to God not to abandon us.” In the South American nation wracked by COVID-19, one of the world’s most abundant elements is now in short supply. Exasperated relatives are racing to fill overpriced tanks. Long neglected hospitals are running empty. And President Martín Vizcarra has issued an emergency decree ordering industrial plants to ramp up production or purchase oxygen from other countries. “Peru, with the Amazon, has the lungs of the planet,” said Iván Hidalgo, academic director of the Institute of Government and Public Management in Peru’s capital of Lima. “And we’re dying because of lack of oxygen.” Regional health directors say the shortage has already cost lives and is so severe that even by turning industrial plants that typically produce oxygen for mining into medicinal production, Peru will fall short of what it needs. Defense Minister Walter Martos said Thursday the country needs 173 tons of oxygen per day. The dean of the Medical College of Peru estimates the nation is producing about 20% of that. The problem is a consequence of decades of underinvestment in hospitals, corruption and poor management, several medical leaders said. The hospital in Tumbes, near the border with Ecuador, where Marchan’s family resides, has a plant that has been inoperative for years because someone stole an electronic card needed to operate it. Officials are hoping to get it back up Saturday. In the meantime, Tumbes health workers have imported oxygen from Ecuador and trucked in tanks from the nearest Peruvian plant, five hours away. The biggest public hospital usually utilizes 30 tanks a week but now needs about 200. Many also blame Peru’s governments for failing to prepare earlier. “This exposes failings throughout the country,” said Dr. Harold Burgos, regional health director for Tumbes. “It was coming and no one took it seriously.” Other countries in Latin America and the Caribbean are facing – or soon likely to encounter – oxygen shortages. In Colombia’s Amazon, doctors have had to airlift patients to Bogota because the only oxygen plant in the region is barely functioning. Haiti is heavily reliant on one oxygen plant for a population of over 11 million. About 15% of all COVID-19 patients experience severe illness that requires oxygen therapy, while another 5% need ventilation, according to the World Health Organization. By the time many patients are critical enough to seek hospital attention, they often have low blood oxygen levels that require immediate attention.  That was the case for Armando Ancajima’s uncle, who was taken Sunday to a hospital in Talara, an oil producing city near Peru’s northern coast. Struggling to breathe, his nails purple, he had just 35% oxygen saturation on arrival. The family was told the hospital had no oxygen, suggesting that they rapidly find a way to buy it themselves. Ancajima said he saw 10 people die during the night he spent with his uncle. “This is the inheritance of 30 years of inattention,” he said.  Peru was one of the earliest nations in Latin America to institute a strict lockdown, but that failed to stop infections from skyrocketing. With nearly 185,000 cases, the country has the second-highest number in the region. Peru’s large informal sector — about 70% of the economy — means many have to break quarantines to earn money and buy food. But the oxygen shortages are also symptomatic of the overall difficulties Latin America encountered in ramping up medical supplies during the pandemic. By the time the first cases were diagnosed in late February and early March, global supplies were drying up. Unable to buy from the U.S. or Europe, many turned to China for ventilators, which have been slow to arrive. “The opportunity to buy goods had already passed when the first cases were diagnosed,” said Dr. Ciro Ugarte, director of the Pan American Health Organization’s health emergencies department. Vizcarra on Thursday announced nearly $25 million to purchase oxygen and $3.2 million to develop plants and generators. “If we can meet the demand nationally, we will,” he said. “If plants and generators cannot be secured that way, we’ll go wherever necessary.” Perhaps the most severe shortages have been in Peru’s Amazon, where doctors in Iquitos were tending to 500 patients in a hospital meant for 225. With no oxygen plant, health workers were depending on outside shipments until recently. The government promised 60 tanks a day by air, though only 24 were arriving. With the help of the church and local communities, two plants have since been purchased and overall need and shortages have gone down.  But the oxygen scarcity is increasingly being felt outside the Amazon as well.  In recent days, lines of people waiting to fill oxygen tanks for loved ones with COVID-19 have been seen even in better-equipped Lima. And in northern Peru, where Marchan’s family lives, many say price gougers are taking advantage. The family was spending about $150 a day on oxygen until recently, hoping to avoid taking her to the hospital, which doctors warned was on the verge of collapse. But as she grew worse and no oxygen could be found, they decided to seek help. A day after admitting her to the hospital, Sorroza said a doctor called, saying they didn’t have oxygen and asking the family to bring some. Later that night, she said, one doctor called a cousin offering to sell them a tank for around $120. Three days later, she was dead.  The family was alerted at 6 a.m. on a Saturday that she’d passed and was told she’d be buried four hours later at a newly created cemetery. They rushed to say a hasty goodbye, enlisting a carpenter cousin to construct a simple white cross out of wood. “I didn’t get to see her,” Sorroza said. “Nothing.”SAINT-LAURENT-SUR-MER, France (AP) — At least the dead will always be there.  
 All too many have been, for 76 years since that fateful June 6 on France’s Normandy beaches, when allied troops in 1944 turned the course of World War II and went on to defeat fascism in Europe in one of the most remarkable feats in military history. 
 Forgotten they will never be. Revered, yes. But Saturday’s anniversary will be one of the loneliest remembrances ever, as the coronavirus pandemic is keeping almost everyone away — from government leaders to frail veterans who might not get another chance for a final farewell to their unlucky comrades.  
 Rain and wind are also forecast, after weeks of warm, sunny weather. 
 “I miss the others,” said Charles Shay, who as a U.S. Army medic was in the first wave of soldiers to wade ashore at Omaha Beach under relentless fire on D-Day.  
 Shay, 95, lives in France close to the beach where he and so many others landed in 1944. He knows of no U.S. veterans making the trip overseas to observe D-Day this year.  
 “I guess I will be alone here this year,” Shay said before he performed a Native American ritual to honor his comrades by spreading the smoke of burning white sage into the winds lashing the Normandy coast Friday. 
 The eerie atmosphere touches the French as well as Americans.  
 “The sadness is almost too much, because there is no one,” said local guide Adeline James. “Plus you have their stories. The history is sad and it’s even more overwhelming now between the weather, the (virus) situation and, and, and.” 
 The locals in this northwestern part of France have come out year after year to show their gratitude for the soldiers from the United States, Britain, Canada and other countries who liberated them from Adolf Hitler’s Nazi forces. 
 Despite the lack of international crowds, David Pottier still went out to raise American flags in the Calvados village of Mosles, population 356, which was liberated by allied troops the day after the landing on five Normandy beachheads.  
 In a forlorn scene, a gardener tended to the parched grass around the small monument for the war dead, while Pottier, the local mayor, was getting the French tricolor to flutter next to the Stars and Stripes.  
 “We have to recognize that they came to die in a foreign land,” Pottier said. “We miss the GIs,” he said of the U.S. soldiers.  
 The pandemic has wreaked havoc across the world, infecting 6.6 million people, killing over 391,000 and devastating economies. It poses a particular threat to the elderly  — like the surviving D-Day veterans who are in their late nineties or older.  
 It has also affected the younger generations who turn out every year to mark the occasion. Most have been barred from traveling to the windswept coasts of Normandy.  
 Some 160,000 soldiers made the perilous crossing from England that day in atrocious conditions, storming dunes which they knew were heavily defended by German troops determined to hold their positions.  
 Somehow, they succeeded. Yet they left a trail of thousands of casualties who have been mourned for generations since.  
 Last year stood out, with U.S. President Donald Trump joining French President Emmanuel Macron at the American cemetery in Colleville-sur-Mer, on a bluff overlooking Omaha Beach. A smattering of veterans were honored with the highest accolades. All across the beaches of Normandy tens of thousands came from across the globe to pay their respects to the dead and laud the surviving soldiers.  
 The acrid smell of wartime-era jeep exhaust fumes and the rumble of old tanks filled the air as parades of vintages vehicles went from village to village. The tiny roads between the dunes, hedges and apple orchards were clogged for hours, if not days. 
 Heading into the D-Day remembrance weekend this year, only the salty brine coming off the ocean on Omaha Beach hits the nostrils, the shrieks of seagulls pierce the ears and a sense of desolation hangs across the region’s country roads.  
 “Last yea,r this place was full with jeeps, trucks, people dressed up as soldiers,” said Eric Angely, who sat on a seawall wearing a World War II uniform after taking his restored U.S. Army jeep out for a ride.  
 “This year, there is nothing. It’s just me now, my dog and my jeep,” the local Frenchman said. 
 Three-quarters of a century and the horrific wartime slaughter of D-Day help put things in perspective. Someday, the COVID-19 pandemic, too, will pass, and people will turn out to remember both events that shook the world. 
 “We don’t have a short memory around here,” Pottier said with a wistful smile.  
 ___ 
 Virginia Mayo contributed.  
 ___ 
 Follow AP pandemic coverage at http://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak 
LONDON (AP) — The U.K. became the second country to officially record more than 40,000 coronavirus-related deaths as more than 100 scientists wrote to the British government on Friday to urge it to reconsider lifting virus lockdown restrictions. 
 The government said another 357 people who had tested positive for the virus have died in the U.K. across all settings, including hospitals and care homes. That takes the total to 40,261, the world’s second-highest pandemic death toll behind the United States. 
 “I think that the day that the number of deaths from coronavirus has gone over 40,000 is a time of sorrow for us all,” Health Secretary Matt Hancock said at the government’s daily press briefing. 
 The U.K.’s actual COVID-19 death toll is widely considered to be higher as the total only includes those who have tested positive for the virus. 
 In an open letter, the scientists urged the government to postpone further easing of the lockdown given the still-high level of daily virus-related deaths and new infections. 
 “Despite a two-month lockdown, we are still experiencing unacceptable daily numbers of deaths, still in the hundreds, and an estimated 8,000 new infections a day in England alone,” they said. 
 Overall, Hancock said the transmission rate was heading down but that there were a couple of areas causing concern. He said the transmission rate is highest in the northwest of England, which includes the cities of Liverpool and Manchester, followed by the less densely populated southwest.  
 Hancock said the government wants to “increasingly have an approach in tackling local lockdowns where we spot a flare-up.” Such an approach could potentially see the government re-imposing restrictions locally. 
 The scientists, many of whom work in infectious disease, biology and immunology, are particularly vexed by the level of community transmission of the virus. They voiced worries that there could again be “exponential growth” in the number of cases and death. 
 Signatories include Professor Stuart Neil, the head of the department of infectious diseases at King’s College London; Professor Adrian Hayday of the Francis Crick Institute; and Professor Neil Fairweather of Imperial College London. 
 “There is a very high probability that relaxation of lockdown, coupled with a potential breakdown in public trust, will bring us back into a situation where the outbreak is once again out of control,” the scientists wrote. “This would inevitably lead to a second lockdown, which could be more damaging and harder to implement.” 
 The British government says its easing of the lockdown has been limited and careful and is backed by the science. The government has taken advice from the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, or SAGE, through the crisis, many of whose members are some of the country’s leading scientists.  
 Steps to ease the lockdown conditions in England over the past couple of weeks included the reopening of schools to some younger children and allowing groups of six people from different households in outdoor spaces, including in private gardens.  
 The other nations of the U.K. — Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland — have also relaxed some elements of the lockdown but not at the same rate as in England. 
 There are concerns that the planned reopening of all nonessential stores on June 15 could act as a catalyst for another escalation of the outbreak, especially if it leads to more use of public transportation. 
 “The level of community transmission is still far too high for lockdown to be released, and should not be attempted before we have a substantial and sustained further drop in community transmission,” the scientists said. 
 ___ 
 Follow AP pandemic coverage at http://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak. 
ANKARA, Turkey (AP) — Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan on Friday canceled a decision to impose a new, two-day weekend curfew in 15 of the country’s provinces that took many by surprise. 
 Erdogan said on Twitter that he was reversing the decision on grounds that it “would have diverse social and economic consequences.” 
 He did not elaborate but the surprise decision to renew a weekend stay-at-home order, announced earlier on Friday, had caused confusion, with many people scrambling to cancel train or air tickets or other weekend travel plans.  
 Erdogan said: “I did not find it in my heart to allow our citizens who started to re-organize their daily lives after a 2.5-month break, to suffer.” 
 He did, however, urge people to wear masks, abide by social distancing practices and maintain high levels of hygiene. 
 The Interior Ministry had announced the stay-at-home order in 15 provinces including Istanbul and Ankara even as the country lifted a raft of restrictions earlier in the week. Domestic air travel resumed, restaurants began welcoming sit-in customers and beaches, swimming pools, parks, gyms and museums reopened amid a slowdown in the virus’ spread. 
 Alpay Azap, a member of Turkey’s scientific advisory body, said the new weekend curfew was announced because of an uptick in coronavirus cases in the southeastern cities of Gaziantep and Diyarbakir as well as some places on the Black Sea coast. He also said that the caseload in Ankara has not decreased. 
 Fearing possible negative effects on the already troubled economy, the country has been imposing short weekend and holiday curfews, instead of total lockdowns. 
 It has also banned people above the age of 65 and minors from leaving home apart from certain days of the week. Those restrictions remain in place. 
 Turkey plans to resume international flights with 40 countries in June, starting on June 10 with flights to and from Bahrain, Bulgaria, Qatar, Greece and the self-declared state in the north of Cyprus that is only recognized by Turkey. 
 On Friday, Health Minister Fahrettin Koca reported the country’s lowest day-to-day increase in the number of COVID-19 fatalities since late March. According to data he posted on Twitter, there were 18 new deaths in 24 hours, bringing the total in the nation to 4,648. 
 The number of daily confirmed cases remained under the 1,000 mark, despite an increase in the number of tests conducted, the data showed. The total of known coronavirus infections now stands at 168,340. 
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) — State health officials on Friday reported an additional 27 coronavirus-related deaths in Indiana. 
 Those newly recorded deaths increase the state’s toll from confirmed or presumed COVID-19 infections to 2,258 since the first one was reported in mid-March, according to the Indiana State Department of Health. Most of the newly reported deaths occurred Wednesday or Thursday, but others date back as far as May 11.  
 Indiana hospitals still had 369 COVID-19 patients in their intensive care units on Thursday, although little more than one-third of the state’s ICU beds were available. 
 Test have confirmed 533 more Indiana residents with COVID-19, bringing the state’s total number of confirmed cases to 36,578, the state agency said. 
 For most people, the coronavirus causes mild or moderate symptoms, such as fever and cough that clear up in two to three weeks. For some, especially older adults and people with existing health problems, it can cause more severe illness or death.  
LANSING, Mich. (AP) — Gov. Gretchen Whitmer said Friday that barbershops and other personal-care businesses can reopen across Michigan on June 15, while those businesses and places like gyms and movie theaters that were shut down for months to curb the  coronavirus can restart in northern Michigan next week. 
 The governor advanced the Upper Peninsula and Traverse City regions to the next phase under her restart plan, effective Wednesday. She is expected to move the rest of the state’s more populated areas to that stage in coming weeks. 
 In 32 northern counties, indoor social gatherings and organized events of up to 50 people will be permissible, subject to distancing and other safety rules. Outdoor gatherings of up to 250 will be allowed. Outdoor performance and sporting venues will be able to have up to 25% capacity or 500 people, whichever is smaller — allowing for some graduation ceremonies, Whitmer said. 
 Indoor facilities such as bowling alleys, cinemas, convention centers and sports arenas — closed since March 16 — will open at 25% capacity or hold up to 250 people, whatever is smaller, as long as customers stay 6 feet (1.8 meters) apart if they are not from the same household. Fitness centers must reduce class sizes as necessary and, “to the extent feasible,” configure workout equipment 10 feet (3 meters) apart — or 6 feet if there are barriers. 
 Hair, tanning, tattoo and massage businesses will be allowed to reopen statewide on June 15 after being closed since March 22. Barbers and hairdressers were the focus of a conservative group’s protest at the Capitol more than two weeks ago. 
 “Please do not drop your guard now,” said Whitmer, a Democrat. “Because of the hard work and sacrifice that we’ve made we’re now able to make this re-engagement happen.” 
The outbreak of the coronavirus has dealt a shock to the global economy with unprecedented speed. Following are developments Friday related to the national and global response, the work place and the spread of the virus. 
 ________________________ 
 JOB CONCERNS: 
 — Mall operator CBL & Associates warned Friday in a regulatory filing that there’s “substantial doubt” that it will be able to continue as a going concern, citing the financial impact of the coronavirus on its store tenants. The warning comes after it skipped an interest payment of $11.8 million that was due June 1. It has a 30-day grace period before it goes into default. CBL has 108 mall properties across 26 states. 
 — Bombardier Aviation is reducing its workforce by about 2,500 employees due to challenges caused by COVID-19. The company said Friday that it had to make the move because business jet deliveries, industry-wide, are forecast to be down approximately 30% year-over-year due to the pandemic. 
 Bombardier said most of the cuts will impact its manufacturing operations in Canada and will occur throughout the year. It has almost 60,000 total employees. The company anticipates an approximately $40 million charge related to the job cuts. 
 — Luxury British carmaker Bentley plans to cut up to 1,000 jobs and has warned of the possibility of more to come as it tries to limit the damage caused by the virus outbreak. 
 The company, which is part of Germany’s Volkswagen Group, said it is looking to make the initial job cuts under a voluntary scheme but that future job cuts may be on a compulsory basis. 
 Bentley said it has informed its 4,200 workers of a program to significantly reduce the size of the business. 
 TRAVEL: 
 — British Airways is considering legal action against the British government’s plans to force anyone arriving into the country to quarantine themselves for 14 days in order to stem the spread of the coronavirus. 
 Willie Walsh, the chief executive of International Airlines Group, which runs the British flag carrier, told Sky News he is reviewing the situation with lawyers. He said the “irrational” quarantine rules would “torpedo” the airline’s chances of flying in July. 
 — Slovakia has lifted the government’s restrictions for traveling to neighboring Austria and Hungary. 
 Slovak Prime Minister Igor Matovic says the move becomes effective on Friday. It also enables citizens of Austria and Hungary to travel to Slovakia without any restrictions. 
 On Thursday, Slovakia reopened for travelers its common border with another neighbor, the Czech Republic. 
 CENTRAL GOVERNMENTS & BANKS: 
 — Louisiana’s bars, spas and tattoo shops can begin restarting operations nearly three months after they were closed because of the coronavirus. 
 The state continued to loosen its virus-related restrictions Friday. The changes allow retailers, restaurants, salons and churches to serve more customers at a time and let other shuttered businesses reopen with limitations. 
 The easing of restrictions won’t take effect in New Orleans. Officials in the state’s original virus hot spot want more time to determine when they’ll allow a wider reopening of businesses. 
 — The unemployment level in the Czech Republic has been moderately growing amid the pandemic. 
 Labor Minister Jana Malacova says unemployment reached 3.6% in May, 0.2% more than the previous month. A total of 266,144 Czechs were unemployed in May, 12,104 more than in April. 
 Analysts have predicted that the unemployment level might reach up to 10% later in the year. 
 — Malaysia’s government has announced a 35 billion ringgit ($8.2 billion) stimulus to bolster short-term economic recovery. The package, which is in addition to a $60 billion stimulus announced earlier, centers on increasing employment, wooing foreign investment and revitalizing key sectors of the economy. Prime Minister Muhyiddin Yassin said Friday it included 10 billion ringgit ($2.3 billion) in direct fiscal injection to the economy in the form of wage subsidies, upskilling programs and supporting small and medium-sized enterprises. Various tax breaks and rebates are being given to bolster the manufacturing, property, auto, palm oil, airline and tourism sectors. 
 — Statistics Canada reports a record high unemployment rate as the Canadian economy added 289,600 jobs in May, with businesses reopening amid easing public health restrictions. The government agency says the unemployment rate rose to 13.7%, topping the previous high of 13.1 % in December 1982. The increase in the unemployment rate came as more people started looking for work. The increase in the number of jobs comes after three million jobs were lost over March and April, and about 2.5 million more had their hours slashed. 
 MARKETS: Stocks are rushing higher  Friday after a much better-than-expected report on the U.S. job market gave Wall Street’s recent rally another shot of adrenaline.  
BRIGHAM CITY, Utah (AP) — Wearing dress shirts, ties and name tags, three missionaries with The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints sit around the kitchen table inside a Utah apartment planning how they’ll spread their gospel that day.  Seth Rather, a 19-year-old from Wichita, Kansas, reads aloud as he types on a smartphone: “During this time, we must put our faith in God to deliver us through these unprecedented times. How has putting your faith in God helped you in your life?  “That good?” he asks his two companions.  “I like it,” Andrew Zitting responds. Guenter Castrillo nods.  With that, the young men have their Facebook post for the day.  This is what missionary work looks like during the coronavirus pandemic, which has forced the Utah-based faith widely known as the Mormon church to accelerate its online outreach. After hastily bringing home more than 26,000 young people from overseas missions aimed at recruiting new members, the church has begun sending many of them out again in their home countries with a new focus on online work that may persist even after the pandemic, officials told The Associated Press.  “The leaders of our church have been asking us: What are we learning from this pandemic that will help us become better, become more efficient,” said Brent H. Nielson, executive director of the church’s missionary department. “We’ve learned that finding people, teaching people online is much more effective than trying to meet people in person on a bus or on a street corner or somewhere else. This will change what we do, I think, forever.”  Missionary work has changed drastically for young people like Rather and Castrillo, who had spent long days walking through the streets in the Philippines to spread the word of their faith before the pandemic hit. Now, they hardly leave a ground-level apartment in the small town of Brigham City in northern Utah.  After sending the Facebook post recently, they knelt for a prayer and then dialed in to a Zoom call with a family. A similar scene is playing out worldwide as reassigned missionaries navigate new realities.  In Orlando, Florida, Bella McCain and Madison King hold a WhatsApp video call with a family they have been teaching church doctrine. They invite the family to take the sacrament for the first time and follow up on an earlier proposal: forgo coffee, a key part of the faith’s health code, which also bans alcohol and tobacco. The husband and wife had different outcomes: She says she found it difficult but would like to work on it. He says he’d given it up.  On Facebook, McCain and King craft a message in Portuguese, the language they learned for their original assignments in Brazil. They also text people asking to set up a call to talk about the church.  It’s a far cry from just months ago. In Brazil, McCain had one of those “little brick phones” and largely spoke to people face to face.  “Sometimes we feel like pioneers,” said McCain, a 19-year-old from Texas. “We’re not used to using social media in this way and, like, I never made videos and posted them online before. ... We’re all learning, and it’s really interesting and really fun.” The church began incorporating online faith outreach when it gave some missionaries tablets six years ago. It’s since made technology more prevalent, giving most missionaries smartphones even before the pandemic, Nielson said.  A more online-based approach would be a major shift and could diminish the appeal for some young church members who crave an enriching cultural experience, said Ryan Cragun, a sociology professor at the University of Tampa who specializes in religion and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The time in the community also breaks up the drudgery of being alone with a fellow missionary, said Cragun, a former church member who served a mission in Costa Rica. “There’s this quasi-tourist experience of going to these cool places, but there is also the connection you get to the people,” Cragun said. “That’s probably one of the more meaningful things that happens to them.” McCain said she sees an opportunity to use online tools to reach more people. Still, “we would love to go and be able to teach in people’s houses.” She and King went to the home of the family they have been teaching to share the sacrament, while social distancing.  “Finding and teaching people online is really effective,” Nielson said, “but we also think there’s a personal touch, too, of meeting people” and having them come to church when things open up more.  The virus forced church officials to scramble for flights to get missionaries home from far-flung countries like Ethiopia, Australia and Vietnam. But Nielson said the church never wavered in keeping the missionary program going.  It shows the importance the church places on sharing its gospel and giving young people the chance to fulfill an important rite of passage. About 5,000 missionaries who were brought home have been sent out again in the United States. Thousands more are heading out soon. The church gave them the option to wait a year, but the large majority chose to start again now, Nielson said.  Missions, which last two years for men and 18 months for women, are as much about locking in young church members for life as converting others, Cragun said. The average number of people converted per missionary has risen slightly in the last three years, to 3.7, but is still less than the average of five in the previous decade, church figures show. Nielson said the pandemic has made people hungry for the missionaries’ message of hope. “There’s never been a time when more people have wanted to know about religion than there is now,” Nielson said. “People searching for peace. People searching for answers. People searching for someone to talk to. It’s been an incredible thing.” ___ Fam reported from Winter Park, Florida. Associated Press religion coverage receives support from the Lilly Endowment through the Religion News Foundation. The AP is solely responsible for this content.WASHINGTON (AP) — President Donald Trump took a victory lap Friday morning after the government reported surprising job gains for last month, seizing on the data to predict that the worst of the coronavirus pandemic and its economic disruption was in the rear-view mirror. 
 The unemployment rate dropped to a better-than-expected 13.3%, but that is still on par with what the nation witnessed during the Great Depression. 
 With the country in upheaval over the death of George Floyd, Trump said that an economic rebound was his answer to racial inequality, saying it “is the greatest thing that can happen for race relations.” 
 Trump spoke from the Rose Garden hours after the Labor Department said that U.S. employers added 2.5 million workers to their payrolls last month. Economists had been expecting them instead to slash another 8 million jobs amid the ongoing fallout from the response to the pandemic.  
 “This shows that what we’ve been doing is right,” Trump said of the jobs numbers. “This is outstanding what’s happened today.” 
 Trump spoke nearly an hour and only briefly mentioned Floyd, the black man who died after a police officer pinned his neck down last week in Minneapolis. The president otherwise touted an economic recovery from the COVID-19 crisis that has disproportionately affected black Americans. 
 “Hopefully George is looking down right now and saying this is a great thing that’s happening for our country,” Trump said. “This is a great day for him. It’s a great day for everybody.” 
 On the economy, Trump pitched himself as key to what he claimed would be a “rocket ship” rebound, and offered that as an argument for his reelection in November. “I’m telling you next year, unless something happens or the wrong people get in here, this will turn around,” Trump said. 
 It’s unclear how many jobs lost as a result of the pandemic are permanently lost, whether the reopenings in states will create a second surge of COVID-19 deaths. In addition, the report from mid-May doesn’t reflect the effect that protests across the nation have had on business. 
 Some economists forecast the rate could remain in the double-digits through the November elections and into next year. 
 Trump predicted a swift bounce-back for an economy that was largely shuttered to slow the spread of the virus, saying the economy would see a “very good” July and August and a “spectacular” fall. “We’ll go back to having the greatest economy anywhere in the world,” he said. 
 Trump also defended his handling of the pandemic, saying that had he not acted to recommend closings more than 1 million Americans would have died. More than 108,000 people are confirmed to have lost their lives due to COVID-19, according to a tally from Johns Hopkins University. 
 Now, though, Trump said states and cities should be lifting remaining restrictions. “I don’t know why they continue to lock down,” he said of some jurisdictions that have maintained closings.  
 “You do social distancing and you wear masks if you want,” Trump said, but added that states need to reopen.  
 Trump also claimed “tremendous progress” is being made by pharmaceutical manufacturers on developing vaccines and therapeutics for the virus.  
 The May job gain suggests that businesses have quickly been recalling workers as states have reopened their economies, but it may take months for all those who lost work in April and March to find jobs. Some economists forecast the rate could remain in the double-digits through the November elections and into next year. 
 Trump also a signed an extension of the Paycheck Protection Program, the federal subsidy program that is helping keep millions on the job. The bipartisan law gives companies more flexibility in using funds from the forgivable federal loans to pay their workers and cover other qualified expenses. 
Leaders of a large study in the United Kingdom that is rigorously testing the malaria drug hydroxychloroquine and other medicines for hospitalized COVID-19 patients say they will stop putting people on the drug because it’s clear it isn’t helping.  
 Results released Friday from 1,542 patients showed the drug did not reduce deaths, time in the hospital or other factors. After 28 days, 25.7% on hydroxychloroquine had died versus 23.5% given usual care -- a difference so small it could have occurred by chance. 
 The results “convincingly rule out any meaningful mortality benefit,” study leaders at the University of Oxford said in a statement.  
 The results have not been published; the statement said full details will be provided soon. No information on safety was given. 
 Hydroxychloroquine has long been used for malaria, lupus and rheumatoid arthritis but is not known to be safe or effective for preventing or treating coronavirus infection. It has been heavily promoted by President Donald Trump and can cause potentially serious side effects, including heart rhythm problems. 
 Many recent studies have suggested it does not help treat COVID-19, but they are mostly weak and observational. A very large one suggesting the drug was unsafe was retracted by the journal Lancet on Thursday amid questions about the truthfulness of the data. 
 The Oxford study  is the largest study so far to put hydroxychloroquine to a strict test.  
 More than 11,000 patients in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland were randomly assigned to get either standard of care or that plus one of these treatments: hydroxychloroquine, the HIV combo drug lopinavir-ritonavir, the antibiotic azithromycin, the steroid dexamethasone, the anti-inflammatory drug tocilizumab, or plasma from people who have recovered from COVID-19 that contains antibodies to fight the virus. 
 Independent monitors met Thursday night to review results so far and recommended ending the hydroxychloroquine part of the study because results from 80% of participants suggested continuing was futile. 
 “Although it is disappointing that this treatment has been shown to be ineffective, it does allow us to focus care and research on more promising drugs,” study leader and Oxford professor Peter Horby said in a statement. 
 The research is funded by government health agencies in the United Kingdom and private donors including the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. 
 The World Health Organization is leading a similar study testing hydroxychloroquine and several other therapies versus standard of care. More than 3,500 patients in 35 countries have enrolled.  
 WHO chief scientist Dr. Soumya Swaminathan said researchers would consider the full Oxford results once they’re available but for now will continue its own study as is. 
 ___ 
 Marilynn Marchione can be followed on Twitter: @MMarchioneAP 
 ___ 
 AP Medical Writer Maria Cheng contributed to this report.  
 ___ 
 The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content. 
WASHINGTON (AP) — Maine’s Democratic governor urged President Trump to watch his tone during his Friday visit to the state to showcase a company that makes specialized swabs for coronavirus testing.  
 The sheriff in the state’s most rural county is urging those expected to protest Trump’s visit — and those who support him — to behave themselves as demonstrations continue around the country over the death of George Floyd in police custody in Minneapolis. 
 Trump has drawn criticism for urging governors to “dominate” protesters and toss perpetrators of violence in prison and for his administration’s move earlier this week to forcibly clear out peaceful protesters near the White House so the president could walk to a nearby church to pose for photos holding up a Bible. 
 At the White House on Friday, Trump called for fair treatment from law enforcement for every American regardless of race, color or creed. At the same time, he said violence and destruction of businesses must stop.  
 “You have to dominate the streets,” Trump said, urging state governors to call in the National Guard. 
 Gov. Janet Mills this week urged the Republican president to “check the rhetoric at the door and abandon the divisive words” during his visit.  
 “I hope he will heed this call and appeal to the best in all people and lead us with courage and compassion through this difficult time,” she said Thursday. 
 During a call earlier this week with governors, Mills told the president she was concerned about “security problems for our state” if Trump visited because of his harsh remarks about handling demonstrators. The president said her remarks only made him more determined to come, adding, “she just doesn’t understand me very well.” Mills has said she will be working during Trump’s visit. 
 Trump’s first visit to Maine since taking office will take him to Guilford, population 1,500, home to Puritan Medical Products, one of only two major companies producing a special type of swab needed to ramp up coronavirus testing. The other is in Italy. 
 More than 350 workers in Guilford have been working long hours since the coronavirus pandemic began. 
 “There is pressure. There’s always not enough. There’s always not enough. You’re always working to provide the extra capacity that’s needed,” co-owner Timothy Templet told The Associated Press. “We’re doing our best to supply the needs. It’s critical that our country is taken care of.” 
 The Trump administration is providing $75.5 million through the Defense Production Act for Puritan to double production to 40 million swabs a month, and the company plans to open a second production site by July 1. 
 Trump is also scheduled to meet with members of the commercial fishing industry in Maine earlier in the day. He’s set to fly into Bangor, where a group of demonstrators has pledged to have a presence, in the afternoon. 
 “It’s not the right time for him to be coming to our state,” said Marie Follayttar, director of Mainers for Accountable Leadership, which is helping organize the demonstration. 
 Normally, Friday’s events would make for a friendly visit for Trump in a congressional district that awarded him an electoral vote in the 2016 election. 
 But it comes against the backdrop of demonstrations across Maine and the nation following Floyd’s death after being detained by police. Video showed a white police officer pressing his knee on the neck of Floyd, who was black, while Floyd was handcuffed on the ground and pleading that he couldn’t breathe. 
 In Maine, the nation’s whitest state, there were four consecutive days of demonstrations. Earlier in the week, more than 1,000 people gathered in Portland, stopping traffic, setting trash cans afire and pelting police with objects. More than 30 people have been arrested. 
 All four members of Maine’s congressional delegation, including Republican Sen. Susan Collins, have been critical of Trump’s actions this week. 
 Piscataquis County Sheriff Robert Young said he’s spoken to organizers of a planned demonstration during Trump’s visit and said their “motives and intent are good.”  
 “They want to speak for social change and are heart-broken by what they see happening to their country,” he said. 
 ___ 
 Whittle reported from Portland, Maine. AP writer David Sharp contributed to this report from Portland. 
NEW YORK (AP) — Since mid-March, when my NYC friends and I began sheltering at home, my piano has been a big source of comfort. I pound out the keys to Broadway tunes (“On My Own” from “Les Miserables”) and classical music (Rachmaninoff and Haydn). I even break into song, mostly off-key, perhaps annoying my neighbors in my Manhattan apartment building.  
 For me, sheltering at home is all too familiar. 
 Three years ago, I started chemotherapy to treat an aggressive form of breast cancer called Triple Negative. Just like now, my world suddenly shrunk. I was on lockdown for five months, afraid to venture out for fear of picking up an infection that would prevent me from getting my much-needed IV infusions.  
 This time is different. This time, the whole world has been embracing a version of what chemotherapy is like. And this time, I have my piano. 
 Back then, I bought Lysol wipes to sanitize every corner of my apartment (who knew they would become a rarity on store shelves?). I turned to online shopping so I didn’t have to venture to stores. I quit taking the subway and signed up for a ride-sharing app called Via. I worked from home while recovering from treatments. And I stopped going to work and social events, limiting my circle to a few friends and relatives. 
 During that time, I longed for a bigger place with room for my piano, which my late uncle left me and was in storage for four years. Playing piano is a source of comfort; it helps me ease the anxiety that many cancer survivors have.  
 Last year, I finally got that new place. But just months later, I was in lockdown again — this time because of a virus. 
 I was ready to hunker down all over again. I had my work schedule set. I went to my usual routine of showering and then going for walks before turning on my laptop. And I went back to sanitizing my apartment all the time.  
 Every night, I play the piano. In recent weeks, I’ve been sharing videos with friends and family on social media. Now I’m getting requests — including “Wheels on the Bus” from my great-nephew. I figure everyone could use some beautiful music, even if there are a few wrong notes. 
 Just like three years ago, I feel grateful that I can work from home, unlike so many essential workers who are on the front lines of the virus. I also feel lucky that I’m not doing chemo now; I’m empathetic about cancer patients who are in the middle of treatment.  
 During my last quarterly checkup, I saw patients getting treatments alone. They can’t bring a friend to chemotherapy and can’t have people over to their home for support as I did. On breast cancer support sites, women undergoing treatment share their worries about getting the virus on top of all their cancer fears. 
 As New York City’s economy starts to reopen, I, like many others who live here, will be slowly moving back to stores. But it’s going to take months for things to get better, and there’s that worry that there will be another surge of cases.  
 Just like the past, I will remain on alert. But as my anxiety starts to rise again, I will go to my piano and calmly sit down. I will think for a moment about what to play. Tonight, I decide on the melodic chords of Haydn’s “Concerto in D Major.” It’s the perfect antidote for me and the world right now on edge. 
 ___ 
 
Virus Diary, an occasional feature, showcases the coronavirus saga through the eyes of Associated Press journalists around the world. See previous entries here. Follow AP Retail Writer Anne D’Innocenzio on Twitter at http://twitter.com/ADInnocenzio 
NEW YORK (AP) — The latest night of protests in New York over the death of George Floyd was largely peaceful, Mayor Bill de Blasio said Friday, while promising further reform of a police department that has faced criticism for the harsh tactics used by some officers enforcing this week’s 8 p.m. curfew. 
 “There are things we need to address, there are things we need to fix in the NYPD, but the overall restraint levels were clear,” de Blasio said at his daily briefing. 
 De Blasio said the city curfew would continue through Sunday, as planned, despite some signs that the city was calming and it might no longer be necessary. “We are talking about three more nights to go, which is not a long time in the scheme of things,” he said. 
 Alluding to instances of police enforcing the curfew aggressively, de Blasio promised unspecified police reform during the remaining year and a half of his administration.  
 “You will see those results, and you’ll judge for yourself as all New Yorkers do,” he said. 
 Protesters again stayed on the streets past 8 p.m. on Thursday in defiance of the curfew, but de Blasio noted that most of the demonstrations were peaceful and said that, in contrast to the smash-and-grab and destruction that took place earlier in the week, “there were few or no attacks on property.” 
 But several videos posted to Twitter on Thursday night showed police aggressively confronting peaceful protesters — often resulting in arrest — in the Bronx and elsewhere. In some places, police watched but didn’t immediately move in, or made orderly arrests without the batons and riot gear of previous nights. 
 De Blasio said reports of police misconduct would be investigated. “In each and every case, there must be a full investigation and where discipline is warranted it must be speedy,” he said. 
 More protests were planned around the city and around the nation on Friday over the death of Floyd, a black man who died May 25 in Minneapolis after a white police officer pressed a knee into Floyd’s neck. 
 Earlier Thursday, a memorial service featuring Floyd’s brother Terrence Floyd was held at Brooklyn’s Cadman Plaza. 
 De Blasio was booed and heckled at the service, where even some speakers took shots at the mayor, criticizing his management of the NYPD and response to the coronavirus pandemic.  
 The mayor tweeted early Friday that he had spoken to NYPD Commissioner Dermot Shea after seeing a video of a delivery worker arrested. De Blasio reiterated at his briefing that “any essential worker doing their job is exempted from the curfew.” 
 De Blasio noted that journalists, like food delivery workers, are exempted from the curfew. “There is no circumstance in which a member of the news media should ever be arrested by the NYPD or any other police organization,” he said. 
 De Blasio had previous condemned police for roughing up journalists, including two from the AP who were shoved, cursed at and told to go home by officers Tuesday night. 
DÜSSELDORF, Germany (AP) — With teams living in a bubble, no fans in the arena and likely anti-racism protests on the court, German basketball will show how the NBA’s future could look. 
 The Basketball Bundesliga, or the BBL for short, returns Saturday after a three-month break caused by the coronavirus pandemic with a 10-team tournament in a closed “bubble” in Munich. 
 The plan has strong similarities to the project approved by the NBA board on Thursday for a closed 22-team format starting July 31 at the Disney campus near Orlando, Florida. 
 Players in Germany will live in what the league calls “group quarantine” at hotels closed to the public. A maximum 22 people are allowed per team, including all players and coaches. They have undergone regular testing for the coronavirus during a training phase and that will continue in Munich. Technical staff and media numbers will be strictly limited. 
 Following the killing of George Floyd, a handcuffed black man who died after a white Minneapolis police officer pressed his knee into Floyd’s neck for several minutes even after he stopped moving, it appears likely that basketball players will protest police brutality and racism during the tournament. 
 The BBL initially said it wouldn’t allow protests, with CEO Stefan Holz telling the dpa news agency that league rules forbid “political statements of any orientation,” but backed down following criticism. Holz later apologized for the “unfortunate wording” of his comments and said the league would “position itself clearly against racism” at the tournament. 
 Per Günther, a point guard for Ratiopharm Ulm, promised to pay other players’ fines if they protested and were punished for it. 
 “If you want to express yourselves and take a stand against racism in the upcoming tournament — please feel free to do so,” Günther wrote  on Twitter. 
 Soccer players in Germany have been told they won’t be punished for a range of on-field protests such as taking a knee or showing messages referencing Floyd on an undershirt or armband. 
 Former first-round draft pick Greg Monroe, who spent time with six NBA teams in nine seasons before joining Bayern Munich last year, has been active on social media in recent days expressing his frustration and anger over Floyd’s death. 
 Monroe, however, will not be at the tournament. His club said he was in New Orleans because of a family member’s illness. 
 The German league is going with a group-play style tournament, which was one of the many options that the NBA considered — and many teams were intrigued by — before settling on a 22-team plan. The German plan calls for two games a day for 10 consecutive days starting Saturday, with tip-offs four hours apart in the same arena. The 10 German teams were split in two five-team groups, and all teams will play the other four teams in their group once. 
 The German plan was to take the top 10 teams in the league standings; one of those teams, Würzburg, declined for financial concerns, so Frankfurt was added in its place. The German tournament is expected to last three weeks, while the NBA version could have some teams in Central Florida for about three months. 
 The Spanish league will restart June 17 with a single-site tournament in Valencia. The top 12 teams in the standings will play a short round-robin tournament before holding semifinals on June 28 and a final on June 30. 
 ___ 
 AP Sports Writers Tim Reynolds in Miami and Joseph Wilson in Barcelona contributed to this report. 
 ___ 
 More AP NBA: https://apnews.com/NBA and https://twitter.com/AP_Sports 
Stocks are rushing higher Friday after a much better-than-expected report on the U.S. job market gave Wall Street’s recent rally another shot of adrenaline.  
 The S&P 500 was up 2.6% after the government said that U.S. employers added 2.5 million workers to their payrolls last month. Economists were expecting them instead to slash another 8 million jobs amid the recession caused by the coronavirus and the shutdowns put in place to stem it.  
 While economists cautioned that it’s just one month of data and that many risks still loom on the long road to a full recovery, the report gives some credence to the optimism building among stock investors that the economy can climb out of its current hole relatively quickly. That hope has been a big reason for the better than 40% rally for the S&P 500 since late March. 
 The S&P 500 is now down less than 6% from its record set in February after being down nearly 34% earlier this year when recession worries were peaking. 
 “It looks like the healing process is underway in the jobs market and it looks like it’s happening sooner than expected,” said Todd Lowenstein, equity strategy executive of The Private Bank at Union Bank. “It looks like the worst is behind us.” 
 The Dow Jones Industrial Average was up 873 points, or 3.3%, at 27,155, as of 11:11 a.m. Eastern time, and the Nasdaq was up 1.9%.  
 The yield on the 10-year Treasury zoomed up to 0.92% from 0.82% late Thursday. This area of the market was much earlier than stocks to give warning about the coming economic devastation from the coronavirus outbreak. It had also been showing much more caution than stocks recently.  
 Now, the 10-year yield is close to its highest level since late March. It tends to move with investors’ expectations for the economy’s strength and inflation.  
 Stocks began their massive rally in late March after the Federal Reserve came to the rescue with promises of immense aid to keep markets running smoothly. Capitol Hill also agreed on unprecedented amounts of aid for the economy. The actions helped convince investors that the worst-case scenario of a full-blown financial crisis was off the table.  
 More recently, it’s been hopes that growth can resume for the economy as states across the country and nations around the world relax lockdown restrictions meant to slow the spread of the virus. Even as horrific and historic data continued to come in on the job market and economy, stocks largely remained resilient in their climb.  
 If their optimism proves to be right, it wouldn’t be the first time. During past recessions, stocks have historically hit their bottom and turned upward months before the economy has. That’s because investors are setting stock prices now for where they see corporate profits heading months into the future.  
 After the financial crisis, stocks hit their bottom in March 2009, for example. That was three months before the recession ended, according to the National Bureau of Economic Research. It was also seven months before the unemployment rate set a peak. 
 Analysts and economists warn, though, that a full recovery is still a long way away. The unemployment rate is still above 13.3%, which is nearly four times above where it was at the start of the year.  
 The biggest threat is likely a possible second wave of coronavirus infections, which could derail all the improvement and push governments to tighten up on lockdown orders. Increasing tensions between the United States and China are also raising worries about a resumption in the trade war between the world’s two largest economies, while some investors are worried about volatiltiy that could be created by this fall’s U.S. elections.  
 Nevertheless, investors on Friday continued their recent trend of focusing more on companies that would benefit most from a growing economy, rather than those that had been earlier winners in the weak, stay-at-home economy. 
 Smaller stocks had the market’s biggest gains, as they typically do when expectations for the economy are rising. The Russell 2000 of small-cap stocks jumped 4.9%.  
 Among the biggest stocks, energy producers, banks and industrial companies were jumping to the biggest gains. Their profits tend to be very closely tied to the strength of the economy. 
 Travel-related companies were also strong, after their stocks got pummeled early in the outbreak on worries that no one would want to fly or go onto a cruise ship for a long time. Security officers screened 391,882 people at U.S. airports on Thursday, the most since March 22. Year-over-year declines have moderated to 85% from 96% in mid-April. 
 American Airlines jumped 20.5%, tacking even more gains onto its 41.1% surge a day before when it said it would fly more of its regular U.S. schedule in a bet that fliers will return to the skies.  
 Norwegian Cruise Line rose 21%, and United Airlines jumped 16.3%. 
 Retailers and owners of shopping malls surged on hopes that people may also head back to enclosed stores. Kohl’s added 14.6%, and Simon Property Group rose 18.9%.  
 Some of the stocks that had been the steadiest earlier this year when investors were searching for stay-at-home winners, meanwhile, were lagging the market.  
 Slack Technologies slid 15.6% even though it reported better results for the latest quarter than Wall Street expected.  
 Netflix, whose subscriber rolls swelled with people hunkering down at home, was close to flat. Clorox, whose disinfecting wipes had been cleared off shelves, was down 3.7%. 
 European and Asian stock markets also rose. France’s CAC 40 jumped 3.25, Germany’s DAX returned 2.8%, and the FTSE 100 in London added 1.8%. 
 Japan’s Nikkei 225 rose 0.7%, the Hang Seng in Hong Kong rose 1.4% and South Korea’s Kospi added 1.4%. 
 Benchmark U.S. crude oil rose 4.7% to $39.17 per barrel. Brent crude, the international standard, added 4.9% to $41.95 per barrel. 
 ___ 
 AP Business Writer David Koenig contributed. 
MANAGUA, Nicaragua (AP) — As the new coronavirus spread and economies shut across Latin America, Nicaragua stayed open — schools, stores, concert halls and baseball stadiums, all operating uninterrupted on orders of a government that denied the gravity of the disease.  
 On a road trip last month, the San Fernando Beasts of the Nicaraguan Professional Baseball League played a full schedule with fans in the stands and no personal protective equipment.  
 Then, during a May 16 game in the capital, Managua, manager Norman Cardoze Sr. and coach Carlos Aranda felt sick. Cardoze’s son Norman Jr., the team’s star slugger, was so weak and achy he didn’t play. Within two days all three men were hospitalized. The Cardoze father and son, who tested positive for the virus, spent a week in the hospital. Aranda, 58, arrived there unconscious, was not tested and died. Eight other players quarantined at home. 
 For a country that has refused to acknowledge the severity of the coronavirus, the death of a well-known sports figure and infection of two others was a powerful wake-up call. 
 Nicaragua’s Sandinista government has been trying to ignore and even actively obscure the impact of COVID-19 on baseball by threatening bans from the sport for those who refused to play. But so many players refused to take the field after Aranda died May 21 that the league was forced to suspend the playoffs that same day, first until June 5 and then until June 26. The national league has said only that it suspended the playoffs “at teams’ request.” 
 Nicaragua’s government has reported more than 1,100 confirmed infections and 46 COVID-19 deaths, numbers that it now shares only weekly. But Nicaraguan activists, opposition figures and international health officials have been pressuring President Daniel Ortega to acknowledge the true toll of the disease, obscured by a lack of testing and “express burials” of people suspected to have had COVID-19. Ortega’s critics have also demanded tougher measures against the disease in line with those of other countries in the region.  
 While the government is unyielding, the cancellation of baseball in Nicaragua is adding to the pressure, offering the country’s 6.4 million people a daily reminder that the disease is present.  
 “I didn’t think the situation was that serious and I was always going to the stadium,” said Eliécer López, a 27-year-old construction worker from Masaya, the Beasts’ hometown. “Now I think the suspension (of the season) was the best thing they could have done,” said López, adding that he knows six people who have died of suspected infections in recent weeks and two of his friends are hospitalized.  
 “It’s not easy to see people suffocating and die right there,” said Cardoze Sr., a 48-year-old Hall of Fame manager. “In just my room like 10 died. And from there we listened to the hammering ... whack, whack, whack ... the coffins they were nailing shut in the other room.” 
 At the Cardoze home, Fátima Ruiz monitors her husband’s and son’s recovery. She was infected too, but her son, 29, continues to be the weakest. She cooks them iguana soup to strengthen their immune systems and fumes that the season was allowed to continue. 
 Aranda’s death “could have been avoided if they had suspended the games in time,” she said. “No one from the team was careful, they didn’t use masks, they didn’t pay attention to it. I think they were all too trusting because they saw that games kept being played as if there was nothing.” 
 Photos from the final game in Bonanza show fans in the stands and no one wearing masks. At the May 17 doubleheader that the Cardozes and Aranda missed, several players wore masks. Earlier in the epidemic, players who had said they wanted to wear masks or stop playing were threatened with bans from the game. Attendance dwindled in Managua, but in more far-flung parts of the country fans still thronged to the stadiums. 
 Coach Aranda’s father, Carlos Aranda Salazar, 77, said his son had been told to keep coaching.  
 “His sister told me she had advised him to stop going to games, but he answered that he had to go, because they had warned him that if he didn’t show up he’d lose his salary and he’d be banned from baseball for two years,” said the elder Aranda. 
 A nongovernmental effort to track the epidemic called Citizen Observatory counted nearly 1,000 deaths due to pneumonia or suspected COVID-19 through May 23 and some 4,200 infections. 
 The Pan-American Health Organization continues to urge the government to immediately implement social distancing measures to slow the virus’ spread and says that the government recently shared information for the first time allowing it to conclude there is local spread in the country. 
 That is not something the government has said publicly, but the number of sick and the “express burials” of those who perish have become more difficult to hide. 
 “He was my coach and I saw him die,” Cardoze Sr. said of Aranda. “I don’t desire that for anyone.” 
 “They say that they don’t die from the virus, but every once in awhile we saw the sick pass on stretchers, suffocating,” he said. “And then coffins and more coffins went by. I watched the bodies lying there when they wrapped them in plastic, they tied them with knots at their feet and head and sealed the caskets with nails. What else could it be?” 
 Aranda’s father said he has no doubt his son died of COVID-19, saying he was healthy and “didn’t suffer from anything.” But when he returned from that road trip, Aranda complained of pains in his body and an exhaustion that made it difficult to breathe. 
 “The hospital called us before dawn and told us my uncle Carlos had died and that we had to bury him immediately,” said the coach’s nephew, Tommy Aranda. “We went then to buy the casket and we had to go ourselves to dig the grave.” 
 “We didn’t get anything more than gloves because the hospital was pressuring us to get him out of there fast,” Tommy Aranda said. “We were digging the grave until 5 a.m.” 
 But when they got to the hospital there was a problem.  
 “They asked for my uncle’s identification and when they saw the photo they told us they had made a mistake, that they had given us another body ... they took the casket back into the hospital and returned it to us all poorly nailed shut, cracked, looking so sad,” Tommy Aranda said. 
 Cardoze Sr. and Aranda’s father agree that there’s no way teams should return to the field until the epidemic is over. 
 “We’re like the circus clowns, while a ton of people without heart or conscience are risking the lives of the players and the fans,” Carlos Aranda Sr. said. 
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) — Modified school days, more outdoor class time, mask-wearing and health screenings for students and staff are among the steps Indiana schools should consider before reopening from their coronavirus closures under recommendations released Friday by the state Department of Education. 
 All schools across the state closed in mid-March and shifted largely to online coursework. The guidelines are not mandatory, however, and the state is leaving the ultimate decision on resuming classes, sports and other activities to local schools. 
 Specific social distancing recommendations outlined in the report include scheduling groups of students to attend in-person school on alternate days or half days to minimize the number of students in the building. The education department also suggests keeping the same students and staff members together as much as possible and increasing space between student desks. 
 “Providing students with a quality education is critical and therefore it is crucial we offer considerations focused on getting students back in the classroom in a safe manner,” state schools Superintendent Jennifer McCormick said in a statement. 
 __ 
 Casey Smith is a corps member for the Associated Press/Report for America Statehouse News Initiative. Report for America is a nonprofit national service program that places journalists in local newsrooms to report on undercovered issues. 
OMAHA, Neb. (AP) — More employees in Nebraska’s prison system have tested positive for COVID-19, as state health figures show the overall number of cases in the state surpassing 15,000.  
 A news release Friday from the Nebraska Department of Correctional Services said two more state prisons employees tested positive this week for the virus, bringing the systemwide total to 18.  
 One of the two new cases is a staff member at the state prison at Tecumseh. The second was attending a staff training academy. The department said it will notify others at both locations about the new cases. Department officials also are directing anyone who may have had close contact with the infected staff members to self-quarantine until they are cleared by a medical provider. 
 Nebraska’s online coronavirus tracking portal shows an additional 251 new cases of the virus reported Thursday, bringing the state’s total to 15,117. State numbers show 186 total deaths from the virus. Nearly 115,000 people have been tested, and hospital capacity was relatively stable, with 42% of hospital beds, 44% of intensive care unit beds and 75% of ventilators available for use. 
 For some infected people, especially older adults and people with existing health problems, the virus can cause severe illness or death. But for most people, it causes mild or moderate symptoms, such as fever and cough, that clear up in two to three weeks. 
BANGKOK (AP) — Factories and stores are reopening, economies are reawakening – but many jobs just aren’t coming back. 
 That’s the harsh truth facing workers laid off around the world, from restaurants in Thailand to car factories in France, whose livelihoods fell victim to a virus-driven recession that’s accelerating decline in struggling industries and upheaval across the global workforce. 
 New U.S. figures released on Friday showed a surprise drop in joblessness as some of those who were temporarily laid off returned to work. But it’s only a dent in the recent months’ surge of unemployment, which remains near Depression-era levels. In a pattern repeated across the world, high unemployment means less money spent in surviving stores, restaurants and travel businesses, with repercussions across economies rich and poor. 
 “My boss feared that since we come from Kibera (an impoverished slum), we might infect them with COVID-19, and so he let us go,” said Margaret Awino, a cleaning worker in a Nairobi charity. “I don’t know how I can go on.” 
 As the virus and now protests across the U.S. have shed new light on economic inequalities, some experts say it’s time to rethink work, wages and health benefits altogether, especially as automation escalates and traditional trades vanish. 
 THAI CHEF 
 When Wannapa Kotabin got a job as an assistant chef in the kitchen of one of Bangkok’s longest-established Italian restaurants, she thought her career was set. 
 But five years on, she’s in line with more than 100 other jobless Thais outside an unemployment office. 
 The government ordered all restaurants closed in March to combat the coronavirus, and 38-year-old Wannapa has been spending her savings on food and shelter. 
 When restaurants were allowed to re-open in May, Wannapa’s restaurant told staff its closure was permanent. 
 “I never thought this would happen,” she said. “It’s like my heart got broken twice.” 
 Around the world, new virus safety rules mean restaurants and stores can’t hold as many people as they used to, so they can’t afford as much staff. Many can’t afford to reopen at all. 
 Bangkok’s restaurants are firing, not hiring, she said. 
 “I will have to go on and keep fighting,” she declared. “If there is any job that I can do, I will do it.” 
 Wannapa’s unemployment benefit can only tide her over for so long. She said if she can’t find work, she’ll have to return to her family’s rubber plantation to start life all over again. 
 ISRAELI PROGRAMMER 
 When the coronavirus first broke out, Israeli software developer Itamar Lev was told to work from home. Then the online advertising company he worked for slashed his salary 20%. Finally, just as restrictions started to ease, he was fired. 
 Lev, 44, is among hundreds of thousands of Israelis out of a job as a result of the pandemic, more than 25% of the workforce. 
 “It was sudden. I wasn’t ready for it,” he said. 
 Tied to the American market, Lev’s company’s advertising revenue dried up and they had to make cutbacks. Lev said he was treated respectfully, and sees himself as simply a victim of the times.  
 He is already preparing for interviews and confident he will find a new position soon. In a country versed in disruptions from wars and security threats, he said Israelis have built up a certain resilience to upheaval. 
 Still, he said this time feels different. His wife, a self-employed dance instructor, has also seen her income temporarily evaporate, forcing the couple to dig into their savings. 
 “The ‘comeback’ is going to take longer,” said Lev, father of a 5-year-old girl. “It’s a difficult period. We’re just going to have to take a deep breath and get through it.” 
 KENYAN CLEANER 
 Perhaps hardest-hit by virus job losses are low-paid service workers like 54-year-old Awino, who lost her job after 15 years as a cleaner at one of Mother Teresa’s charities in Nairobi. 
 Awino shares a shack with her four daughters, including one who has epilepsy and requires costly medical care, and they share a communal toilet nearby. She hasn’t seen her husband in nine years. 
 Without her regular $150 monthly salary, she now buys raw chicken and fries it on the streets for sale. 
 “Ever since I was fired because of COVID-19, I put all my efforts into my business,” she said. 
 Some days she earns more than what she was making at her old job, but it’s hard work, and unpredictable. City council and health inspectors are known to raid informal street vendors, who are often arrested and have their goods confiscated.  
 Awino has no choice but to take the risk, and she’s not alone: Hundreds of thousands of Kenyans have also lost their jobs because of the pandemic. 
 CLOUDY SKIES 
 On a global scale, the industry perhaps most vulnerable is aviation. 
 Germany’s Lufthansa is losing a million euros an hour, and its CEO estimates that when the pandemic is over it will need 10,000 fewer workers than it does now. Emirates President Tim Clark signaled it could take the Dubai-based airline four years to return to its full network of routes. 
 The ripple effect on jobs in tourism and hospitality sectors is massive.  
 Countries like the United Arab Emirates are home to millions of foreigners who far outnumber the local population – many of whom have lost their jobs. Their families in countries like India, Pakistan, Nepal and the Philippines rely on their monthly remittances for survival. 
 Egyptian hotel chef Ramadan el-Sayed is among thousands sent home in March as the pandemic began to decimate Dubai’s tourism industry. He returned to his wife and three kids in the city of Sohag, about 500 kilometers (310 miles) south of Cairo. He has not been paid since April. 
 “There’s no work here at all,” he said. “Even tourism here is operating at 25% so who’s going to hire here?” 
 He sits idle, relying on his brother and father for support. He is hopeful the Marriott hotel where he worked will bring him back at the end of the summer when they plan to re-open.  
 “We are waiting, God willing,” el-Sayed said.  
 LONG ROAD AHEAD 
 So why aren’t all the jobs coming back, if economies are reopening? 
 Some companies that came into the recession in bad shape can no longer put off tough decisions. Meanwhile, even though reopened cities are filling anew with shoppers and commuters, many consumers remain wary about returning to old habits for fear of the virus. 
 “Some firms that were healthy before governments imposed shutdowns will go bankrupt, and it could take a long time for them to be replaced by new businesses,” Capital Economics said in a research note. “Other firms will delay or cancel investment.” 
 It estimates that a third of U.S. workers made jobless by the pandemic won’t find work within six months. And some European workers on generous government-subsidized furlough programs could get laid off when they expire, as companies like French carmaker Renault and plane maker Airbus face up to a bleaker future. 
 Holger Schmieding, economist at Berenberg Economics, warned: “The COVID-19 pandemic and the ensuing mega-recession may shape political debates and choices for a long time.” 
 ___ 
 Charlton reported from Paris. Aya Batrawy in Dubai, Khaled Kazziha in Nairobi, Aron Heller in Kfar Saba, Israel, David Biller in Rio de Janeiro and Dave McHugh in Frankfurt contributed. 
VALLEY STREAM, N.Y. (AP) — One was a nurse, another a retiree. Others had recently lost jobs with an insurance company and a country club.  
 On a humid day last week, in the parking lot of this Long Island town’s largest park, they had a common bond. Each was making their first visit to a food bank to help cope with hardships arising from the coronavirus outbreak. 
 “I’m hungry. That’s why I’m here,” said Marcia Duckley, a mother of four children ages 4 through 17 who lost her hotel job this year. “It never crossed my mind before that I’d be doing this.” 
 Duckley, who came to the United States 30 years ago from Jamaica, said she has recently been feeding her children meals of flour dumplings with butter – plus an occasional treat of water flavored with sugar. 
 “They say, ‘Mom, when are you going back to work?’” she said through an open window as she edged her car slowly forward. 
 The scene in Valley Stream, a community of 37,000 in the Nassau County suburbs just east of New York City, has been replicated nationwide during a 10-week stretch in which 42 million Americans have applied for unemployment benefits. Long lines of cars, sometimes numbering in the thousands, backed up while their occupants wait — sometimes for hours — for the chance to take home a free batch of food. 
 Island Harvest, one of the major food banks on Long Island, organized the food distribution in Valley Stream, one of many it has conducted throughout the area. 
 Randi Shubin Dresner, Island Harvest’s CEO, said the food bank has distributed 1.2 million more meals so far this year than during the same period last year. 
 In Valley Stream, she said, 1,124 boxes of food were distributed by volunteers, mostly to motorists, but also to several hundred people who came on foot. Each box contained roughly 25 pounds of milk, potatoes, apples, cheese and other produce. 
 “There are a lot of people who’ve never asked for food before -- some used to contribute to us,” she said. “It’s a very humbling experience for them.” 
 Dresner noted that some cars in the long line were new, upscale models — and that it would wrong to second-guess their occupants’ needs. 
 “Maybe a few weeks ago they had a great job,” she said. “Then the world is taken from underneath them and they have no income -- they’re struggling to pay the mortgage and the car loan.” 
 “It’s not up to us to judge the type of car that comes though the line, or the way people are dressed,” she added. “It’s up to us to respect them.” 
 The first woman waiting in the pedestrian line was indeed well dressed. She asked to be identified only as Maria G. and said she had been furloughed during the pandemic by the insurance company where she’d been an underwriter for 20 years.  
 She is a single mom living with four sons ages 15 to 20 who are “eating me out of house and home,” she said. 
 “I’ve never been through something like this,” she said. “I’ve seen it in Third World countries, and now it’s hit Valley Stream.” 
 Not far behind her was retiree Sheila Barron, 69, who said she was making her first trip to a food bank because of increasing wariness of grocery stores. They’re too crowded, she said, and often are out of items she needs.  
 The pandemic restrictions have been tough for her. She’s missed the opportunity to go to church and is asked to do medical appointments via telemedicine. 
 Barron was soon followed by Tina Grace, 29, walking alongside her bicycle, who said she was recently laid off by the country club where she worked on event planning. She’s getting unemployment compensation but worries it won’t last. 
 “I’m just taking it day by day,” she said. “It’s hard. It sucks. Everyone is in a tough situation right now.” 
 Unlike many others in line, Mary Blaize is still employed — she’s a nurse in New York City. The stress of her job is now compounded by her husband’s recent layoff, she said, making it harder to pay their mortgage and utility bills. 
 But she was upbeat about her first visit to a food bank. 
 “It feels good to know that people actually care,” she said. 
 In neighboring Connecticut, perennially ranked as one of the richest states, demand on food banks has also been intense. 
 Each weekday outside a football stadium in East Hartford, 1,000 to 2,500 cars roll through a distribution site run by the regional food bank, Foodshare. Drivers have their trunks open as volunteers load boxes of fruits and vegetables, bread, milk and even toys. 
 Among those making use of the site was Natalie Townsend, 32, a single mother from Hartford who lost her job at a call center in April. She said she has fallen two months behind on her rent, is still waiting for unemployment benefits and worries about how to care for her 9-year-old daughter. 
 “It definitely gets me down because I like to pay my bills on time,” she said. “I don’t want to be on the streets.” 
 Also at the site were Yanet Belossantos and her husband, Alex Cepeda, who lost their jobs in March, she as a medical assistant, he as a chef. The Dominican Republic immigrants live in Hartford with her mother, who has Alzheimer’s disease. 
 They have been surviving on unemployment benefits but are behind in their bills. 
 “We can’t go grocery shopping because we don’t have the money,” Belossantos said. “This is really helping us.” 
 In the mostly affluent southwest corner of Connecticut, Kate Lombardo says demand is up by about 40% in recent weeks for the Stamford-based Food Bank of Lower Fairfield County, of which she is executive director. 
 Lombardo says her own family in Brooklyn faced sudden hardship in the 1960s, including losing their house, after her father died and her mother had to care for five children. She said that experience deepens her empathy with people now facing their first-ever need for food assistance. 
 “Suddenly you feel like you’ve been transported to a different country,” Lombardo said. “You never used these resources before. You don’t know how to find them. It’s like Dorothy trying to find the Wizard of Oz.” 
 Lifelong Stamford resident Juledah Wilson -- in addition to her job as a paraeducator in the public school system – has for many years helped run one of the neighborhood food pantries supplied by the food bank. 
 But Wilson has been out of work since March; so are the two adult children who live with her, along with two grandchildren. Wilson recently designated herself and her family as recipients of aid from that very pantry in order to obtain meat, bread and fresh vegetables.  
 “I grew up with a lot of brothers and sisters,” she said. “I learned how to make do with what you have -- try to survive.” 
 Throughout her community, anxiety is high as food supplies grow tighter. 
 “A lot of people are very nervous,” Wilson said. “We don’t know where we’re headed. It’s kind of scary.” 
 ___ 
 Associated Press writer Dave Collins in East Hartford and AP video journalist Robert Bumsted in Valley Stream contributed to this report. 
BRUSSELS (AP) — Europe could have its free travel zone up and running again by the end of this month, but travelers from further afield will not be allowed in before July, a European Union commissioner said Friday after talks among the bloc’s interior ministers. 
 Panicked by Italy’s coronavirus outbreak in February, countries in the 26-nation Schengen travel zone — where people and goods move freely without border checks — imposed border restrictions without consulting their neighbors to try to keep the disease out. The moves caused massive border traffic jams and blocked medical equipment. 
 Free movement is a jewel in Europe’s crown that helps its businesses flourish and many European officials feared that the very future of the Schengen area was under threat from coronavirus travel restrictions. These added to border pressures already caused by the arrival in Europe of well over 1 million migrants in 2015. 
 “I personally believe that we will return to a full functioning of the Schengen area and freedom of movement of citizens no later than the end of the month of June,” European Union Home Affairs Commissioner Ylva Johansson said Friday after the video-conference meeting.  
 All but essential travel into Europe from the outside is restricted until June 15, but many ministers suggested Friday that they want this deadline extended until early July. 
 The meeting came as the Czech Republic was easing restrictions with some of its neighbors; Austria, Germany and Hungary. Also Friday, Switzerland said it plans to lift restrictions on travel from EU nations and Britain on June 15. Switzerland is not an EU member but is part of the Schengen travel zone. 
 Johansson said Europe’s Centre for Disease Prevention and Control believes that confinement, social distancing and other health measures are working. More than 175,000 people have died in Europe’s coronavirus outbreak, according to a tally by Johns Hopkins University, mostly in Britain, Italy, France and Spain. 
 “Physical distancing and other health-related measures are still needed, of course. But health authorities are clear that there is no longer a clear justification for either travel restrictions or border measures within the EU Schengen area,” Johansson said. 
 German Interior Minister Horst Seehofer, whose country plans to lift its remaining border checks on June 15 like many other EU countries, said “the internal border controls will be over in all of Europe at the end of June.” 
 The news should come as a relief to millions of Europeans still trying to work out their summer vacation plans — which begin for many in July once the school year is over — and who are anxious to know whether they will be allowed to head to the continent’s beaches or mountains. 
 It’s also good news for European countries whose economies have been ravaged by the spread of COVID-19 and are hoping for a much-needed boost from their decimated tourism industries.  
 But the perception that Italy is still dangerous is weighing heavily on its tourism sector, which along with related industries accounts for 13% of Italy’s gross domestic product. 
 In an apparent reference to Austria and Greece, which have not fully opened to Italian tourists, Italian Foreign Minister Luigi Di Maio denounced the “ad hoc” measures put in place by some countries as “a violation of the European spirit that has always distinguished us.” 
 Di Maio said Rome would provide regular infection data to Austria “so they can have certainty about Italy’s numbers.” Last week, he said Italy refused to be treated as a leper after Greece announced a list of 29 countries whose citizens could visit without testing or quarantine requirements, but excluded Italians, Britons and residents of other hard-hit countries. 
 Germany’s Seehofer said most of the EU’s interior ministers want to extend the current entry ban on outside travelers “by 14 days until July 1.”  
 Visitors from the United States, Russia or Brazil, for example, would only be allowed back into Europe on based on how those nations have brought the spread of the virus under control, he said. Those three nations account for 44% of the world’s confirmed infections and nearly 38% of the world’s confirmed coronavirus deaths, according to Johns Hopkins. 
 Worldwide, 6.6 million people have been confirmed infected by the virus and over 391,000 have died, according to Johns Hopkins, but experts say the tally understates the true toll of the pandemic due to limited testing, missed mild cases and deliberate government undercounts. 
 ___ 
 Janicek reported from Prague. Geir Moulson in Berlin and Nicole Winfield in Rome contributed to this report. 
 ___ 
 Follow AP pandemic coverage at http://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak  and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak 
WASHINGTON (AP) — U.S. unemployment dropped unexpectedly in May to 13.3% as reopened businesses began recalling millions of workers faster than economists had predicted, triggering a rally Friday on Wall Street and giving President Donald Trump something to boast about amid his reelection bid. The jobless rate is still on par with what the nation witnessed during the Great Depression. And for the second straight month, the Labor Department acknowledged making errors in counting the unemployed during the coronavirus outbreak, saying the real figure is even worse than the numbers indicate.  Still, after weeks of dire predictions by economists that unemployment in May could hit 20% or more, the news that the economy added a surprising 2.5 million jobs last month was seen as evidence that the collapse may have bottomed out in April at 14.7% and that a recovery is well underway as states loosen their lockdowns and let stores, restaurants, gyms and other businesses reopen. “We are witnessing the easiest phase of growth as people come off temporary layoffs and come back to their employers,” said Harvard University economist Jason Furman, who led the White House Council of Economic Advisers during the Obama presidency. “And once employers are done recalling people, the much harder, longer work of recovery will have to proceed.” Most economists had expected rehiring to kick in as shutdowns were increasingly lifted and people gradually resumed shopping and eating out. “The surprising thing here is the timing and that it happened as quickly as it did,” said Adam Kamins, senior regional economist at Moody’s Analytics. On Wall Street, the S&P 500 was up 2.6% around midday on the news. An exultant Trump seized on the report as evidence that the economy is going to come back from the coronavirus crisis like a “rocket ship.” “This shows that what we’ve been doing is right,” said the president, who has pushed governors aggressively to reopen their economies amid warnings from public health officials that the country is risking a second wave of infections on top of the one that has killed over 100,000 Americans. Still, the job market is in such a deep hole that it could take years to dig out, economists say. Most are forecasting unemployment in the high single-digits or low double-digits by the end of this year. Economists had expected the government to report that employers shed 8.5 million more jobs in May on top of the 21.4 million lost in March and April. Instead, nearly all industries added jobs, a sharp reversal from April, when almost all cut them. Hotels and restaurants added 1.2 million jobs in May, after shedding 7.5 million. Retailers gained 368,000, after losing nearly 2.3 million in the previous month. Construction companies added 464,000 after cutting 995,000. The crisis has also exposed wide disparities: While the unemployment rate for white Americans was 12.4% May, it was 17.6% for Hispanics and 16.8% for African-Americans. Economists warn that until most Americans are confident they can shop, travel, eat out and fully return to their other spending habits without fear of contracting the virus, the economy is likely to remain sluggish. Erica Groshen, a labor economist at Cornell University and a former commissioner of the Labor Department’s Bureau of Labor Statistics, said hiring could ramp up relatively quickly in the coming months and reduce unemployment to low double-digits by year’s end.  “Then my inclination is that it will be a long, slow slog,” she said.  Gwyneth Duesbery, 22, returned this week to her job as a restaurant hostess in Grand Rapids, Michigan, as Bowdie’s Chop House prepares to reopen with tables 6 feet apart and seating capacity reduced to about one-quarter. “I am concerned that it will expose me to potential diseases, and expose others, no matter the precautions that we take,” she said. “It’s kind of uncharted waters.”  Friday’s report made it clear the government continues to struggle with how it classifies millions of workers on temporary layoff. The Labor Department admitted that government household survey-takers mistakenly counted about 4.9 million temporarily laid-off people as employed. The government doesn’t correct its survey results for fear of the appearance of political manipulation. Had the mistake been corrected, the unemployment rate would have risen to 16.1% in May, while corrected April figure would have been more than than 19%, rather than 14.7%. Taken together, the two corrected numbers show that the overall trend still holds: Unemployment is going down. A few businesses are reporting signs of progress even in hard-hit industries. American Airlines, for example, said this week that it will fly 55% of its U.S. routes in July, up from just 20% in May.  And the Cheesecake Factory said one-quarter of its nearly 300 restaurants have reopened, though with limited capacity. Sales are at nearly 75% of the levels reached a year ago, the company said.  ___ AP Economics Writer Josh Boak contributed to this report.NEW DELHI (AP) — India’s Health Ministry on Friday reported another record spike in new coronavirus cases — more than 9,800 in 24 hours. 
 India now has 226,770 confirmed cases with 6,348 deaths, 273 of them in the past 24 hours, the ministry said. It says the overall rate of recovery for coronavirus patients is around 48%. 
 There has been a surge in infections in rural areas following the return of hundreds of thousands of migrant workers who left cities and towns after losing their jobs due to a nationwide lockdown. 
 The more than 2-month-old lockdown is now largely being enforced only in high-risk areas, known as containment zones. 
 The government has partially restored train service and domestic flights and allowed the reopening of shops and manufacturing. 
 E-commerce companies have started to deliver goods, including those considered nonessential, to places outside containment zones. 
 Metro service and schools and colleges, however, remain shuttered nationwide. 
 Prime Minister Narendra Modi, meanwhile, announced India was contributing $15 million to an international vaccine alliance. 
 In other developments in the Asia-Pacific region: 
 AUSTRALIAN COURT RULES AGAINST PROTEST: An Australian court has sided with police in ruling Friday that a Black Lives Matter protest planned for Sydney poses too much risk of spreading the coronavirus. Thousands of people were expected to rally in Australia’s largest city on Saturday to honor George Floyd, who was killed by U.S. police, and to protest against indigenous Aboriginal deaths in custody. But the New South Wales state Supreme Court ruled that the rally was not an authorized public assembly. The judge said “we’re talking about a situation of a health crisis.” 
 — DUTERTE ANGERED BY AID DELAYS: President Rodrigo Duterte expressed relief that “Filipinos are really law-abiding” and that his country was not going through riots like America, which would make coronavirus quarantine enforcement formidable. Duterte made the remarks during a televised meeting Thursday night with key Cabinet officials, where he used expletives to express disgust over a range of quarantine problems. He particularly fumed over the delay in the delivery of promised financial help to the families of 32 health workers who died of COVID-19. Duterte wondered what was causing the problem, saying the Philippines wasn’t like the U.S., where “there is a riot going all over and it seems to be that there is no end in sight.” Duterte renewed his threat to jail officials who steal cash aid meant for the poor. 
 — SOUTH KOREA CASES CLIMB: South Korea on Friday reported 39 new cases of the coronavirus as infections continued to spike after rigid social distancing rules were relaxed. The Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said 34 of the new cases were reported in the Seoul metropolitan area, where about half of South Korea’s 51 million people live. The rise in infections linked to Seoul nightclubs and a large e-commerce warehouse is still far below the hundreds of new cases that were reported daily in late February and early March.  
 — FIJI SAYS IT’S VIRUS FREE: Fiji has declared itself free of the coronavirus -- at least for now -- after all 18 people who tested positive recovered. Prime Minister Frank Bainimarama said Friday that the South Pacific island nation has just cleared the last of its active patients. “It’s now been 45 days since we recorded our last case. With no deaths, our recovery rate is 100%,” Bainimarama wrote on Twitter. “Answered prayers, hard work, and affirmation of science!” Fiji, which has a population of 900,000, instituted a lockdown in certain areas in April and imposed ongoing border restrictions.  
 — JAKARTA MOSQUES REOPEN: Muslims in Indonesia’s capital held their first communal Friday prayers as mosques closed by the coronavirus outbreak for nine weeks were allowed to start reopening as part of plans to relax restrictions. Jakarta Gov. Anies Baswedan allowed mosques and other worship facilities to open at half capacity. Fever checks, masks and social distancing were in place. Worshipers were asked to bring their own prayer rugs and avoid shaking hands with others. The government is deploying 340,000 security personnel to enforce health rules in an effort to get the country back to normal by the end of July amid growing economic pressure. 
 — FIVE NEW CASES IN CHINA: China on Friday reported five new confirmed coronavirus cases, all of them brought by Chinese citizens from outside the country. Despite criticism of its initial handling of the outbreak which was first detected in Wuhan last year and allegations it withheld crucial information, China has repeatedly defended its record. Foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said Thursday that Beijing was committed to providing support to the World Health Organization, GAVI Alliance and other international organizations to ensure that vaccines are accessible and affordable in developing countries. The GAVI Alliance seeks to provide children in the world’s poorest countries with improved access to new and underused vaccines. Also Thursday, Premier Li Keqiang urged members of an anti-virus task force to redouble efforts to develop a vaccine and effective medications for COVID-19. 
 — NEW MALAYSIAN STIMULUS: Malaysia announced a 35 billion ringgit ($8.2 billion) stimulus package to bolster short-term economic recovery as it emerges from a virus lockdown. The package, which is in addition to a $60 billion stimulus announced earlier, centers on increasing employment, attracting foreign investment and revitalizing key sectors of the economy. Prime Minister Muhyiddin Yassin said Friday it includes a 10 billion ringgit ($2.3 billion) injection into the economy in the form of wage subsidies, training programs and support for small and medium-size enterprises. Various tax breaks and rebates will help the manufacturing, property, auto, palm oil, airline and tourism sectors. He said this includes a zero tax rate for up to 15 years for foreigners investing more than 500 million ringgit ($117 million) in manufacturing and fixed property. Malaysia, which has nearly 8,300 confirmed infections and 116 deaths, eased virus restrictions last month and most economic sectors have reopened. 
 ___ 
 Follow AP news coverage of the pandemic at http://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak 
WASHINGTON (AP) — Unemployment dips to 13.3% as US added 2.5 million jobs in May as impact from virus eases. 
CANBERRA, Australia (AP) — Thousands gathered in Canberra, Australia’s capital, on Friday to protest racial inequality in reaction to George Floyd’s death in the United States, while a court effectively banned a larger rally planned for Sydney because of the coronavirus threat. 
 The Canberra rally by about 2,000 people came ahead of larger rallies planned in Australia’s most populous cities on Saturday, with authorities concerned about maintaining social distancing. 
 Police on Friday successfully applied to the New South Wales state Supreme Court to declare that the Stop All Black Deaths in Custody rally planned for Sydney on Saturday was not an authorized public assembly. 
 The rally was expected to attract 5,000 people to the Sydney Town Hall. Police Commissioner Mick Fuller said the court ruling means “all of the police powers available to us can be used” to prevent the protest. 
 A state government and police also urged demonstrators not to attend a rally in Melbourne, Australia’s second largest city, because of the coronavirus risk. 
 In Canberra, Matilda House, an elder of the Ngambri-Ngunnawal family group who are the traditional owners of the Canberra region, said, “Australians have to understand that what’s been going on the United States has been happening here for a long time.” 
 Australia needs to move beyond a colonial attitude “that blacks are only here to be walked on, trodden on and murdered,” House said in the first speech at the rally. 
 A demonstrator who interrupted House, arguing that the rally’s focus should be on “what’s happening in the United States” rather than Australia’s colonial history, was shouted down in a heated confrontation with several protesters. The demonstrator eventually followed the crowd’s advice to leave. 
 The crowd was majority white in a majority white city. Organizers handed out masks and hand sanitizer. Most protesters attempted to keep the recommended 1.5 meters (5 feet) of social distancing until the speeches began and people drew closer. Public gatherings are limited to 20 people in Canberra, but police did not intervene. 
 One of the protesters, Wendy Brookman, a teacher and member of the Butchulla indigenous people, said Australia should not accept more than 430 indigenous Australians dying in police custody or prison in the past three decades. 
 “We’re not here to jump on the bandwagon of what’s happened in the United States,” Brookman said. “We’re here to voice what’s happening to our indigenous people.” 
 One of the protesters’ signs read “I can’t breathe,” a parallel between Floyd’s death in Minnesota on May 25 and the Australian indigenous experience. 
 They were among the last words of both Floyd and Aboriginal man David Dungay, who died in a prison hospital in 2015 while being restrained by five guards. 
 Dungay’s mother, Leetona Dungay, said she planned to march in Sydney on Saturday regardless of the Supreme Court ruling. 
 “The correctional services officers and the doctors and nurses put my son under the ground, and I’m going to walk on it for my march,” she said, her voice rising to a yell. “Just like George Floyd.” 
 “We’re not going to stop. We’re going to march. We don’t care what any act of law tells us what to do. Coz those acts of laws are killing us,” she added. 
 Nigerian-born Oluwatobi Odusote, 16, and her school friends Jan Usha, 17, and Rhyse Morgan, 16, held a red, black and yellow indigenous flag during the protest. 
 “I thought that if America is taking a stand to save black lives, then we should help save the Aboriginal lives here in Australia, too,” Odusote said. 
 Usha, who is of Nigerian and Asian background, described the rally as “great” because Australia rarely addresses racism through protest. 
 Morgan, who is of European heritage, said, “if we’re all not equal, then no one benefits.” 
 Indigenous Australians are 2% of the Australian adult population but 27% of the prison population.  
 Australia’s indigenous people are the most disadvantaged ethnic minority in Australia. They have higher-than-average rates of infant mortality and poor health, as well as shorter life expectancy and lower levels of education and employment than other Australians. 
SYDNEY (AP) — An Australian court sided with police in ruling Friday that a Black Lives Matter protest planned for Sydney poses too much risk for spreading the coronavirus and cannot be held. 
 Thousands of people were expected to rally in Australia’s largest city on Saturday afternoon to honor George Floyd and to protest against the deaths of indigenous Australians in custody. 
 But New South Wales state Supreme Court Justice Des Fagan ruled the rally was not an authorized public assembly. Fagan said he understood the rally was designed to coincide with similar events in other countries. 
 “I don’t diminish the importance of the issues and no one would deny them in normal circumstances,” he said. “No one denies them that but we’re talking about a situation of a health crisis.” 
 In Sydney, outdoor gatherings are restricted to 10 people, while up to 50 people can go to funerals, places of worship, restaurants, pubs and cafes. 
 State Premier Gladys Berejiklian said organizers initially proposed a protest far smaller rally. She said protesters could not guarantee social distancing protocols would be followed. 
 “All of us have given up so much and worked so hard to make sure we get on top of the virus,” Berejiklian told reporters. 
 Earlier Friday, demonstrators in the capital reminded the country that racial inequality is not a U.S. issue alone.  
 Organizers of the Canberra rally that attracted about 2,000 demonstrators handed out masks and hand sanitizer. Most protesters kept a recommended social distance but drew closer to hear speeches. Public gatherings are limited to 20 in Canberra, but police did not intervene. 
 School teacher Wendy Brookman, a member of the Butchulla indigenous people, said Australia should not accept that more than 430 indigenous Australians have died in police custody or prison in the past three decades. 
 “We’re not here to jump on the bandwagon of what’s happened in the United States,” Brookman said. “We’re here to voice what’s happening to our indigenous people.” 
 One of the protesters’ signs read “I can’t breathe” and drew a parallel between Floyd’s death in the U.S. on May 25 and the Australian indigenous experience. Those words were among the last spoken by Floyd and an indigenous Australian, David Dungay, who died in a prison hospital in 2015 while being restrained by five guards. 
 In South Korea, dozens gathered in front of the U.S. Embassy to condemn what they described as police brutality toward protesters in the U.S. They called for South Korea’s government to speak against the “racial discrimination and state violence” of its ally and pushed for an anti-discrimination law to improve the lives of migrant workers, undocumented foreigners and other minorities.  
 “As the U.S. civil society empowered and stood in solidarity with Korean pro-democracy activists in the past, we will now stand in solidarity with citizens in the United States,” said activist Lee Sang-hyun, referring to South Koreans’ bloody struggles against military dictatorships that ruled the country until the late 1980s. 
 Holding a banner that read “Justice for Floyd,” most of the protesters wore black and some brought flowers in honor of Floyd, who died after a white Minneapolis police officer pressed his neck with a knee for several minutes while he pleaded for air. 
 Larger marches are planned in Seoul on Saturday to protest Floyd’s death. 
WASHINGTON (AP) — Ten long weeks after a massive coronavirus outbreak sidelined one of the Navy’s signature warships, the U.S.S. Theodore Roosevelt has returned to sea and is conducting military operations in the Pacific region. 
 Lining the flight deck in their dress white uniforms, sailors wearing white face masks stood a virus-safe 10 feet (3 meters) apart in a final, formal thank you as the ship sailed out of port in Guam on Thursday and headed into the Philippine Sea. 
 “We manned the rail, which we don’t normally do. There was a lot of symbolism in that,” Navy Capt. Carlos Sardiello told The Associated Press in an interview from the ship Thursday. “They’re excited. They’re fired up to be back at sea doing the mission.” 
 The Roosevelt pulled into Guam on March 27, with a rapidly escalating number of sailors testing positive for the virus. Over time, more than 1,000 were infected with COVID-19, setting off a lengthy and systematic process to move about 4,000 sailors ashore for quarantine and treatment, while about 800 remained aboard to protect and run the high-tech systems, including the nuclear reactors that run the vessel. 
 Slowly, sailors were methodically brought back on board, while the others who had remained went ashore for their mandated two-week quarantine. And in late March, the ship with only about 3,000 crew aboard went out to sea for roughly two weeks of training, including the recertification of the flight deck and fighter squadron, such as takeoffs and landings on the carrier. 
 Earlier this week, the Roosevelt wrapped up training and returned to Guam to pick up nearly 1,000 sailors who had been left there to either complete their quarantine or to manage and work with those still on the island. As the ship sailed into the port, it was flying a flag with the words “Don’t Give Up the Ship,” a famous Navy battle cry from the War of 1812. 
 “Our sailors didn’t give up the ship. They fought and got it back. So I thought it was appropriate,” said Sardiello, who asked one of the other Navy ships to borrow their flag. “The ship was clean and the ship was healthy with no COVID cases. So I said, OK, we’re going to fly that one time on the way into Guam as a symbol to bolster their morale.” 
 RS1 Katie VanDrimmelen was one of the sailors left ashore during the two-week training. She had tested positive for the virus and was in quarantine for about five weeks. Walking back onto the ship, she said, was like being welcomed home from a deployment. 
 “It was amazing,” said VanDrimmelen, of Ogden, Utah. “It was very comforting to be back in our normal atmosphere. Everybody was happy.” 
 Sardiello said that watching the sailors board the ship was a great feeling, But he knows he’s not done yet. There are still about 350 sailors on Guam who are either in isolation or are there as support staff. 
 “More and more of those sailors are meeting the return-to-work criteria, and we’re flying them on board every single day. So we’re whittling down that number day by day,” said Sardiello. “But I really want those 350 remaining back. And we’re working hard on that.” 
 He said that any sailors who don’t recover in time will be transported back to the U.S. The ship is expected to continue operations in the Pacific, and then would likely head home to San Diego later this summer. 
 The Roosevelt has been at the center of a still unresolved controversy that led to the firing of the ship’s previous captain, the resignation of the Navy secretary and an expanded investigation into what triggered the outbreak and how well top naval commanders handled it.  
 Sardiello, had previously captained the Roosevelt but was abruptly sent back to the ship in early April to take command after Capt. Brett Crozier was fired for urging his commanders to take faster action to stem the virus outbreak onboard.  
 After a preliminary review last month, Adm. Mike Gilday, the Navy’s top officer, recommended that Crozier be reinstated as ship captain. But the Navy decided to conduct the broader investigation. 
 That review, which effectively delays a decision on Crozier’s reinstatement, was finished and submitted to Gilday at the end of March and he is still reviewing the extensive report, which includes several hundred pages of interviews, documents and recommendations. 
 Cmdr. Nate Christensen, spokesman for Gilday, said is will take time for the admiral to finish his review and make any decisions. 
LONDON (AP) — When black men died at the hands of U.S. police in recent years, the news made international headlines. The name of George Floyd has reached the world’s streets. 
 Since his death while being detained by Minneapolis police last week, Floyd’s face has been painted on walls from Nairobi, Kenya to Idlib, Syria. His name has been inked on the shirts of professional soccer players and chanted by crowds from London to Cape Town to Tel Aviv to Sydney.  
 The outpouring of outrage and support reflects the power and reach of the United States, a country whose best and worst facets fascinate the world. It also reflects that deep-seated racial inequalities are not just an American phenomenon. 
 “This happened in the United States, but it happens in France, it happens everywhere,” said Xavier Dintimille, who attended a thousands-strong Paris protest to show solidarity with U.S. demonstrators  and anger over a death closer to home.  
 The Paris demonstrators declared “We are all George Floyd,” but also invoked the name of Adama Traore, a 24-year-old Frenchman of Malian origin who died in police custody in 2016. The circumstances are still under investigation by justice authorities. 
 The world is used to watching American stories on TV and movie screens, and intrigued by a country founded on principles of equality and liberty but scarred by a tortured racial history of slavery and segregation. Viewed from abroad, images of U.S. violence and racial divisions can sometimes seem like part of a uniquely American malaise. 
 Not this time. When people around the world watched Floyd struggling for breath as a white police officer knelt on his neck, many saw reflections of violence and injustice in their own cities and towns. They heard echoes of their own experiences or those of family members, neighbors or friends.  
 “The same thing is happening here. It’s no different,” said Isaak Kabenge, who joined more than 1,000 other people at a protest in Sweden’s capital, Stockholm. “I got stopped (by police) two weeks ago. It happens all the time.” 
 
In London, thousands of people chanted “Say his name - George Floyd!”  as they marched through the city. But they also invoked names from nearby, including Stephen Lawrence, an 18-year-old black Londoner stabbed to death in 1993 as he waited for a bus. A bungled police investigation triggered a public inquiry, which concluded that the London police force was “institutionally racist.” 
 London-born “Star Wars” actor John Boyega, who was 1-year-old when Stephen Lawrence died, linked Lawrence, Floyd and other black victims of violence in a passionate speech to the crowd. 
 “Black lives have always mattered,” Boyega said. “We have always been important. We have always meant something.” 
 More than 160 people in Britain have died while in police custody in the past decade, and figures show that black people are twice as likely as white people to die under such circumstances.  
 In the London suburb of Croydon, hundreds of protesters gathered this week —standing the required coronavirus social distance of 2 meters (6½ feet) apart —and took a knee in memory both of Floyd and of Olaseni Lewis. The local man died in 2010 while being restrained by police at a psychiatric hospital. 
 Lewis’ mother, Ajibola Lewis, has campaigned to tighten the rules on the use of restraint by police. She said she couldn’t bear to watch the widely circulated footage of Floyd’s death. 
 “Many other families, we have heard our loved ones say ‘I can’t breathe,’” she told the BBC. “People think it’s only happening in America. It’s not. It’s happening here.” 
 Floyd’s death is another shocking turn for a technology-fueled world unsettled by disease, coronavirus lockdowns and massive unemployment. 
 The speed of social media helped Floyd’s final moments in Minneapolis spread around the world, and amplified the shock, anguish and anger they evoked. 
 Floyd’s death also dropped a spark into cities already smoldering from the coronavirus pandemic. In many countries, lockdowns imposed to slow the spread of the virus confined young people indoors for weeks. Their pent-up energy has been released into the streets as diverse, youthful crowds protest Floyd’s treatment, often in defiance of bans on mass gatherings.  
 In many places, protesters have tried to practice social distancing, but the attempts often fell apart in the heat of the moment. Some demonstrators wore face masks to guard against the virus — a practical health measure made poignant by the addition of Floyd’s dying words, “I can’t breathe,” written across the front. 
 The new virus has sent economies around the world into nosedives, throwing millions out of work. It has also exposed social inequalities, both in the United States — where cities with large black populations have been among the hardest hit — and elsewhere. 
 In Britain, black and ethnic minority people are at greater risk of dying with COVID-19, and have also been levied a disproportionate number of the fines and arrests for breaking lockdown rules, according to official statistics. 
 In London, some demonstrators called out the name of Belly Mujinga, a railway ticket-seller who died of coronavirus in April, weeks after she was spat at by a man claiming to have COVID-19. Police said they found no evidence to support charges in her death. 
 Thousands more plan to take to the streets of cities around the world this weekend, mourning a man whose death they hope will bring permanent change, and looking to the United States as both an inspiration and a warning. 
 “Here I think it’s systematic, and we need to start doing something starting from small to make change,” said musician Jayda Makwana, who joined thousands of others at a protest in London’s Hyde Park. “I think the U.K. could learn so much from the U.S., because we don’t want it to get to the point that it is at in the U.S.” 
 __ 
 Angela Charlton in Paris, David Keyton in Stockholm and Associated Press reporters around the world contributed to this story. 
 ___ 
 Follow more AP stories on the George Floyd protests and reaction at https://apnews.com/GeorgeFloyd 
BRUSSELS (AP) — Think about Hannibal Lecter, the psychopathic cannibal in the “Silence of The Lambs.” Or Jason Voorhees, the hockey mask-wearing murderer in the “Friday the 13th” slasher film series. Before the coronavirus outbreak abruptly disrupted the livelihoods of millions of people, the sight of masks worn in public spaces in the Western world conjured up images of malevolent clowns and terrifying fictional villains. Even worse, in the streets of Paris, London or Brussels, mask-wearing — a long-accepted measure in some Asian cities — would often trigger unease and angst related to real-life traumatic bloodshed orchestrated by balaclava-led commandos from extremist groups. France banned the wearing of full veils in public places back in 2011 in part because the government said the face covering violated the nation’s secular values, well before the COVID-19 pandemic took shape. But in the space of just a few weeks this spring, this narrative has been turned upside down. Masks are everywhere and carry a new, positive meaning. “The mask, at first, is anxiety-inducing,” Franck Cochoy, a professor of sociology at the University of Toulouse Jean Jaures, said in a phone interview. “When people saw them in the street, it felt like they were faced with the threat of the disease. Today, what people find scary is not having masks. Masks have become soothing objects.”  After discouraging citizens from wearing face covers during the early stages of the pandemic, most governments now recommend, or even make their use mandatory, as they try to slow the spread of the virus. Cochoy is stunned by how quickly people have adopted masks. With a team of researchers, he has surveyed their use during the health crisis, scrutinizing more than a thousand testimonies. He said masks have created a new kind of social inequality, “a social division between those who have masks, and those who don’t.” “People who don’t have masks feel naked,” he said.  At the start of the pandemic, the lack of masks led many people to resort to homemade solutions. Although medical professionals say the protection they offer is not ideal, hand-crafted masks have become a hit and the small pieces of fabric covering the nose and mouth are now a social marker like any other piece of clothing. On the glitzy Champs-Elysees avenue in Paris, when shoppers were allowed back in the streets after two months of a stringent lockdown, a woman sported a black mask with a white Chanel inscription. In Brussels, inside a small shop selling organic fruit and vegetables popular with the so-called “bohemian-bourgeois” urbanites, hand-crafted masks come in a myriad of designs and a rainbow of colors. A few hundreds meters down the road, people running errands at a big-chain supermarket mostly wear the surgical, disposable version of the mask — the one available for less than one euro in pharmacies — with no aesthetic airs at all. Vanessa Colignon, a textile and fashion designer based in Brussels, has been engaged for years in zero-waste projects, using natural or recycled materials from sustainable local producers. It’s the daily sight of cheap disposable gloves and masks thrown away in the streets of her neighborhood that convinced her to start producing her own during the health crisis. “I expected the government to develop reusable masks and gloves,” she said, disappointed by a perceived lack of commitment for sustainable mask production from Belgian authorities. “The priority should have been to say: ‘We don’t make disposable masks anymore,’” she added. Cochoy thinks the dichotomy between the hand-crafted and surgical masks offers a preview of the trend that will shape life after COVID-19, supporters of sustainable development facing off against “growth at all costs” strategies. “It’s fascinating. These two types of masks are carrying voices for the post-coronavirus world,” he said. “On one hand, the surgical masks embody the modern, globalized world, where everything is standardized, with all its advantages and inconveniences. Their filtration power is high, measurable, and certified, but they come from abroad in containers, are carbon-charged, disposable. With the homemade version, we return to a form of less efficient, but also non-market, sustainable economy.” ___ Follow AP news coverage of the coronavirus pandemic at https://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak.COLOMBO, Sri Lanka (AP) — The tourists came to see the magical waterfalls and mountain views of the lowland jungle and rainforest. But then the pandemic hit, and they were stranded in Sri Lanka. 
 When flights were canceled and the airports shut down, Darshana Ratnayake came to the rescue. 
 Ratnayake, a cafe owner in Ella, a former colonial hill station in Sri Lankan tea country, organized free food and shelter for dozens of stranded tourists. 
 “We were totally blown away,” said Alex Degmetich, a 31-year-old American cruise line entertainment director. 
 “It’s pretty remarkable,” he said. “Coming from Western society, where nothing is really given to us and we have to pay for everything which is fine. But here, locals providing us — tourists — free food and accommodation, is really humbling.” 
 The Sri Lankan government imposed a nationwide curfew on March 20 to curb the spread of the virus, sealing off entire regions of the Indian Ocean island nation. Degmetich was among 40 tourists from 11 countries stranded in Ella, 200 kilometers (120 miles) east of the capital, Colombo. 
 Ella’s famous treks tend to draw a young backpacker crowd, and Darshana knew they’d soon be out of money, and the small bed-and-breakfast lodges out of food. 
 He was right: Many of the tourists had just enough money to pay for the trip, and broken supply chains meant the lodges were running low on provisions. 
 Darshana established his Chill Cafe as a juice bar with two tables 13 years ago. The business has grown to a full restaurant and boutique hotel with 72 employees. 
 Just after the curfew was imposed, Darshana prepared a list of those staying in lodges and began boxed dinner deliveries. And he convinced lodge owners to let their guests stay on for free. 
 “Our livelihood depends on tourism. We must help tourists when they are in trouble. Money isn’t everything. We must help and share at difficult times like this,” he said. 
 He said he also donated 5 million Sri Lankan rupees ($27,000) to tour guides who lost their income when tourism came to a standstill.  
 Darshana said Sri Lanka’s bloody, decades-long civil war had a huge impact on tourism in Ella. Any time a bomb went off in the country, he said, tourist arrivals fell sharply. For 25 years, separatists from the minority Tamil community fought for a separate state. By the time government forces crushed the rebellion in 2009, U.N. estimates say some 100,000 people had been killed. 
 With the war’s end, Ella’s visitor numbers rose sharply, averaging a thousand people a day, he said. 
 Darshana has expanded his support to both lunch and dinner each day — without, he insists, sacrificing on quality or customer service. 
 Rebecca Curwood-Moss, a tourist from England, felt hopeless when Sri Lanka’s curfew was imposed. She said Darshana’s meals have done more than fill empty stomachs. 
 “In the box, we didn’t just find the delicious homemade rice and curry, but we found hope,” she said. 
 ___ 
 While nonstop news about the effects of the coronavirus has become commonplace, so, too, have tales of kindness. “One Good Thing” is a series of AP stories focusing on glimmers of joy and benevolence in a dark time. Read the series here: https://apnews.com/OneGoodThing 
TOKYO (AP) — Japan has kept its deaths from the new coronavirus low despite a series of missteps that beg the question of whether it can prevent future waves of infections. Authorities were criticized for bungling a cruise ship quarantine and were slow to close Japan’s borders. They have conducted only a fraction of the tests needed to find and isolate patients and let businesses operate almost as usual, even under a pandemic state of emergency. But the roughly 900 deaths, or 7 per million people, in Japan are far fewer than the 320 per million in the U.S. and more than 550 per million in Italy and Britain. Prime Minister Shinzo Abe on May 25 declared an end to a 7-week pandemic state of emergency, lauding “the power of the Japan model” and winning World Health Organization chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus’s praise as a “success.” Experts say it’s unclear exactly how Japan has managed to keep outbreaks in check, but the country needs to use the reprieve to beef up testing and healthcare systems to better find, isolate and treat patients to minimize future waves of infections. A government-commissioned panel concluded that early contact-tracing helped pinpoint outbreaks, slowing the spread of the virus until late March, when a surge of cases overwhelmed the extremely labor intensive process of investigating clusters of infections. A campaign to get the public to avoid high-risk environments, dubbed the “three Cs,” or close contact, closed settings and crowded places, also helped, it said. “At a relatively early stage, we detected signs of infections and we were aware of how the coronavirus transmits ... We were able to warn the people against the ‘3 Cs’ from early on,” said Shireru Omi, a public health expert and leading figure on the government task force. “Japan could have been like (the U.S. or Europe) if infections had overshot at the beginning,” he said. Omi and other experts say widespread use of masks to fend off allergies and prevent sharing colds; the Japanese custom of bowing instead of shaking hands or hugging; a taboo on wearing shoes inside homes and a highly accessible, affordable public health system all helped. Patients who were hospitalized benefited from Japanese doctors’ heavy reliance on CAT scans and X-rays to diagnose pneumonia cases. Researchers also suspect possible past exposure to other strains of coronavirus might provide some protection from the illness. Or, Japan may just have been lucky so far, despite many missteps, some critics say. Initially, hopes were high that Japan’s system of public health centers, or “hokenjo,” set up decades ago to track down tuberculosis and other infectious diseases, might be a powerful weapon against the pandemic. Instead, gutted by steep staff cuts and restructuring, they became bottlenecks as they were flooded with tens of thousands of phone calls and testing requests. Bureaucracy prevented commercial and university labs from helping, as some people sickened and died before their calls were even answered. “A public health perspective was prioritized, and treatment for each patient was neglected,” Michiko Sakane, a doctor in Tsukuba, near Tokyo, said in a recent article published by the Medical Research Information Center. “We had to keep asking patients with flu symptoms to wait at home. We don’t even know how many of them were positive,” she said. “We needed a system that allow us to test anyone who needed to be tested.” Infections spread in hospitals, as meanwhile emergency rooms often rejected suspected COVID-19 patients due to shortages of protective gear, ventilators and intensive care beds. The handling of the Diamond Princess cruise ship, on which 712 of the 3,711 people aboard gradually fell ill while being quarantined in the Yokohama port, triggered criticism that Japanese health officials had turned the vessel into a virus incubator. Hundreds of those patients flooded into hospitals just as the pandemic was gaining a foothold in the Tokyo-Yokohama region. Other passengers were eventually evacuated from the ship without reports of secondary infections. Officials say tests were rationed to avoid overwhelming hospitals, since health ministry policy initially required hospitalization of all positive cases. Officials later agreed to isolate asymptomatic or mild cases in hotels. Still, emergency medicine briefly collapsed, said Takeshi Shimazu, head of the Japanese Association for Acute Medicine. “If we had a bigger outbreak, we wouldn’t have been able to cope.” By early June, Japan had tested some 254,000, or only 0.2% of its 126 million people, a fraction of the numbers tested in the U.S., Germany and South Korea. Omi has acknowledged the actual number of infections could be 10 or 20 times, or more, the health ministry’s tally of nearly 17,000. So far, government appeals to businesses to let employees work remotely; limited shutdowns of some businesses and schools and voluntary compliance with calls to avoid crowds appear to have turned the tide. Numbers of new cases have dropped dramatically, though they have rebounded in recent days, a reminder of how easily the new coronavirus can spread. One priority is to better protect the nearly one-third of Japanese over 65 in this fastest aging nation, said Tatsuhiko Kodama, a Tokyo University Immunologist. As Japanese return to schools, shops and offices reconfigured to help prevent infections with ample use of plastic screens, masks and reminders to keep their distance, access to faster testing is crucial, officials say. The government has revised its testing guidelines and is setting up dozens of testing stations, introducing quick test kits for early detection. Some antibody testing has begun to assess the extent of infections and a contact-tracing app for both Apple and Google smartphones is under development. Authorities are on the lookout for further outbreaks of the virus that has cost the country hundreds of lives and trillions of yen (trillions of dollars) in lost production, consumer spending and tourism revenues — and in government spending to help salvage the economy. When Tokyo confirmed 34 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, its governor declared an “alert,” lighting the city government headquarters and the scenic Rainbow Bridge over Tokyo Bay in crimson. Shimazu fears such largely symbolic measures won’t prevent a resurgence of infections as people once again crowd onto trains and gather in cramped offices and classrooms. “How effective can masks, social distancing and hand washing be?” he said. “I’m watching the situation with great concern.” ___ Follow Mari Yamaguchi on Twitter at https://www.twitter.com/mariyamaguchiUNITED NATIONS (AP) — U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said the coronavirus pandemic has compounded the “dire humanitarian and security situations” in Mali and Africa’s Sahel region. 
 The U.N. chief said in a report to the Security Council obtained Thursday by The Associated Press that the deteriorating security situation “remains of grave concern with terrorist groups allied with al-Qaida and Islamic State competing for control over areas of influence.” 
 Guterres said terrorist attacks against civilians, Malian and international forces are continuing in northern and central Mali, posing the most significant security threat in the north. He said clashes between al-Qaida and the Islamic State group have also been reported. 
 Mali has been in turmoil since a 2012 uprising prompted mutinous soldiers to overthrow the president. The power vacuum that resulted ultimately led to an Islamic insurgency and a French-led war that ousted the jihadists from power in 2013. 
 Insurgents remain active and extremist groups affiliated with al-Qaida and the Islamic State group have moved from the arid north to more populated central Mali since 2015, stoking animosity and violence between ethnic groups in the region 
 Guterres said the impact of COVID-19 was exacerbating the humanitarian crises in Mali, where 3.5 million people are currently suffering from food insecurity and 757,000 are severely food insecure.  
 He said the pandemic is likely to increase the number of people who will face crisis levels of food insecurity to 1.3 million in coming months. 
 The anticipated impact of the pandemic led the government to revise its economic forecast for 2020 from 5% growth to just 0.9%, Guterres said, adding that decreasing output, lower remittances from workers abroad and decreasing tax revenue risk putting 800,000 people below the poverty line. 
 On a positive note, Guterres said the engagement of rival parties in the implementation of a 2015 peace agreement was encouraging. 
 Parliamentary elections were held in March and April and Guterres said he is encouraged that the newly elected National Assembly includes 41 women, almost three times the 14 women in the previous legislature. He encouraged members of Parliament “to play a proactive role in shaping the reform agenda and implementing the peace agreement.” 
 Guterres said the redeployment of Mali’s reconstituted army to the country’s north “is an important achievement” that wouldn’t have been possible without support from the U.N. peacekeeping force in the country, known as MINUSMA. The Malian force includes an equal number of regular army soldiers, former rebels and ex-militants who fought in regional self-defense groups. 
 “It is paramount for all redeployed units to become operational, while creating the conditions for them to gradually assume their mandated security responsibilities,” Guterres said. 
 He recommended that MINUSMA’s mandate be extended for another year, until June 30, 2021, at its current level of about 15,600 troops, police and civilians. 
 MINUSMA’s Force Commander Lt. Gen. Dennis Gyllensporre told a Security Council video meeting on Thursday that the deployment of the reconstituted army “represents a vital step towards state representation in northern Mali and the implementation of the peace accord.”  
 Turning to the pandemic, Gyllensporre said MINUSMA has put in place a variety of preventive measures to stop the spread of the virus. According to Guterres’ report, as of May 27, 73 members of MINUSMA and 6 U.N. staffers tested positive and two peacekeepers died from the virus last week. 
WASHINGTON (AP) — A phalanx of law enforcement officers and soldiers is positioned on the streets of the nation’s capital to keep protesters at bay. Helicopters circle overhead, sometimes dipping low to buzz the crowd. The country’s leader warns that he’s willing to go further to “dominate” the streets. In words and in actions, President Donald Trump is increasingly emulating the strongman leaders he has long admired as he seeks to tamp down protests over police brutality that are roiling the United States. In doing so, he is stretching the powers of the American presidency in ways rarely seen, and testing the willingness of the Pentagon to follow along. His actions have forced a public reckoning among both current and former military leaders, as well as a handful of Republican politicians. Some of their concerns center not only on the actions Trump has already taken, but also on how far he may be willing to go in an election year, particularly if the political winds appear to be moving against him.  “Perhaps we’re getting to the point where we can be more honest with the concerns that we might hold internally and have the courage of our own convictions to speak up,” said Sen. Lisa Murkowski, a moderate Republican from Alaska. She added that she was unsure whether she could continue to support the president in November.  The president’s face-off against Democrat Joe Biden will be the ultimate inflection point, a moment when the nation decides whether to shift course or press forward with Trump at the helm for four more years.  The choice between the two men has become increasingly stark as the nation confronts a confluence of public health, economic and civil rights crises, with Trump aggressively embracing the mantle of a “law and order” president in an attempt to project strength in uncertain times. Biden, for his part, has called the election a moral test and a “battle for the soul” of the nation. Trump made a similar appeal to voters in 2016 and drew support from disaffected, largely white Americans. As commander in chief, he has the extraordinary power of the federal government and military at his disposal to back up tough talk with action. His willingness to do so has become apparent during the protests that followed the death of George Floyd by police in Minneapolis. The demonstrations across the country have been largely peaceful but marred by outbursts of violence.  On Monday night, the president warned in a Rose Garden address that he would deploy active-duty soldiers to the states if local law enforcement and National Guard members couldn’t get control of the protests. As he spoke, officers outside the White House aggressively dispersed a crowd using smoke canisters and pepper balls so the president could walk to a nearby church and pose with a Bible. He was flanked by Defense Secretary Mark Esper and Joint Chiefs Chairman Gen. Mark Milley, who was dressed in combat fatigues.  The stunning scene played out on live television and drew comparisons to crackdowns in authoritarian countries. Trump has long praised the broad powers of leaders in those countries, including Russian President Vladimir Putin and President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines.  Former Pentagon official Kori Schake said Trump’s threats to use the military to crack down on American protesters was unsurprising given his past rhetoric and actions.  “The military is just the latest American governmental institution to have the president try and erode the democratic norms and crush the institutional independence of the organization,” said Schake, now at the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative think tank.  Still, Trump’s words and actions Monday night became a breaking point for some. “Never did I dream that troops ... would be ordered under any circumstance to violate the Constitutional rights of their fellow citizens — much less to provide a bizarre photo op for the elected commander-in-chief, with military leadership standing alongside,” Gen. Jim Mattis, Trump’s first defense secretary, wrote in a statement published by The Atlantic. Mattis’ comments were all the more extraordinary given that he has resisted criticizing the president since announcing his resignation in 2018.  It’s unclear whether the warnings this week from Mattis, Murkowski and others carry any sway with voters or signal any broader shift within the Republican Party. Trump faced a similar insurrection among members of the so-called establishment before the 2016 election and ultimately prevailed with a comfortable Electoral College victory. His grip on the GOP has tightened during his more than three years in office given the loyalty of his core backers.  Some of those supporters have publicly closed ranks around the president during the protests, applauding his administration’s heavy-handed response and urging him to take more aggressive actions to quell demonstrations that get out of hand.  “These conditions can shift rapidly in any city across the country and the president needs to have the tools and the equipment and the information needed to move quickly to protect our citizens if that’s what’s necessary,” said Sen. Tom Cotton, R-Ark.  Yet it’s clear that the crises battering the nation have shifted the ground beneath Trump. His response to the COVID-19 pandemic has been uneven, and the resulting financial slowdown has upended his plans to run for reelection on the back of a strong economy.  His embrace of a strongman strategy may well be a way to rally his most ardent supporters, appeal to a sense of uncertainty many Americans are feeling and lock down a narrow path to victory in November. Yet it has also left his critics anxious about the steps he may be willing to take between now and then.  “It’s hard to envision any line that Donald Trump won’t cross or anything he won’t do,” said Peter Wehner, a veteran of three Republican administrations and an ardent critic of the president. “The question is whether the system of government, and the people who make up government and the court would be able to check him.” ___ EDITOR’S NOTE: Julie Pace has covered the White House and politics for the AP since 2007. Follow her at http://twitter.com/jpaceDC The Latest on the May 25 death in Minneapolis of George Floyd, a handcuffed black man who pleaded for air as a white police officer pressed a knee on his neck: 
 TOP OF THE HOUR: 
 — Protesters take to New York City streets after curfew, again. 
 — Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms tells protesters they “matter,” urges COVID-19 tests. 
 — Heavy rain brings an end to Washington protests before dark. 
 ___ 
 NEW YORK -- Protesters stayed on the streets of New York City after curfew for another day Thursday, spurred by the death of George Floyd. 
 Actions by the protesters included gathering at Brooklyn’s Cadman Plaza, the site where police used batons against demonstrators who were out past the city-imposed curfew a night earlier.  
 Protesters continued past the 8 p.m. curfew Thursday, even after Gov. Andrew Cuomo and Mayor Bill de Blasio sought to deflect criticism over harsh tactics from police enforcing it. 
 Thousands of protesters were out after curfew, and so were police. 
 At some locations, officials watched, but didn’t immediately move in. At other spots, they made orderly arrests without the batons and riot gear, like a night earlier. 
 ___ 
 ATLANTA -- Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms walked with protesters in downtown Atlanta on Thursday and told the crowd through a megaphone that “there is something better on the other side of this.” 
 “We are in the midst of a movement in this country,” she said. “But it’s going to be incumbent upon all of us to be able to get together and articulate more than our anger. We got to be able to articulate what we want as our solutions.” 
 The mayor’s appearance came on the seventh straight night of protests in the city following the killing of George Floyd in Minnesota. Police Chief Erika Shields also attended the protest. 
 When the first night of protests on Friday turned violent, an impassioned Bottoms held a news conference and urged the protesters to go home, saying those who were looting and vandalizing businesses were disgracing the city and Floyd’s life. 
 She told the crowd on Thursday that they “matter” to her, and before she left, she encouraged them to get tested for COVID-19. 
 ___ 
 WASHINGTON — Protests in the nation’s capital over George Floyd’s death broke up before dark Thursday as a heavy rain began to fall. 
 The law enforcement presence at the Lincoln Memorial, where protesters gathered, was much smaller than it had been near the White House during the previous nights’ demonstrations. 
 Tomora Wright, 29, of Washington, said her parents were concerned that she was coming down to protest but she wasn’t worried. “I know that my people are peaceful and I’m not scared to be around people who believe in the same thing, the same cause. I definitely felt the need to come down here and protest in solidarity.” 
 She wants to see the killers of George Floyd brought to justice but also reopening of past cases such as Sandra Bland in Texas. “These are unimaginable times. “ 
 ___ 
 BUFFALO, N.Y. — A police commissioner has suspended two officers following video that shows a Buffalo officer appearing to shove a man who walked up to police. 
 Video from WBFO shows the man appearing to hit his head on the pavement, with blood leaking out as officers walk past to clear Niagara Square on Thursday night. 
 The station reports two medics treated the unidentified man. Erie County Executive Mark Poloncarz tweeted that the man was hospitalized and stable, but his exact condition wasn’t immediately known. 
 WIVB-TV reports that Buffalo police initially said in a statement a person “was injured when he tripped & fell.” But Capt. Jeff Rinaldo later told the TV station that an internal affairs investigation was opened. Later Thursday, news outlets reported that Police Commissioner Byron Lockwood suspended two officers without pay. 
 New York Attorney General Letitia James’s office has tweeted that they’re aware of the video. 
 ___ 
 WASHINGTON — The American Civil Liberties Union and others have filed a lawsuit against the Trump administration, alleging officials violated the civil rights of protesters who were forcefully removed from a park near the White House by police using chemical agents before President Donald Trump walked to a nearby church to take a photo. 
 The lawsuit was filed Thursday in federal court in Washington. It argues that Trump, Attorney General William Barr and other officials “unlawfully conspired to violate” the protesters’ rights when clearing Lafayette Park on Monday. 
 Shortly before 6:30 p.m. on Monday, law enforcement officers began aggressively forcing back the peaceful protesters, firing smoke bombs and pepper balls into the crowd to disperse them from the park. 
 The ACLU called it a “coordinated and unprovoked charge into the crowd of demonstrators.” 
 Barr said Thursday that he ordered the protesters to be dispersed because officials were supposed to extend a security perimeter around the White House earlier in the day. He said he arrived there later in the afternoon and discovered it hadn’t been done. 
 The lawsuit was filed on behalf of the group Black Lives Matter D.C., and individual protesters who were in Lafayette Park on Monday evening. 
 ___ 
 MINNEAPOLIS — Defense attorneys said Thursday that two of three Minneapolis police officers accused of aiding and abetting in the death of George Floyd were rookies barely off probation when a more senior white officer ignored the black man’s cries for help and pressed a knee into his neck. 
 Earl Gray said his client, former Officer Thomas Lane had no choice but to follow the instructions of Derek Chauvin, who has since been charged with second-degree murder in Floyd’s May 25 death. Gray called the case against his client “extremely weak.” 
 A judge set bail at $750,000 apiece for Lane, J. Kueng and Tou Thao, when they made their first appearances in Hennepin County District Court on Thursday.  
 The Minneapolis Police Department fired all four officers last week and charged Chauvin. On Wednesday, the three other officers were charged. 
 ___ 
 AUSTIN, Texas — Dozens of members of the University of Texas football team marched with Austin police officers from campus to the state Capitol to honor the memory of George Floyd. 
 Many of the players locked arms on the two-mile walk that stopped on the north side of the Capitol, the opposite side of the building from where protesters have gathered for several days. 
 Once there, the group and police officers took a knee for nine minutes to symbolize the amount of time Floyd was detained on the ground by Minneapolis police before he died. 
 The players were also joined by head coach Tom Herman, his wife, and several assistant coaches. 
 “I’m so proud,” Herman told the players, urging them to “be agents of change.” 
 ___ 
 SALT LAKE CITY -- A man captured on video aiming a bow and arrow at protesters in Salt Lake City over the weekend was charged Thursday with assault and weapon possession. 
 Brandon McCormick was charged with possession of a dangerous weapon by a restricted person, as well as aggravated assault and threatening or using a dangerous weapon in a fight or quarrel. 
 He was reportedly pushed to the ground on Saturday after pointing the bow and arrow at people protesting the death of George Floyd at the hands of police. People then flipped over his car and set it on fire. 
 No attorney was listed in court records. 
 ___ 
 NEW YORK — The Queens district attorney says a man seen on video charging protesters in New York while wearing a glove with four long, serrated-edge blades has surrendered to authorities. 
 A release from the office of District Attorney Melinda Katz says 54-year-old Frank Cavalluzzi jumped out of a vehicle Tuesday afternoon, shouting “I will kill you,” and chasing protesters who were gathered peacefully on an overpass. 
 The release says he got back into his vehicle and drove on a sidewalk, nearly running over the demonstrators. Cavalluzzi turned himself in Thursday and was arraigned on multiple charges, including second-degree attempted murder. He faces up to 25 years in prison if convicted. 
 It wasn’t immediately clear whether he had retained an attorney who could comment on his behalf. 
 ___ 
 SAN ANTONIO -- The GOP chairwoman of one of Texas’ largest counties faced widespread pressure from her party to resign Thursday over a conspiracy theory on social media suggesting that George Floyd’s death was staged. 
 Cynthia Brehm is head of the Bexar County Republican Party in San Antonio. She also drew attention and condemnation last month  for suggesting the coronavirus pandemic was a hoax intended to hurt President Donald Trump. 
 Republican Texas Gov. Greg Abbott called on her to step down after a San Antonio Express-News columnist Wednesday tweeted an image of Brehm suggesting in a Facebook post that Floyd’s death was staged. The post is no longer on Brehm’s page. She has not publicly addressed calls for her resignation and did not respond to requests for comment Thursday. 
 “The comments are disgusting and have no place in the Republican Party or in public discourse,” Abbott spokesman said John Wittman said. 
 Both Sen. John Cornyn and Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas also called on her to resign, as did Texas Republican Party Chairman James Dickey. 
 Floyd, a 46-year-old African American, died after a white Minneapolis police officer, Derek Chauvin, put his knee on Floyd’s neck for several minutes as he lay handcuffed on the pavement, gasping that he couldn’t breathe. Floyd’s funeral will be held next week in Houston, where he grew up. 
 ___ 
 BARCELONA, Spain — More than a thousand people gathered in a central square in Barcelona, Spain, to protest against the death of American George Floyd and police brutality against African Americans. 
 The protesters held a minute of silence at the candlelight vigil on Thursday. A recording of Martin Luther King Jr.’s “I have a dream speech” was played and people set up a shrine in memory of Floyd. 
 “I am hopeful that people are standing up now and they’ve said ‘enough is enough’,” said Jonathan Courtney, a 31-year-old American resident who organized the event. “If you go back in history when people did make change, they did go to the streets.” 
 ___ 
 FARGO, N.D. — Black leaders in North Dakota’s largest city pleaded for calm in the face of violent threats to disrupt a gathering in memory of George Floyd. They advertised the event as a celebration and not a protest. 
 The OneFargo event is scheduled Friday afternoon at a downtown Fargo park. Organizers had planned to march from the park to City Hall for a sit-in. They have scrapped that idea after social media threats surfaced to burn down the city offices and commit other violent acts. 
 Organizer Wess Philome says anyone who is looking to destroy the “positive energy” from Friday’s event should stay home.  
 The pledge to tone down the dissent comes after a violent protest in downtown Fargo last weekend resulted in damaged property, a dozen arrests and minor injuries to four police officers. 
 ___ 
 OAKLAND, Calif. -- Police say well-coordinated criminals are capitalizing on the chaos around protests to stage widespread store thefts. 
 They travel by caravan and use messaging apps or social media to communicate or distract and throw police off their trail. 
  The wave of crime that has followed largely peaceful demonstrations over the police killing of George Floyd has happened in big and small cities and in rural areas. Thieves have targeted high-value goods as officers are assigned to prevent protests from becoming unruly and enforce curfews. In the San Francisco Bay Area, a band of thieves stole nearly 75 vehicles from a dealership. 
 ___ 
 MINNEAPOLIS — Mourners at George Floyd’s memorial service are standing for  8 minutes, 46 seconds, a span that has become a potent symbol of police brutality. 
 The Rev. Al Sharpton exhorted Floyd’s family, civil rights leaders, politicians, athletes and celebrities at the service Thursday to stand as a commitment to justice in Floyd’s name. Gwen Carr, the mother of Eric Garner, who died in police custody in New York City in 2014, stood on stage with Sharpton and comedian Tiffany Haddish. 
 Floyd, a handcuffed black man, died on May 25 as a white Minneapolis police officer pressed his knee into Floyd’s neck, ignoring his cries and bystander shouts until Floyd eventually stopped moving. 
 In the days since his death, protesters have seized on 8 minutes, 46 seconds — the time given in a criminal complaint that the officer held his knee on Floyd’s neck — as a way to honor Floyd. 
 Sharpton says Floyd’s story has been the story of black people in America, and that he died not from common health conditions, but from a malfunction of the criminal justice system. 
 Sharpton says the reason black people couldn’t be who they dreamed of being is because “you had your knee on our necks.” He added: “Get your knee off of our necks!”  
 He also commented about the protests that have occurred across the country and the world since Floyd’s death, saying that this time is different. Sharpton said he saw white people outnumbering black people in some marches and calling for justice. 
 Sharpton also called out President Donald Trump for walking from the White House across the street as protests were going on in Washington so he could pose with a bible.  
 “We cannot use bibles as a prop,” Sharpton said. “For those that have agendas that are not about justice, this family will not let you use George as a prop.” 
 ___ 
 VIENNA — Thousands of people have participated in an anti-racism demonstration in Vienna. 
 The Austria Press Agency reported police said about 50,000 people gathered in downtown Vienna. 
 Protesters carrying signs with the Black Lives Matter slogan marched to the Karlsplatz square. Many argued racism is just as present in Austria as the United States. 
 Diedo Ladstaetter, a 27-year-old student from Vienna, says his dark-skinned Latino friend “is affected by everyday racism. And therefore, I don’t see why it would be somehow different in Austria compared to America. You have to protest here, too.” 
 Some protesters also carried Antifa signs and were heard shouting “fight the police.” 
 ___ 
 PORTLAND, Ore. — Portland Public Schools will discontinue use of school resource officers from the Portland Police Bureau. Superintendent Guadalupe Guerrero says Oregon’s largest school district needed to “re-examine our relationship” with the police after the nationwide upheaval over the death of George Floyd.  
 The news came after thousands of protesters gathered Wednesday for the sixth consecutive night in Portland and remained peaceful. Gov. Kate Brown on Thursday ordered all flags flown at half-staff to honor Floyd.  
 ___ 
 LOS ANGELES — The mayor of Los Angeles says he will end the curfew starting Thursday night.  
 Mayor Eric Garcetti made the announcement after the curfews were put in place since last week as a precaution against looting and violence.  
 Earlier, the Los Angeles County sheriff said he will not enforce a curfew in areas his deputies patrol. Curfews also ended in San Francisco and San Jose. The decisions follow generally peaceful demonstrations.  
 Oakland and Sacramento plan to maintain curfews for now. 
 ___ 
 LOCUST GROVE, Va. — Deputies in Virginia say a white man who called to report an assault turned out to be the aggressor and has been charged with attacking three African Americans because of their race. 
 Authorities responding to a call from Edward Halstead in Locust Grove on Tuesday night “interviewed several people and determined that the caller was in fact the perpetrator of assault and battery on three individuals,” the Orange County Sheriff’s Office said in a Facebook post. 
 Halstead, 53, was charged with attempted strangulation and three counts of felonious assault and battery due to the victim’s race. 
 It was not immediately clear if Halstead had a lawyer who could comment on his behalf. 
 ___ 
 BERLIN — German Chancellor Angela Merkel says U.S. society is “very polarized” while sidestepping questions whether President Donald Trump bears a share of the responsibility. 
 Merkel told ZDF television the killing of George Floyd “is something really, really terrible, racism is something terrible and society in the United States is very polarized.” 
 Merkel say her approach to politics is always to try to bring people together. She deflected questions about Trump’s role, saying she hopes the U.S. will unify and she’s “happy that many are making their contribution to that.” 
 Pressed again about Trump, she replied: “I think the political style is a very controversial one, that is clear.”  
 Regarding racism, she says “unfortunately we have it here, too. So let’s put our own house in order and hope there are also enough people in the United States who carry forward peaceful demonstrations.” 
 ___ 
 ROME — The highest-ranking American at the Vatican will lead a prayer service on Friday in Rome to pray for “peaceful coexistence” following the death of George Floyd and protests that erupted across the U.S. 
 Cardinal Kevin Farrell, an Irish-born naturalized U.S. citizen, is the prefect of the Vatican’s family and laity office. 
 The Sant’Egidio Community, a Catholic charity close to Pope Francis, is organizing the evening prayer at its Santa Maria in Trastevere church. Francis this week decried Floyd’s death and the “sin of racism” while denouncing violence as “self-destructive and self-defeating.” He’s appealed for national reconciliation and peace. 
 Farrell was bishop in Dallas, Texas, and an auxiliary bishop of Washington D.C. before taking his current job in 2016.  
 ___  
 MOSCOW — The Russian Foreign Ministry urged the U.S. authorities to respect Americans’ right for peaceful protest amid the wave of demonstrations sparked by George Floyd’s death. 
 The ministry spokeswoman, Maria Zakharova, says Moscow has taken note of the use of tear gas to disperse rallies and massive arrests of protesters in the U.S. She also pointed out numerous journalists, including Russian reporters, were hurt while covering the protests. 
 Moscow long has bristled at Washington’s criticism of its human rights record amid Russia-U.S. tensions. Zakharova sought to turn the tables on the U.S. by pointing to the authorities forceful response to protests. 
 She says “it’s time for the U.S. to drop the mentor’s tone and look in the mirror,” challenging the U.S. authorities to “start respecting peoples’ rights and observing democratic standards at home.” 
 ___ 
 WARSAW, Poland — A large crowd gathered in front of the U.S. Embassy in Warsaw with signs reading “Black Lives Matter,” in Poland’s second anti-racist protest in two days in response to the death of George Floyd 
 Some laid face down on the ground in solidarity with the handcuffed Floyd, who was pleading for air as a Minneapolis police officer pressed his knee against Floyd’s neck for several minutes. 
 U.S. Ambassador to Poland, Georgette Mosbacher, says the violent scenes of protest in the U.S. are an “anomaly” and not a true picture of the Americans. 
 “We can and will heal and learn from this tragedy — and justice will prevail,” Mosbacher’s statement said. 
 A small protest march was held Wednesday in Poland’s western city of Poznan. 
 ___ 
 ST. PAUL, Minn. — Gov. Tim Walz is sending Minnesota National Guard troops to state’s western border because of what he says are credible threats of violence during demonstrations planned in neighboring North Dakota.  
 The city of Moorhead, Minnesota, lies just across the border from Fargo, North Dakota.  
 Walz’s order didn’t say how many guard members are being deployed in Clay County. The governor didn’t provide details on what he perceives is a credible threat.  
 “The Minnesota National Guard stands ready to provide protection for all Minnesotans,” said Walz in a statement. “While Minnesotans turn their attention to rebuilding our communities and re-examining racial inequities in the wake of George Floyd’s death, our administration is committed to providing protection for our neighborhoods, businesses, and families in order for those meaningful conversations to happen.”  
 The National Guard adjutant general will work with local government agencies to provide personnel, equipment and facilities as needed, Walz said. 
 ___ 
 SARASOTA, Fla. — A bystander video showing a Sarasota police officer pressing his knee into the neck of a handcuffed black man a week before the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis has prompted an investigation and promises of transparency.  
 Two Sarasota officers are seen on video holding down Patrick Carroll, 27, during a domestic violence call on May 18. A third officer was standing nearby. 
 The department told news outlets it wasn’t aware the officer placed a knee on Carroll’s neck until it was tagged in the video on social media on Monday. 
 Aerial video posted by the department Tuesday shows the officers speaking with Carroll for several minutes before placing him in handcuffs. He then resists being put in the patrol car, and officers force him to the ground.  
 Carroll said he was trying to ask officers why he was being detained. He said he has asthma and scoliosis in his back and was having trouble breathing. 
 The officer who placed his knee on Carroll’s neck has been placed on administrative leave, the department said. He hasn’t been identified. The two other officers are on “desk duty” while the arrest is being investigated, news outlets reported. 
 Carroll faces charges of domestic battery, possession of ammunition by a convicted felon and resisting arrest. 
PROVO, Utah (AP) — Utah County commissioners hope the state will move the county from yellow to green in its system rating risk levels for the coronavirus. 
 The Daily Herald reports that Commissioner Bill Lee on Wednesday called for the Utah County Commission to discuss supporting an upgrade of the county’s status in the state’s color-coded health guidance system. 
 Lee originally wanted commissioners to appeal directly to Republican Gov. Gary Herbert and Jefferson Burton, acting director of the Utah Department of Health. 
 Lee said the county should now support a state Public Health and Economic Emergency Commission vote Tuesday to have most of the state move from a yellow to a green risk phase with fewer restrictions.  
 The commission created to advise state officials on how to combat the coronavirus made its recommendation based on the state’s low hospitalization, transmission and fatality rates. 
 “The lower risk level does not indicate that our state is back to normal,” the commission said in a statement. 
 For most people, the new coronavirus causes mild or moderate symptoms, such as fever and cough that clear up in two to three weeks. For some, especially older adults and people with existing health problems, it can cause more severe illness, including pneumonia and death. The vast majority of people recover. 
MINNEAPOLIS (AP) — A mural honoring George Floyd was projected above his golden coffin, where mourners knelt and cried, paused and prayed Thursday at his memorial service. Its simple message: “I can breathe now.” 
 But for far too many black Americans, dreams have been dashed and goals not achieved because they still cannot breathe, said the Rev. Al Sharpton, who eulogized Floyd in Minneapolis on Thursday. 
 “The reason we could never be who we wanted and dreamed to be is you kept your knee on our neck,” Sharpton said in reference to Floyd’s May 25 arrest, during which a white Minneapolis police officer pressed his knee into the handcuffed black man’s neck for several minutes even after Floyd stopped moving and pleading for air.  
 “What happened to Floyd happens every day in this country,” Sharpton said. “It’s time for us to stand up in George’s name and say, ‘Get your knee off our neck!’” 
 Floyd’s memorial service was a send-off that his family felt he deserved — they paid heartfelt tribute to a man they affectionately called “Perry.” With many of Minnesota’s top elected leaders in the room, along with members of Congress, the service included strong calls for meaningful changes in policing and the criminal justice system. 
 During eulogy remarks, Sharpton revealed plans to hold a commemorative march on Washington in August as part of a push for federal policing reforms. 
 “When we fight for the George Floyds of the world — and more importantly, the unknown George Floyds of the world — we are helping America be America for all Americans,” said Floyd family attorney Ben Crump, who listed off the names of other African American men and women killed by police. 
 Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee, who represents Floyd’s native Houston and attended the service, said she and other lawmakers on Thursday introduced police accountability legislation named after Floyd. The measure calls for improved training for police departments and standards for how the use of deadly force and misconduct are investigated, among other aims.  
 “We have put a stop sign in front of America — there will be no more” unchecked killing by police, Jackson Lee told The Associated Press. “I will never forget the words ‘I can’t breathe.’ America cannot allow people to die in the 21st century.” 
 She was among dozens of other politicians, celebrities, civil rights activists and family members of Floyd who sang “Amazing Grace,” prayed and joined together in a rousing memorial that was a celebration for a man whose death at the hands of police has sparked protests nationwide and calls for an end to racial injustice.  
 Inside the service, held in the Frank J. Lindquist sanctuary at North Central University, mourners wore masks, some with the words “I can’t breathe” on them. Organizers issued several reminders for attendees to keep some social distance. Many attendees bumped elbows rather than hug or shake hands at the memorial taking place in the midst of the coronavirus pandemic.  
 It was not the coronavirus that killed Floyd, Crump said in his service remarks, but the “pandemic of racism and discrimination.” 
 Floyd’s brother and other family members told personal stories about dancing, playing football, cooking and enjoying life together. They said he was also known by other endearing nicknames such as “Georgie Porgie.” 
 “George, he was like a general,” brother Philonise Floyd said. “Every day he would walk outside, there would be a line of people wanting to greet him. ... He was powerful, man. He had a way with words. ... Everybody loved George.”  
 Projected above the pulpit inside the sanctuary was the blue and orange mural that was painted at the site of a makeshift memorial in the neighborhood where Floyd pleaded for air. A small band and choir sang “Goin’ Up Yonder” and other classic gospel songs as mourners gathered. Grammy Award-winning gospel singer Bishop Hezekiah Walker closed the service with the song “Every Praise.” 
 Others in attendance included Martin Luther King III; Minnesota Sen. Amy Klobuchar; Reps. Ilhan Omar, Ayanna Pressley and Joyce Beatty; rapper T.I. and his wife Tameka “Tiny” Harris; rapper Ludacris; singer Tyrese Gibson; comedians Kevin Hart and Tiffany Haddish; and actress Marsai Martin. 
 Floyd’s body will go from the first service to Raeford, North Carolina, the state where he was born 46 years ago, for a two-hour public viewing and private service for the family on Saturday. 
 Finally, a public viewing will be held Monday in Houston, where he was raised and lived most of his life. A 500-person service on Tuesday will take place at The Fountain of Praise church and will include addresses from Sharpton, Crump, and the Rev. Remus E. Wright, the family pastor. Former Vice President Joe Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, may attend, and other political figures and celebrities are expected as well. A private burial will follow. 
 Floyd’s final journey was designed with intention, Sharpton said ahead of Thursday’s service. Having left Houston for Minneapolis in 2014 in search of a job and a new life, Floyd will retrace that path in death. 
 Many mourners have noted that among the wrenching cries that Floyd made in his final moments, one was for his mother, Larcenia Floyd, who had died two years earlier.  
 Sharpton said George Floyd was calling for his mother because, as he neared death, she had her hands outstretched to him calling him back home. 
 “Come on, George,” Sharpton said. “I’ll welcome you where the wicked will cease from troubling you, where the weary will get rest. It’s a place where police don’t put knees on you, George.” 
 ___ 
 Associated Press writers Amy Forliti in Minneapolis, Scott Bauer in Madison, Wisconsin; and Nomaan Merchant in Houston contributed to this report.  
The Latest on the effects of the coronavirus outbreak on sports around the world: 
 ___ 
 Penn State will begin bringing some students back to campus Monday, including 75 football players. 
 Voluntary workouts for football players who have been medically cleared can begin on June 15. 
 The school said players have been prescribed quarantines in preparation for their return. All players will be tested for COVID-19. Players will be limited to groups of 20 for their workouts and will be supervised by performance enhancement and sports medicine staffs. 
 A date for the return of the rest of the team will be set later. 
 ___ 
 The National Hockey League is allowing team facilities to reopen and players to take part in voluntary on- and off-ice workouts beginning Monday. 
 The league announced its move to “Phase 2” of a potential return Thursday night. Earlier in the day, it unveiled the final details of the 24-team playoff format that will be used if play resumes and the Pittsburgh Penguins announced one of their players tested positive for the coronavirus. 
 During this stage, players can skate or work out in groups of up to six at a time. Unlike training camps, which could begin sometime in July, these workouts are not mandatory for players, who can choose to skate in their current city even if they don’t play there. 
 ___ 
 The American Century Championship celebrity golf tournament at Lake Tahoe plans to proceed without spectators. 
 Featuring two-time defending champion Tony Romo, Steph Curry, Aaron Rodgers and Charles Barkley, the 80-player event at Edgewood Tahoe is set for its original dates of July 10-12. All prize money will be donated to COVID-19 charities and regional causes. 
 “The event has a tremendous tradition and is critical to that beautiful resort region,” Romo said. “It’ll be fun to try to win again but the sense of community and charity fundraising will be most important.” 
 NBC will televise the tournament. 
 ___ 
 Notre Dame says it will test all its football players for COVID-19, starting June 15, before they can begin using the school’s athletic facilities for voluntary workouts. 
 The Fighting Irish players are expected to travel back to campus from June 8-17. Testing for football players and and employees will be conducted June 15-19. Players and employees will be tested for COVID-19 and antibodies for the coronavirus, which would signal previous exposure to the disease. 
 The phased approach will include quarantines for players returning before they get tested. Players who fly back will be expected to quarantine for seven days before they get tested and those who drive will be expected to quarantine for three days before being tested. Players will be housed at the Morris Inn, an on-campus hotel in South Bend. 
 “We’re going to have positives. I think that’s to be expected,” Dr. Matt Leiszler, head physician for Notre Dame football. “That being said, we need to do a really good job of controlling those. The things that play into that are a really robust contact tracing system to ensure if we have a positive we’re going to move really quickly in coordination with the university to limit those other close contacts so we don’t end up with a cluster.” 
 Leiszler said Notre Dame players will be tested again for COVID-19 after their initial test but did not specify when that second test would occur. 
 ___ 
 Central Michigan says it has received a waiver from the NCAA regarding the minimum Division I sports sponsorship requirements. 
 Division I schools are not supposed to have fewer than six sports for male athletes. CMU announced last month it was dropping men’s track and field, citing university-wide budget cuts. That leaves the school with five men’s teams -- baseball, basketball, cross country, football and wrestling. 
 “This waiver has been granted for the 2020-21 and the 2021-22 academic years,” athletic director Michael Alford said in a statement. “We continue to research and determine the best course of action to return the department to full compliance. I want to thank the NCAA staff for making this an efficient process and for understanding the difficult decisions the COVID-19 pandemic has forced our department to make.” 
 ___ 
 The NCAA has set a new schedule for early entrants to the NBA draft to withdraw and return to school. 
 The NCAA announced Thursday that it would give players until 10 days after the NBA scouting combine or Aug. 3, whichever comes earlier. This comes three weeks after the NCAA postponed its deadline, which was originally scheduled to fall on Wednesday. 
 That June 3 deadline was set to come 10 days after the completion of the combine, but the NBA postponed the combine amid the coronavirus pandemic and has yet to announce a new date. 
 In a statement, the NCAA said the Division I Men’s Basketball Oversight Committee worked with the National Association of Basketball Coaches on the new timeline and “believes this is the most equitable alternative available in these unprecedented circumstances.” 
 “This provides the utmost flexibility to student-athletes testing the waters to make the most informed decision about their future during this uncertain time,” NCAA Senior Vice President for Basketball Dan Gavitt said in the statement. 
 ___ 
 The NBA G League has canceled the rest of its season. 
 “While canceling the remainder of our season weighs heavily on us, we recognize that it is the most appropriate action to take for our league,” NBA G League President Shareef Abdur-Rahim said. 
 The league suspended play March 12. 
 ___ 
 NASCAR is set to run its All-Star race on a Wednesday night at Charlotte Motor Speedway and added one more weeknight Cup Series race as part of its latest revised schedule through July. 
 NASCAR has revamped its schedule in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic and announced even more changes on Thursday. 
 NASCAR will keep its scheduled twinbill weekend later this month at Pocono Raceway. The track is still scheduled to hold a Truck Series and Cup Series race on June 27 and an Xfinity Series and Cup Series race on June 28. The compressed schedule because of the pandemic has forced NASCAR to run races from all three national series multiple days a week. NASCAR crammed five Cup races on the schedule from May 17 to May 31. 
 The rest of the Cup schedule includes a July 5 race at Indianapolis Motor Speedway, July 12 at Kentucky Speedway, the All-Star race on July 15 at Charlotte, July 19 at Texas Motor Speedway and July 23 at Kansas Speedway. The new schedule wraps Aug. 2 at New Hampshire Motor Speedway. 
 The All-Star race is usually held in May and New Hampshire was bumped from its July date. Pocono, Indy and Kentucky stayed the same. 
 NASCAR also scheduled five Truck races and six second-tier Xfinity races. The Cup Series races again Sunday at Atlanta Motor Speedway. 
 The schedule for the rest of the season will be released at a later date. 
 ___ 
 A fraudster has used data of Brazilian soccer star Neymar to request a government handout paid to informal workers during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
 Day Crespo, a spokeswoman for the Brazil and Paris Saint-Germain striker, confirmed the information to The Associated Press after it was reported by local news website UOL. Crespo also said Neymar has already informed authorities about the incident. 
  The handout is of about $170 a month. A representative of Brazil’s state-run bank Caixa Econômica Federal was not immediately available for comment. UOL said the request on Neymar’s behalf was accepted, but its status was changed to “under analysis” after its report was published. Fraudsters used data from other Brazilian celebrities to receive the government money in the Latin American country hit hardest by the coronavirus. 
 ___ 
 A day after announcing a deal with its players’ association to resume the season with a tournament in Florida, Major League Soccer says teams may resume training. 
 MLS says each player and staff member must complete two tests for the coronavirus 24 hours apart, 72 hours ahead of the start of training. Every player also must have a test for antibodies and a physical. 
 Once training starts, players, coaches and some staff must be tested for the virus every other day. An individual who tests positive would be isolated, tested again at least 24 houts later, and all close contacts would be tested. High-risk individuals must be cleared to participate by the team’s chief medical officer in consultation with the MLS medical staff. 
 Testing for antibodies will take place every three months. Testing providers must be authorized by the FDA or Health Canada. 
 Training rooms and gyms will be restricted to a maximum five people, and lockers should be spaced a minimum 10 feet apart. Doors should be left open. 
 Food is restricted to individual, prepackaged meals and individually wrapped utensils, and 10 feet of distancing is necessary while eating. 
 Staff is to use appropriate personal protective equipment. 
 ___ 
 Michigan State says a student-athlete’s father died of COVID-19 and the athlete tested positive but remained asymptomatic. 
 Athletic director Bill Beekman was part of a video conference with reporters Thursday to discuss the school’s plans to have athletes back on campus. When asked if any athlete or athletic department personnel had tested positive in the past three months, Beekman said nobody that he was aware of -- but that he might not necessarily have all the information. 
 Dr. Jeffrey Kovan, the school’s director of sports medicine, was also part of the video conference. He quickly said that one student-athlete had tested positive, his father died, and his mother and sister also tested positive. Kovan said the athlete was asymptomatic and retested negative a few weeks later. 
 The school did not disclose the athlete’s identity or his sport. 
 “We’ve had a couple others that have had symptoms, without testing positive that we know of,” Kovan said. 
 Michigan State athletes can begin returning to campus June 15 in preparation for voluntary workouts. Football, basketball and volleyball players will be the first to undergo testing. 
 After testing, athletes will be instructed to self-isolate for a week, and those testing positive will be quarantined for 10 days. On June 22, athletes who initially tested negative will be given a second round of testing. Athletes who receive a second negative test will be cleared to begin voluntary workouts. They will be split into small workout groups based on people they live with. 
 “The intent is that if we keep our volume, our number of athletes together in a small set, and their strength coach works with just that group when they work out, and somebody in that group is positive, then we can isolate that individual group as opposed to the whole team,” Kovan said. 
 Common areas like locker rooms and lounges will remain closed. Athletes will be given masks and required to wear them while in facilities, except during workouts. 
 ___ 
 A member of the Pittsburgh Penguins has tested positive for COVID-19. 
 The team announced Thursday that an unidentified player has been diagnosed with the coronavirus. The team says the player was not in Pittsburgh at the time of test and has been at his home since first experiencing symptoms. The club said the player is “recovering and feeling well” and those who have been in close contact with him have been notified. 
 The NHL’s season remains “on pause,” but the Penguins will participate in the approved playoff format whenever the season resumes. 
 ___ 
 Atalanta coach Gian Piero Gasperini says the reaction from Champions League opponent Valencia after he acknowledged testing positive for the coronavirus is “really very offensive.” 
 Valencia expressed “surprise” and a top health official in the Spanish region said Gasperini “lacked responsibility” for traveling to Spain with symptoms of the virus. He recently told Italian media he felt sick the day before the March 10 match in Valencia. 
 Gasperini tells Sky Italia, “I know that I respected the protocols. I was in quarantine like everyone else until training resumed. I never had a test. It was only in May when (the entire team) had blood tests that I realized that I had had the virus.” 
 Valencia said after the March 10 game that about 35% of its team had the virus. 
 Gasperini adds, “Looking back, I think that was the period when I didn’t feel well. But I never had a fever or any sort of respiratory problems. When I left from Bergamo I felt fine. I had some problems that evening and the day after (the match).” 
 Experts say the first leg on Feb. 19 in Milan was one of the biggest reasons why the virus was so deadly in Atalanta’s home city of Bergamo. The match has been dubbed “Game Zero” by Italian media. 
 ___ 
 Seven Arkansas State athletes have tested positive for COVID-19 and are self-isolating for 14 days. 
 Chancellor Kelly Damphousse said the seven athletes are from three sports, and all were asymptomatic Thursday. They learned of the positive results Wednesday night. 
 The athletes who tested positive and are living off campus will self-isolate there or at home for 14 days. Those living on campus will self-isolate in their residence hall or at home for 14 days. 
 Damphousse said contact tracing has begun, and anyone who has been exposed to any of the seven athletes will be required to quarantine for 14 days. 
 “This is a day that we knew would come, not just at A-State, but for colleges and universities across America,” Damphousse said. 
 An Arkansas State spokesman said he didn’t know how many athletes have been tested since they began returning to campus for voluntary workouts. 
 Oklahoma State and Marshall have announced they’ve each had three athletes test positive. 
 ___ 
 The International Olympic Committee is in talks with insurers over compensation for the postponed 2020 Tokyo Games. 
 Olympic operations director Pierre Ducrey says there is “an open discussion” between the IOC and insurance brokers “to try and find the right level of compensation to help us bear the cost of having to wait another year.” 
 The IOC pays for insurance against the cancellation of an Olympics but it is unclear if its policy covers a one-year postponement. 
 Cancellation policies detailed in IOC accounts cost $14.4 million for the 2016 Rio de Janeiro Olympics and $12.8 million for the 2018 Pyeongchang Games. 
 The IOC said last month it set aside $650 million to cover potential extra costs for the postponement. 
 Costs for organizers in Japan are expected to run to billions of dollars. 
 ___ 
 Borussia Dortmund has defended a group of players who were accused of breaking Bundesliga hygiene rules while getting haircuts. 
 German newspaper Bild reports that some of the players were pictured without face masks during appointments at home with a celebrity barber. Forward Jadon Sancho was among the players. 
 League rules during the coronavirus pandemic say players should minimize contact with people from outside their household. They have to wear masks for large parts of game days unless actually on the field. 
 Dortmund sporting director Michael Zorc says he spoke with the players about their behavior and adds that they only removed their face masks to pose briefly for pictures. Zorc adds that the 20-year-old Sancho is still “very young.” 
 ___ 
 The Italian soccer federation is launching a fund of nearly $25 million to help clubs and their members following the crisis caused by the coronavirus pandemic. 
 The Save Soccer Foundation will need definitive approval at a federation meeting on Monday. 
 Federation president Gabriele Gravina says “it’s an initiative which doesn’t have precedents and represents a great assumption of responsibility which the (federation) is taking in favor of the whole soccer system.” 
 The fund consists of 21,700,000 euros ($24,500,000). It will give up to 5 million euros ($5.6 million) to each of the two divisions below Serie A as well as the same amount to support clubs from the amateur soccer league. 
 It will also give up to 3 million euros ($3.4 million) to soccer players and the same amount to coaches and their staff. 
 The fund will also provide 700,000 euros ($800,000) to help women’s soccer clubs that are set to complete the season. 
 ___ 
 More AP sports: https://apnews.com/apf-sports and https://twitter.com/AP_Sports 
NEW YORK (AP) — Baseball players reaffirmed their stance for full prorated pay, leaving a huge gap with teams that could scuttle plans to start the coronavirus-delayed season around the Fourth of July and may leave owners focusing on a schedule as short as 50 games. 
 More than 100 players, including the union’s executive board, held a two-hour digital meeting with officials of the Major League Baseball Players Association on Thursday, a day after the union’s offer was rejected by Major League Baseball. 
 “Earlier this week, Major League Baseball communicated its intention to schedule a dramatically shortened 2020 season unless players negotiate salary concessions,” union head Tony Clark said in a statement. “The concessions being sought are in addition to billions in player salary reductions that have already been agreed upon. This threat came in response to an association proposal aimed at charting a path forward.” 
 “Rather than engage, the league replied it will shorten the season unless players agree to further salary reductions,” Clark added. 
 Players originally were set to earn about $4 billion in 2020 salaries, exclusive of guaranteed money such as signing bonuses, termination pay and option buyouts. The union’s plan would cut that to around $2.8 billion and management to approximately $1.2 billion plus a $200 million bonus pool if the postseason is completed. 
 MLB last week proposed an 82-game season with an additional sliding scale of pay cuts that would leave a player at the $563,500 minimum with 47% of his original salary and top stars Mike Trout and Gerrit Cole at less than 22% of the $36 million they had been set to earn. 
 Players countered Sunday with a plan for  a 114-game regular season with no pay cuts beyond the prorated salaries they agreed to on March 26. That would leave each player with about 70% of his original pay. 
 
MLB rejected that Wednesday, when Deputy Commissioner Dan Halem wrote in a letter to union chief negotiator Bruce Meyer informing him “we do not have any reason to believe that a negotiated solution for an 82-game season is possible.” 
 “Nonetheless, the commissioner is committed to playing baseball in 2020,” Halem said in the letter, which was obtained by The Associated Press. “He has started discussions with ownership about staging a shorter season without fans.”  
 Management officials have said they are considering a slate of perhaps 50 games or fewer. There has not been a schedule averaging fewer than 82 games per team since 1879. 
 “The overwhelming consensus of the board is that players are ready to report, ready to get back on the field, and they are willing to do so under unprecedented conditions that could affect the health and safety of not just themselves, but their families as well,” Clark said in a statement. “The league’s demand for additional concessions was resoundingly rejected.” 
 Baseball’s March 26 deal allows games if there are no government restrictions on playing in front of fans and no relevant travel limitations. The sides agreed to “discuss in good faith” the economic feasibility of playing in empty ballparks, which appears to be the likely option. 
 MLB says that without fans it would average a loss of $640,000 for each additional game played. The union disputes the teams’ financial figures. 
 Teams also worry about a second wave of the new coronavirus this fall and don’t want to play past October, fearing $787 million in broadcast revenue for the postseason could be lost. MLB proposed expanding the playoffs from 10 teams to 14, which would generate additional broadcast rights to sell, and players have offered to guarantee the larger playoffs for both 2020 and 2021. 
 While baseball has reverted to the economic bickering that led to eight work stoppages from 1972-95, the NBA announced plans Thursday to resume its regular season with 22 teams on July 31, the  NHL is moving ahead with plans for an expanded Stanley Cup playoffs this summer and MLS is planning to have teams return with a tournament in July. 
 “In this time of unprecedented suffering at home and abroad, players want nothing more than to get back to work,” Clark said. “But we cannot do this alone.” 
  ___ 
 More AP MLB: https://apnews.com/MLB and https://twitter.com/AP_Sports  
WASHINGTON (AP) — The U.S. unemployment rate fell to 13.3% in May from 14.7%, and 2.5 million jobs were added — a surprisingly positive reading in the midst of a recession that has paralyzed the economy in the wake of the viral pandemic. The May job gain suggests that businesses have quickly been recalling workers as states have reopened their economies.  Other evidence has also shown that the job market meltdown triggered by the coronavirus has bottomed out. The number of people applying for unemployment benefits has declined for nine straight weeks. And the total number of people receiving such aid has essentially leveled off.  The overall job cuts have widened economic disparities that have disproportionately hurt minorities and lower-educated workers. Though the unemployment rate for white Americans was 12.4% May, it was 17.6% for Hispanics and 16.8% for African-Americans. Even with the surprising gain in May, it may take months for all those who lost work in April and March to find jobs. Some economists forecast the rate could remain in double-digits through the November elections and into next year. THIS IS A BREAKING NEWS UPDATE. AP’s earlier story is below: America’s workers likely suffered another devastating blow in May, with millions more jobs lost to the viral pandemic and an unemployment rate near or even above 20% for the first time since the Great Depression. Economists have forecast that the government will report Friday that employers shed 8.5 million more jobs last month on top of 21.4 million lost in March and April. A figure that large would raise the total losses since the coronavirus intensified nearly three months ago to almost 30 million — more than triple the number of jobs lost during the 2008-2009 Great Recession.  The economy has sunk into what looks like a deep recession, and most economists foresee unemployment remaining above 10% — its peak during the Great Recession — through the November elections and into next year. A report Thursday on applications for unemployment benefits reinforced the picture of a bleak job market: The number of people seeking jobless aid last week was double the previous record high that prevailed before the viral outbreak occurred.  Still, that report did offer a few glimmers of hope. As restaurants, movie theaters, gyms, hair salons and other retail establishments gradually reopen, job cuts are slowing and employers are recalling some of their laid-off workers. The total number of people receiving unemployment aid rose slightly, the government said, but stayed below a peak of 25 million reached two weeks earlier. And the number of laid-off workers applying for aid, while historically high, has declined for nine straight weeks. The economic shock, like the pandemic itself, has widened economic disparities that have disproportionately hurt minorities and lower-educated workers. More than 55% of African-Americans say they or someone in their household has lost income since mid-March, compared with 43% of whites, according to a weekly survey by the Census Bureau. For Hispanics, the figure is 60%. The pandemic has especially eliminated jobs, at least temporarily, at restaurants, hotels, retail chains and other lower-wage industries. The street protests over George Floyd’s killing that led to some vandalism and looting in dozens of cities won’t affect Friday’s jobs figures, which were compiled in the middle of May. But business closures related to the unrest could cause job losses that would be reflected in the June jobs report to be issued next month. A few businesses are reporting signs of progress even in hard-hit industries. American Airlines, for example, said this week that it would fly 55% of its U.S. routes in July, up from just 20% in May.  And the Cheesecake Factory said one-quarter of its nearly 300 restaurants have reopened, though with limited capacity. Sales at those restaurants are at nearly 75% of the levels reached a year ago, the company said. Both companies’ share prices rose. Those limited gains may lead to more rehiring as companies slowly restart shuttered businesses. But economists say the pace of hiring will then likely lag as a severe recession and high unemployment hold back consumer spending, the main driver of the economy.  Erica Groshen, a labor economist at Cornell University and a former commissioner of the Labor Department’s Bureau of Labor Statistics, said hiring could ramp up relatively quickly in coming months and reduce unemployment to low double-digits by year’s end.  “Then my inclination is that it will be a long, slow slog,” she said.  Overhanging the jobs picture is widespread uncertainty about how long the unemployed will remain out of work. Most of the layoffs in recent months were a direct result of the sudden shutdowns of businesses in response to the coronavirus pandemic. Though many of the unemployed have said they expect their layoffs to be temporary, many large businesses won’t rehire everyone they laid off. And some small employers might not reopen at all if the recession drags on. Until most Americans are confident they can shop, travel, eat out and fully return to their other spending habits without fear of contracting the virus, the economy will likely remain sluggish. Even if just one-third of the U.S. job losses turn out to be permanent, that would leave roughly 10 million people out of work. That is still more than all the jobs lost in the Great Recession. A hole that size would take years to fill. Oxford Economics estimates that the economy will regain 17 million jobs by year’s end, a huge increase by historical standards. But that would make up for barely more than half the losses. Gwyneth Duesbery, 22, returned this week to her job as a hostess at a steakhouse where she lives in Grand Rapids, Michigan, as the restaurant prepares to reopen. Duesbery said she is grateful for the opportunity, given that she hasn’t received unemployment benefits since the restaurant closed in March and has run through her savings.  She will spend this week helping to clean the restaurant and setting tables 6 feet apart. The restaurant will be able to seat only about one-quarter of its usual capacity.  The restaurant, Bowdie’s Chop House, has reservations for about 20 people for its opening night Monday and said it has drawn plenty of interest from longtime customers. Still, Duesbery worries about her health.  “I am concerned that it will expose me to potential diseases, and expose others, no matter the precautions that we take,” she said. “It’s kind of uncharted waters.” VALLEY STREAM, N.Y. (AP) — One was a nurse, another a retiree. Others had recently lost jobs with an insurance company and a country club.  
 On a humid day last week, in the parking lot of this Long Island town’s largest park, they had a common bond. Each was making their first visit to a food bank to help cope with hardships arising from the coronavirus outbreak. 
 “I’m hungry. That’s why I’m here,” said Marcia Duckley, a mother of four children ages 4 through 17 who lost her hotel job this year. “It never crossed my mind before that I’d be doing this.” 
 Duckley, who came to the United States 30 years ago from Jamaica, said she has recently been feeding her children meals of flour dumplings with butter – plus an occasional treat of water flavored with sugar. 
 “They say, ‘Mom, when are you going back to work?’” she said through an open window as she edged her car slowly forward. 
 The scene in Valley Stream, a community of 37,000 in the Nassau County suburbs just east of New York City, has been replicated nationwide during a 10-week stretch in which 42 million Americans have applied for unemployment benefits. Long lines of cars, sometimes numbering in the thousands, backed up while their occupants wait — sometimes for hours — for the chance to take home a free batch of food. 
 Island Harvest, one of the major food banks on Long Island, organized the food distribution in Valley Stream, one of many it has conducted throughout the area. 
 Randi Shubin Dresner, Island Harvest’s CEO, said the food bank has distributed 1.2 million more meals so far this year than during the same period last year. 
 In Valley Stream, she said, 1,124 boxes of food were distributed by volunteers, mostly to motorists, but also to several hundred people who came on foot. Each box contained roughly 25 pounds of milk, potatoes, apples, cheese and other produce. 
 “There are a lot of people who’ve never asked for food before -- some used to contribute to us,” she said. “It’s a very humbling experience for them.” 
 Dresner noted that some cars in the long line were new, upscale models — and that it would wrong to second-guess their occupants’ needs. 
 “Maybe a few weeks ago they had a great job,” she said. “Then the world is taken from underneath them and they have no income -- they’re struggling to pay the mortgage and the car loan.” 
 “It’s not up to us to judge the type of car that comes though the line, or the way people are dressed,” she added. “It’s up to us to respect them.” 
 The first woman waiting in the pedestrian line was indeed well dressed. She asked to be identified only as Maria G. and said she had been furloughed during the pandemic by the insurance company where she’d been an underwriter for 20 years.  
 She is a single mom living with four sons ages 15 to 20 who are “eating me out of house and home,” she said. 
 “I’ve never been through something like this,” she said. “I’ve seen it in Third World countries, and now it’s hit Valley Stream.” 
 Not far behind her was retiree Sheila Barron, 69, who said she was making her first trip to a food bank because of increasing wariness of grocery stores. They’re too crowded, she said, and often are out of items she needs.  
 The pandemic restrictions have been tough for her. She’s missed the opportunity to go to church and is asked to do medical appointments via telemedicine. 
 Barron was soon followed by Tina Grace, 29, walking alongside her bicycle, who said she was recently laid off by the country club where she worked on event planning. She’s getting unemployment compensation but worries it won’t last. 
 “I’m just taking it day by day,” she said. “It’s hard. It sucks. Everyone is in a tough situation right now.” 
 Unlike many others in line, Mary Blaize is still employed — she’s a nurse in New York City. The stress of her job is now compounded by her husband’s recent layoff, she said, making it harder to pay their mortgage and utility bills. 
 But she was upbeat about her first visit to a food bank. 
 “It feels good to know that people actually care,” she said. 
 In neighboring Connecticut, perennially ranked as one of the richest states, demand on food banks has also been intense. 
 Each weekday outside a football stadium in East Hartford, 1,000 to 2,500 cars roll through a distribution site run by the regional food bank, Foodshare. Drivers have their trunks open as volunteers load boxes of fruits and vegetables, bread, milk and even toys. 
 Among those making use of the site was Natalie Townsend, 32, a single mother from Hartford who lost her job at a call center in April. She said she has fallen two months behind on her rent, is still waiting for unemployment benefits and worries about how to care for her 9-year-old daughter. 
 “It definitely gets me down because I like to pay my bills on time,” she said. “I don’t want to be on the streets.” 
 Also at the site were Yanet Belossantos and her husband, Alex Cepeda, who lost their jobs in March, she as a medical assistant, he as a chef. The Dominican Republic immigrants live in Hartford with her mother, who has Alzheimer’s disease. 
 They have been surviving on unemployment benefits but are behind in their bills. 
 “We can’t go grocery shopping because we don’t have the money,” Belossantos said. “This is really helping us.” 
 In the mostly affluent southwest corner of Connecticut, Kate Lombardo says demand is up by about 40% in recent weeks for the Stamford-based Food Bank of Lower Fairfield County, of which she is executive director. 
 Lombardo says her own family in Brooklyn faced sudden hardship in the 1960s, including losing their house, after her father died and her mother had to care for five children. She said that experience deepens her empathy with people now facing their first-ever need for food assistance. 
 “Suddenly you feel like you’ve been transported to a different country,” Lombardo said. “You never used these resources before. You don’t know how to find them. It’s like Dorothy trying to find the Wizard of Oz.” 
 Lifelong Stamford resident Juledah Wilson -- in addition to her job as a paraeducator in the public school system – has for many years helped run one of the neighborhood food pantries supplied by the food bank. 
 But Wilson has been out of work since March; so are the two adult children who live with her, along with two grandchildren. Wilson recently designated herself and her family as recipients of aid from that very pantry in order to obtain meat, bread and fresh vegetables.  
 “I grew up with a lot of brothers and sisters,” she said. “I learned how to make do with what you have -- try to survive.” 
 Throughout her community, anxiety is high as food supplies grow tighter. 
 “A lot of people are very nervous,” Wilson said. “We don’t know where we’re headed. It’s kind of scary.” 
 ___ 
 Associated Press writer Dave Collins in East Hartford and AP video journalist Robert Bumsted in Valley Stream contributed to this report. 
BRIGHAM CITY, Utah (AP) — Wearing dress shirts, ties and name tags, three missionaries with The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints sit around the kitchen table inside a Utah apartment planning how they’ll spread their gospel that day.  
 Seth Rather, a 19-year-old from Wichita, Kansas, reads aloud as he types on a smartphone: “During this time, we must put our faith in God to deliver us through these unprecedented times. How has putting your faith in God helped you in your life?  
 “That good?” he asks his two companions.  
 “I like it,” Andrew Zitting responds. Guenter Castrillo nods.  
 With that, the young men have their Facebook post for the day.  
 This is what missionary work looks like during the coronavirus pandemic, which has forced the Utah-based faith widely known as the Mormon church to accelerate its online outreach. 
 After hastily bringing home more than 26,000 young people from overseas missions aimed at recruiting new members, the church has begun sending many of them out again in their home countries with a new focus on online work that may persist even after the pandemic, officials told The Associated Press.  
 “The leaders of our church have been asking us: What are we learning from this pandemic that will help us become better, become more efficient,” said Brent H. Nielson, executive director of the church’s missionary department. “We’ve learned that finding people, teaching people online is much more effective than trying to meet people in person on a bus or on a street corner or somewhere else. This will change what we do, I think, forever.”  
 Missionary work has changed drastically for young people like Rather and Castrillo, who had spent long days walking through the streets in the Philippines to spread the word of their faith before the pandemic hit. Now, they hardly leave a ground-level apartment in the small town of Brigham City in northern Utah.  
 After sending the Facebook post recently, they knelt for a prayer and then dialed in to a Zoom call with a family. A similar scene is playing out worldwide as reassigned missionaries navigate new realities.  
 In Orlando, Florida, Bella McCain and Madison King hold a WhatsApp video call with a family they have been teaching church doctrine. They invite the family to take the sacrament for the first time and follow up on an earlier proposal: forgo coffee, a key part of the faith’s health code, which also bans alcohol and tobacco. 
 The husband and wife had different outcomes: She says she found it difficult but would like to work on it. He says he’d given it up.  
 On Facebook, McCain and King craft a message in Portuguese, the language they learned for their original assignments in Brazil. They also text people asking to set up a call to talk about the church.  
 It’s a far cry from just months ago. In Brazil, McCain had one of those “little brick phones” and largely spoke to people face to face.  
 “Sometimes we feel like pioneers,” said McCain, a 19-year-old from Texas. “We’re not used to using social media in this way and, like, I never made videos and posted them online before. ... We’re all learning, and it’s really interesting and really fun.” 
 The church began incorporating online faith outreach when it gave some missionaries tablets six years ago. It’s since made technology more prevalent, giving most missionaries smartphones even before the pandemic, Nielson said.  
 A more online-based approach would be a major shift and could diminish the appeal for some young church members who crave an enriching cultural experience, said Ryan Cragun, a sociology professor at the University of Tampa who specializes in religion and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The time in the community also breaks up the drudgery of being alone with a fellow missionary, said Cragun, a former church member who served a mission in Costa Rica. 
 “There’s this quasi-tourist experience of going to these cool places, but there is also the connection you get to the people,” Cragun said. “That’s probably one of the more meaningful things that happens to them.” 
 McCain said she sees an opportunity to use online tools to reach more people. Still, “we would love to go and be able to teach in people’s houses.” She and King went to the home of the family they have been teaching to share the sacrament, while social distancing.  
 “Finding and teaching people online is really effective,” Nielson said, “but we also think there’s a personal touch, too, of meeting people” and having them come to church when things open up more.  
 The virus forced church officials to scramble for flights to get missionaries home from far-flung countries like Ethiopia, Australia and Vietnam. But Nielson said the church never wavered in keeping the missionary program going.  
 It shows the importance the church places on sharing its gospel and giving young people the chance to fulfill an important rite of passage. 
 About 5,000 missionaries who were brought home have been sent out again in the United States. Thousands more are heading out soon. The church gave them the option to wait a year, but the large majority chose to start again now, Nielson said.  
 Missions, which last two years for men and 18 months for women, are as much about locking in young church members for life as converting others, Cragun said. The average number of people converted per missionary has risen slightly in the last three years, to 3.7, but is still less than the average of five in the previous decade, church figures show. 
 Nielson said the pandemic has made people hungry for the missionaries’ message of hope. 
 “There’s never been a time when more people have wanted to know about religion than there is now,” Nielson said. “People searching for peace. People searching for answers. People searching for someone to talk to. It’s been an incredible thing.” 
 ___ 
 Fam reported from Winter Park, Florida. Associated Press religion coverage receives support from the Lilly Endowment through the Religion News Foundation. The AP is solely responsible for this content. 
LONDON (AP) — When black men died at the hands of U.S. police in recent years, the news made international headlines. The name of George Floyd has reached the world’s streets. 
 Since his death while being detained by Minneapolis police last week, Floyd’s face has been painted on walls from Nairobi, Kenya to Idlib, Syria. His name has been inked on the shirts of professional soccer players and chanted by crowds from London to Cape Town to Tel Aviv to Sydney.  
 The outpouring of outrage and support reflects the power and reach of the United States, a country whose best and worst facets fascinate the world. It also reflects that deep-seated racial inequalities are not just an American phenomenon. 
 “This happened in the United States, but it happens in France, it happens everywhere,” said Xavier Dintimille, who attended a thousands-strong Paris protest to show solidarity with U.S. demonstrators  and anger over a death closer to home.  
 The Paris demonstrators declared “We are all George Floyd,” but also invoked the name of Adama Traore, a 24-year-old Frenchman of Malian origin who died in police custody in 2016. The circumstances are still under investigation by justice authorities. 
 The world is used to watching American stories on TV and movie screens, and intrigued by a country founded on principles of equality and liberty but scarred by a tortured racial history of slavery and segregation. Viewed from abroad, images of U.S. violence and racial divisions can sometimes seem like part of a uniquely American malaise. 
 Not this time. When people around the world watched Floyd struggling for breath as a white police officer knelt on his neck, many saw reflections of violence and injustice in their own cities and towns. They heard echoes of their own experiences or those of family members, neighbors or friends.  
 “The same thing is happening here. It’s no different,” said Isaak Kabenge, who joined more than 1,000 other people at a protest in Sweden’s capital, Stockholm. “I got stopped (by police) two weeks ago. It happens all the time.” 
 
In London, thousands of people chanted “Say his name - George Floyd!”  as they marched through the city. But they also invoked names from nearby, including Stephen Lawrence, an 18-year-old black Londoner stabbed to death in 1993 as he waited for a bus. A bungled police investigation triggered a public inquiry, which concluded that the London police force was “institutionally racist.” 
 London-born “Star Wars” actor John Boyega, who was 1-year-old when Stephen Lawrence died, linked Lawrence, Floyd and other black victims of violence in a passionate speech to the crowd. 
 “Black lives have always mattered,” Boyega said. “We have always been important. We have always meant something.” 
 More than 160 people in Britain have died while in police custody in the past decade, and figures show that black people are twice as likely as white people to die under such circumstances.  
 In the London suburb of Croydon, hundreds of protesters gathered this week —standing the required coronavirus social distance of 2 meters (6½ feet) apart —and took a knee in memory both of Floyd and of Olaseni Lewis. The local man died in 2010 while being restrained by police at a psychiatric hospital. 
 Lewis’ mother, Ajibola Lewis, has campaigned to tighten the rules on the use of restraint by police. She said she couldn’t bear to watch the widely circulated footage of Floyd’s death. 
 “Many other families, we have heard our loved ones say ‘I can’t breathe,’” she told the BBC. “People think it’s only happening in America. It’s not. It’s happening here.” 
 Floyd’s death is another shocking turn for a technology-fueled world unsettled by disease, coronavirus lockdowns and massive unemployment. 
 The speed of social media helped Floyd’s final moments in Minneapolis spread around the world, and amplified the shock, anguish and anger they evoked. 
 Floyd’s death also dropped a spark into cities already smoldering from the coronavirus pandemic. In many countries, lockdowns imposed to slow the spread of the virus confined young people indoors for weeks. Their pent-up energy has been released into the streets as diverse, youthful crowds protest Floyd’s treatment, often in defiance of bans on mass gatherings.  
 In many places, protesters have tried to practice social distancing, but the attempts often fell apart in the heat of the moment. Some demonstrators wore face masks to guard against the virus — a practical health measure made poignant by the addition of Floyd’s dying words, “I can’t breathe,” written across the front. 
 The new virus has sent economies around the world into nosedives, throwing millions out of work. It has also exposed social inequalities, both in the United States — where cities with large black populations have been among the hardest hit — and elsewhere. 
 In Britain, black and ethnic minority people are at greater risk of dying with COVID-19, and have also been levied a disproportionate number of the fines and arrests for breaking lockdown rules, according to official statistics. 
 In London, some demonstrators called out the name of Belly Mujinga, a railway ticket-seller who died of coronavirus in April, weeks after she was spat at by a man claiming to have COVID-19. Police said they found no evidence to support charges in her death. 
 Thousands more plan to take to the streets of cities around the world this weekend, mourning a man whose death they hope will bring permanent change, and looking to the United States as both an inspiration and a warning. 
 “Here I think it’s systematic, and we need to start doing something starting from small to make change,” said musician Jayda Makwana, who joined thousands of others at a protest in London’s Hyde Park. “I think the U.K. could learn so much from the U.S., because we don’t want it to get to the point that it is at in the U.S.” 
 __ 
 Angela Charlton in Paris, David Keyton in Stockholm and Associated Press reporters around the world contributed to this story. 
 ___ 
 Follow more AP stories on the George Floyd protests and reaction at https://apnews.com/GeorgeFloyd 
NEW YORK (AP) — Since mid-March, when my NYC friends and I began sheltering at home, my piano has been a big source of comfort. I pound out the keys to Broadway tunes (“On My Own” from “Les Miserables”) and classical music (Rachmaninoff and Haydn). I even break into song, mostly off-key, perhaps annoying my neighbors in my Manhattan apartment building.  
 For me, sheltering at home is all too familiar. 
 Three years ago, I started chemotherapy to treat an aggressive form of breast cancer called Triple Negative. Just like now, my world suddenly shrunk. I was on lockdown for five months, afraid to venture out for fear of picking up an infection that would prevent me from getting my much-needed IV infusions.  
 This time is different. This time, the whole world has been embracing a version of what chemotherapy is like. And this time, I have my piano. 
 Back then, I bought Lysol wipes to sanitize every corner of my apartment (who knew they would become a rarity on store shelves?). I turned to online shopping so I didn’t have to venture to stores. I quit taking the subway and signed up for a ride-sharing app called Via. I worked from home while recovering from treatments. And I stopped going to work and social events, limiting my circle to a few friends and relatives. 
 During that time, I longed for a bigger place with room for my piano, which my late uncle left me and was in storage for four years. Playing piano is a source of comfort; it helps me ease the anxiety that many cancer survivors have.  
 Last year, I finally got that new place. But just months later, I was in lockdown again — this time because of a virus. 
 I was ready to hunker down all over again. I had my work schedule set. I went to my usual routine of showering and then going for walks before turning on my laptop. And I went back to sanitizing my apartment all the time.  
 Every night, I play the piano. In recent weeks, I’ve been sharing videos with friends and family on social media. Now I’m getting requests — including “Wheels on the Bus” from my great-nephew. I figure everyone could use some beautiful music, even if there are a few wrong notes. 
 Just like three years ago, I feel grateful that I can work from home, unlike so many essential workers who are on the front lines of the virus. I also feel lucky that I’m not doing chemo now; I’m empathetic about cancer patients who are in the middle of treatment.  
 During my last quarterly checkup, I saw patients getting treatments alone. They can’t bring a friend to chemotherapy and can’t have people over to their home for support as I did. On breast cancer support sites, women undergoing treatment share their worries about getting the virus on top of all their cancer fears. 
 As New York City’s economy starts to reopen, I, like many others who live here, will be slowly moving back to stores. But it’s going to take months for things to get better, and there’s that worry that there will be another surge of cases.  
 Just like the past, I will remain on alert. But as my anxiety starts to rise again, I will go to my piano and calmly sit down. I will think for a moment about what to play. Tonight, I decide on the melodic chords of Haydn’s “Concerto in D Major.” It’s the perfect antidote for me and the world right now on edge. 
 ___ 
 
Virus Diary, an occasional feature, showcases the coronavirus saga through the eyes of Associated Press journalists around the world. See previous entries here. Follow AP Retail Writer Anne D’Innocenzio on Twitter at http://twitter.com/ADInnocenzio 
BRUSSELS (AP) — Think about Hannibal Lecter, the psychopathic cannibal in the “Silence of The Lambs.” Or Jason Voorhees, the hockey mask-wearing murderer in the “Friday the 13th” slasher film series. Before the coronavirus outbreak abruptly disrupted the livelihoods of millions of people, the sight of masks worn in public spaces in the Western world conjured up images of malevolent clowns and terrifying fictional villains. Even worse, in the streets of Paris, London or Brussels, mask-wearing — a long-accepted measure in some Asian cities — would often trigger unease and angst related to real-life traumatic bloodshed orchestrated by balaclava-led commandos from extremist groups. France banned the wearing of full veils in public places back in 2011 in part because the government said the face covering violated the nation’s secular values, well before the COVID-19 pandemic took shape. But in the space of just a few weeks this spring, this narrative has been turned upside down. Masks are everywhere and carry a new, positive meaning. “The mask, at first, is anxiety-inducing,” Franck Cochoy, a professor of sociology at the University of Toulouse Jean Jaures, said in a phone interview. “When people saw them in the street, it felt like they were faced with the threat of the disease. Today, what people find scary is not having masks. Masks have become soothing objects.”  After discouraging citizens from wearing face covers during the early stages of the pandemic, most governments now recommend, or even make their use mandatory, as they try to slow the spread of the virus. Cochoy is stunned by how quickly people have adopted masks. With a team of researchers, he has surveyed their use during the health crisis, scrutinizing more than a thousand testimonies. He said masks have created a new kind of social inequality, “a social division between those who have masks, and those who don’t.” “People who don’t have masks feel naked,” he said.  At the start of the pandemic, the lack of masks led many people to resort to homemade solutions. Although medical professionals say the protection they offer is not ideal, hand-crafted masks have become a hit and the small pieces of fabric covering the nose and mouth are now a social marker like any other piece of clothing. On the glitzy Champs-Elysees avenue in Paris, when shoppers were allowed back in the streets after two months of a stringent lockdown, a woman sported a black mask with a white Chanel inscription. In Brussels, inside a small shop selling organic fruit and vegetables popular with the so-called “bohemian-bourgeois” urbanites, hand-crafted masks come in a myriad of designs and a rainbow of colors. A few hundreds meters down the road, people running errands at a big-chain supermarket mostly wear the surgical, disposable version of the mask — the one available for less than one euro in pharmacies — with no aesthetic airs at all. Vanessa Colignon, a textile and fashion designer based in Brussels, has been engaged for years in zero-waste projects, using natural or recycled materials from sustainable local producers. It’s the daily sight of cheap disposable gloves and masks thrown away in the streets of her neighborhood that convinced her to start producing her own during the health crisis. “I expected the government to develop reusable masks and gloves,” she said, disappointed by a perceived lack of commitment for sustainable mask production from Belgian authorities. “The priority should have been to say: ‘We don’t make disposable masks anymore,’” she added. Cochoy thinks the dichotomy between the hand-crafted and surgical masks offers a preview of the trend that will shape life after COVID-19, supporters of sustainable development facing off against “growth at all costs” strategies. “It’s fascinating. These two types of masks are carrying voices for the post-coronavirus world,” he said. “On one hand, the surgical masks embody the modern, globalized world, where everything is standardized, with all its advantages and inconveniences. Their filtration power is high, measurable, and certified, but they come from abroad in containers, are carbon-charged, disposable. With the homemade version, we return to a form of less efficient, but also non-market, sustainable economy.” ___ Follow AP news coverage of the coronavirus pandemic at https://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak.BANGKOK (AP) — Factories and stores are reopening, economies are reawakening – but many jobs just aren’t coming back. 
 That’s the harsh truth facing workers laid off around the world, from restaurants in Thailand to car factories in France, whose livelihoods fell victim to a virus-driven recession that’s accelerating decline in struggling industries and upheaval across the global workforce. 
 New U.S. figures released on Friday showed a surprise drop in joblessness as some of those who were temporarily laid off returned to work. But it’s only a dent in the recent months’ surge of unemployment, which remains near Depression-era levels. In a pattern repeated across the world, high unemployment means less money spent in surviving stores, restaurants and travel businesses, with repercussions across economies rich and poor. 
 “My boss feared that since we come from Kibera (an impoverished slum), we might infect them with COVID-19, and so he let us go,” said Margaret Awino, a cleaning worker in a Nairobi charity. “I don’t know how I can go on.” 
 As the virus and now protests across the U.S. have shed new light on economic inequalities, some experts say it’s time to rethink work, wages and health benefits altogether, especially as automation escalates and traditional trades vanish. 
 THAI CHEF 
 When Wannapa Kotabin got a job as an assistant chef in the kitchen of one of Bangkok’s longest-established Italian restaurants, she thought her career was set. 
 But five years on, she’s in line with more than 100 other jobless Thais outside an unemployment office. 
 The government ordered all restaurants closed in March to combat the coronavirus, and 38-year-old Wannapa has been spending her savings on food and shelter. 
 When restaurants were allowed to re-open in May, Wannapa’s restaurant told staff its closure was permanent. 
 “I never thought this would happen,” she said. “It’s like my heart got broken twice.” 
 Around the world, new virus safety rules mean restaurants and stores can’t hold as many people as they used to, so they can’t afford as much staff. Many can’t afford to reopen at all. 
 Bangkok’s restaurants are firing, not hiring, she said. 
 “I will have to go on and keep fighting,” she declared. “If there is any job that I can do, I will do it.” 
 Wannapa’s unemployment benefit can only tide her over for so long. She said if she can’t find work, she’ll have to return to her family’s rubber plantation to start life all over again. 
 ISRAELI PROGRAMMER 
 When the coronavirus first broke out, Israeli software developer Itamar Lev was told to work from home. Then the online advertising company he worked for slashed his salary 20%. Finally, just as restrictions started to ease, he was fired. 
 Lev, 44, is among hundreds of thousands of Israelis out of a job as a result of the pandemic, more than 25% of the workforce. 
 “It was sudden. I wasn’t ready for it,” he said. 
 Tied to the American market, Lev’s company’s advertising revenue dried up and they had to make cutbacks. Lev said he was treated respectfully, and sees himself as simply a victim of the times.  
 He is already preparing for interviews and confident he will find a new position soon. In a country versed in disruptions from wars and security threats, he said Israelis have built up a certain resilience to upheaval. 
 Still, he said this time feels different. His wife, a self-employed dance instructor, has also seen her income temporarily evaporate, forcing the couple to dig into their savings. 
 “The ‘comeback’ is going to take longer,” said Lev, father of a 5-year-old girl. “It’s a difficult period. We’re just going to have to take a deep breath and get through it.” 
 KENYAN CLEANER 
 Perhaps hardest-hit by virus job losses are low-paid service workers like 54-year-old Awino, who lost her job after 15 years as a cleaner at one of Mother Teresa’s charities in Nairobi. 
 Awino shares a shack with her four daughters, including one who has epilepsy and requires costly medical care, and they share a communal toilet nearby. She hasn’t seen her husband in nine years. 
 Without her regular $150 monthly salary, she now buys raw chicken and fries it on the streets for sale. 
 “Ever since I was fired because of COVID-19, I put all my efforts into my business,” she said. 
 Some days she earns more than what she was making at her old job, but it’s hard work, and unpredictable. City council and health inspectors are known to raid informal street vendors, who are often arrested and have their goods confiscated.  
 Awino has no choice but to take the risk, and she’s not alone: Hundreds of thousands of Kenyans have also lost their jobs because of the pandemic. 
 CLOUDY SKIES 
 On a global scale, the industry perhaps most vulnerable is aviation. 
 Germany’s Lufthansa is losing a million euros an hour, and its CEO estimates that when the pandemic is over it will need 10,000 fewer workers than it does now. Emirates President Tim Clark signaled it could take the Dubai-based airline four years to return to its full network of routes. 
 The ripple effect on jobs in tourism and hospitality sectors is massive.  
 Countries like the United Arab Emirates are home to millions of foreigners who far outnumber the local population – many of whom have lost their jobs. Their families in countries like India, Pakistan, Nepal and the Philippines rely on their monthly remittances for survival. 
 Egyptian hotel chef Ramadan el-Sayed is among thousands sent home in March as the pandemic began to decimate Dubai’s tourism industry. He returned to his wife and three kids in the city of Sohag, about 500 kilometers (310 miles) south of Cairo. He has not been paid since April. 
 “There’s no work here at all,” he said. “Even tourism here is operating at 25% so who’s going to hire here?” 
 He sits idle, relying on his brother and father for support. He is hopeful the Marriott hotel where he worked will bring him back at the end of the summer when they plan to re-open.  
 “We are waiting, God willing,” el-Sayed said.  
 LONG ROAD AHEAD 
 So why aren’t all the jobs coming back, if economies are reopening? 
 Some companies that came into the recession in bad shape can no longer put off tough decisions. Meanwhile, even though reopened cities are filling anew with shoppers and commuters, many consumers remain wary about returning to old habits for fear of the virus. 
 “Some firms that were healthy before governments imposed shutdowns will go bankrupt, and it could take a long time for them to be replaced by new businesses,” Capital Economics said in a research note. “Other firms will delay or cancel investment.” 
 It estimates that a third of U.S. workers made jobless by the pandemic won’t find work within six months. And some European workers on generous government-subsidized furlough programs could get laid off when they expire, as companies like French carmaker Renault and plane maker Airbus face up to a bleaker future. 
 Holger Schmieding, economist at Berenberg Economics, warned: “The COVID-19 pandemic and the ensuing mega-recession may shape political debates and choices for a long time.” 
 ___ 
 Charlton reported from Paris. Aya Batrawy in Dubai, Khaled Kazziha in Nairobi, Aron Heller in Kfar Saba, Israel, David Biller in Rio de Janeiro and Dave McHugh in Frankfurt contributed. 
COLOMBO, Sri Lanka (AP) — The tourists came to see the magical waterfalls and mountain views of the lowland jungle and rainforest. But then the pandemic hit, and they were stranded in Sri Lanka. 
 When flights were canceled and the airports shut down, Darshana Ratnayake came to the rescue. 
 Ratnayake, a cafe owner in Ella, a former colonial hill station in Sri Lankan tea country, organized free food and shelter for dozens of stranded tourists. 
 “We were totally blown away,” said Alex Degmetich, a 31-year-old American cruise line entertainment director. 
 “It’s pretty remarkable,” he said. “Coming from Western society, where nothing is really given to us and we have to pay for everything which is fine. But here, locals providing us — tourists — free food and accommodation, is really humbling.” 
 The Sri Lankan government imposed a nationwide curfew on March 20 to curb the spread of the virus, sealing off entire regions of the Indian Ocean island nation. Degmetich was among 40 tourists from 11 countries stranded in Ella, 200 kilometers (120 miles) east of the capital, Colombo. 
 Ella’s famous treks tend to draw a young backpacker crowd, and Darshana knew they’d soon be out of money, and the small bed-and-breakfast lodges out of food. 
 He was right: Many of the tourists had just enough money to pay for the trip, and broken supply chains meant the lodges were running low on provisions. 
 Darshana established his Chill Cafe as a juice bar with two tables 13 years ago. The business has grown to a full restaurant and boutique hotel with 72 employees. 
 Just after the curfew was imposed, Darshana prepared a list of those staying in lodges and began boxed dinner deliveries. And he convinced lodge owners to let their guests stay on for free. 
 “Our livelihood depends on tourism. We must help tourists when they are in trouble. Money isn’t everything. We must help and share at difficult times like this,” he said. 
 He said he also donated 5 million Sri Lankan rupees ($27,000) to tour guides who lost their income when tourism came to a standstill.  
 Darshana said Sri Lanka’s bloody, decades-long civil war had a huge impact on tourism in Ella. Any time a bomb went off in the country, he said, tourist arrivals fell sharply. For 25 years, separatists from the minority Tamil community fought for a separate state. By the time government forces crushed the rebellion in 2009, U.N. estimates say some 100,000 people had been killed. 
 With the war’s end, Ella’s visitor numbers rose sharply, averaging a thousand people a day, he said. 
 Darshana has expanded his support to both lunch and dinner each day — without, he insists, sacrificing on quality or customer service. 
 Rebecca Curwood-Moss, a tourist from England, felt hopeless when Sri Lanka’s curfew was imposed. She said Darshana’s meals have done more than fill empty stomachs. 
 “In the box, we didn’t just find the delicious homemade rice and curry, but we found hope,” she said. 
 ___ 
 While nonstop news about the effects of the coronavirus has become commonplace, so, too, have tales of kindness. “One Good Thing” is a series of AP stories focusing on glimmers of joy and benevolence in a dark time. Read the series here: https://apnews.com/OneGoodThing 
PORTLAND, Ore. (AP) — An increasing number of cities are rethinking the presence of school resource officers as they respond to the concerns of thousands of demonstrators — many of them young — who have filled the streets night after night to protest the death of George Floyd. 
 Portland Public Schools, Oregon’s largest school district, on Thursday cut its ties with the Portland Police Bureau, joining other urban districts from Minneapolis to Denver that are mulling the fate of such programs. Protesters in some cities, including Portland, have demanded the removal of the officers from schools.  
 Floyd, who was handcuffed and prone on his stomach, died after a white Minneapolis police officer pressed his knee to Floyd’s neck for nearly nine minutes during an arrest on May 25.  
 Minneapolis suspended its school resource officer program on Tuesday. Districts in St. Paul, Minnesota and Denver are considering doing the same. Protesters in Charlottesville, Virginia, have made the end of the school resource officer program in their district one of their demands. 
 Portland Mayor Ted Wheeler said Thursday that he would also discontinue using school resource officers in two smaller metropolitan districts under a program that in total costs the city $1.6 million a year and has been in place for more than two decades. The three districts have a combined student population of nearly 53,000, with more than 49,000 in Portland schools alone. 
 Having the officers in high schools has been a touchy topic for several years in this liberal city. Students have protested in recent years for an end to the program, at one point even overwhelming a school board meeting. 
 “Leaders must listen and respond to community. We must disrupt the patterns of racism and injustice,” Wheeler said Thursday of the most recent demonstrations. “I am pulling police officers from schools.” 
 The presence of armed police officers in schools is a contentious one.  
 While many Portland residents applauded the decision, others raised immediate concerns about student safety in the event of a school shooting or other emergency. A suicidal student last year brought a gun to a high school at one of the districts that will be affected by the decision and was tackled by the track coach in an incident that got national attention. 
 “Over the last several years there have been ongoing conversations about the police and their role in public schools,” said Portland Police Chief Jami Resch. “I want to reassure the public that if there is a public safety emergency at a school, PPB will respond.” 
 The move is “a knee-jerk reaction,” and the decision by a few districts to stop their programs could snowball — to the detriment of students nationwide, said Mo Canady, executive director of the National Association of School Resource Officers, which represents about 10,000 dues-paying officers. 
 There are an estimated 25,000 school resource officers nationwide, he said. 
 “What happened last Monday is atrocious. I don’t know how someone who wears a uniform, like I used to do, could get to that point. That’s evil,” Canady said of Floyd’s death. “But ... I think there’s some shortsightedness here. When it’s done right, the SRO program really is the epitome of community-based policing. I hate to see the baby thrown out with the bathwater.” 
 Beyond their law enforcement role, the model for school resource officers endorsed by the U.S. Justice Department enlists them also as mentors, informal counselors and educators on topics ranging from bullying to drunk driving with the goal of promoting school safety. 
 But critics of the concept say the officers’ presence can also lead to the criminalization of students, particularly students of color, who may be labeled as troublemakers for things such as not paying attention in class, using a cellphone or other minor infractions. In 2015, a school resource officer in South Carolina was caught on video flipping a female student to the floor and dragging her across a classroom after she refused to surrender her cellphone. 
 Nationwide, 43% of public schools had an armed law enforcement officer present at least once a week in the 2015-2016 school year, the last time the National Center for Education Statistics released data on this topic. 
 Properly trained officers work closely with school administrators, Canady said. Generally there is an understanding that anything short of illegal activity should be handled by school officials, he said. 
 ___ 
 Follow Gillian Flaccus on Twitter at http://www.twitter.com/gflaccus 
PORTLAND, Maine (AP) — Eric Pray is used to shipping seafood all over the country. But since the coronavirus took hold, he has shifted his focus closer to home — selling lobsters from a homemade tank in his garage. 
 Pray, of Portland, Maine, is one of hundreds of fishermen, farmers and food producers who have shifted to a direct-to-consumer model amid the virus outbreak. The pandemic has stressed and sometimes disrupted supply chains, shuttered restaurants and changed the way consumers buy food, leaving some producers scrambling for a new way to reach their customers. 
 The farm-to-table movement in the United States has grown in recent years, as consumers have increasingly demanded locally sourced food. But in the past several weeks, the movement has grown out of necessity because some producers can’t rely on the complex web of processors, distributors and middlemen to get food to customers. 
 For some, the challenges have turned into opportunities — and new customers. 
 “When restaurants reopen, we’ll probably keep doing home delivery, because we’ve got a good base of customers,” Pray said. 
 But it’s not good news for many of America’s food producers. In late April and early May, U.S. beef and pork processing capacity was down 40% from last year, according to Jayson Lusk, head of the department of agricultural economics at Purdue University. Plants are now mainly back online but at reduced capacity with beef and pork plants running about 10% to 15% below last year, he said. 
 Some sectors have also suffered reductions in value, in part because the restaurants they normally rely on are closed. Live, 1.25-pound lobsters were worth $6.74 per pound in the Northeast in April, which was 13% less than a year ago and 37% less than two years ago.  
 “The two biggest problems are facilitating distribution throughout the supply chain while protecting worker health, and revamping food demand in a way that avoids further disruptions,” said LaPorchia Collins, a professor in the Department of Economics at Tulane University.  
 Before the pandemic hit, Gunthorp Farms in LaGrange, Indiana, had been selling most of its pasture-raised pork and poultry to upscale restaurants, including ones started by famed chef Rick Bayless, as well as to charcuterie shops. Then, practically overnight, restaurants and shops shut down, drying up the farm’s business.  
 The farm has been able to switch to retail packaging and selling the pork and poultry elsewhere but it’s been far from easy, coming after endless hours of work by the family and employees, said Greg Gunthorp. That involved changing the labeling, adding bar codes, and cutting and packaging portions rather than selling in bulk.  
 “It’s been way, way too much work, way more changes. We made more changes in the first two weeks than we had planned to make in two years,” he said.  
 Templeton Farm, a small grass-fed beef farm in East Montpelier, Vermont, lost its biggest business — two restaurant accounts — when they had to shut down. But around the same time, the phone starting ringing with people seeking locally raised beef, said farmer Bruce Chapell. 
 “Since then, our beef sales have been off the charts,” he said. 
 PrairiErth Farm in Atlanta, Illinois, this season doubled its consumer supported agriculture, where customers pay up front for produce throughout the season to 322 members, said Katie Bishop, one of the farmers. And it has about 75 on its waiting list, she said.  
 However, it’s unclear whether this new model will be sustainable once the coronavirus crisis passes. 
 Food products that are heavily dependent on restaurants, such as seafood, eventually need those customers back, said John Sackton, an industry analyst and publisher of SeafoodNews.com. But for now, selling direct to customers is a way to get a better price for those products than they would typically see, he said. 
 Pray, a Maine fishermen for three decades, said he’s managing to make ends meet so far, but it’ll be more of a challenge the longer restaurants and processors remain inaccessible. One of his customers, South Portland anesthesiologist Stephen Harden, said the appeal is as much about helping neighbors as buying great food. 
 “My wife and I sort of felt it was our duty to support locally as much as possible,” he said. “And of course, the food is much better quality.” 
May 29- June 5, 2020 
 This photo gallery highlights some of the most compelling images made or published by Associated Press photographers in the North America region. 
 The gallery was curated by photo editor Courtney Dittmar in New York. 
 Follow AP visual journalism: 
 Instagram:  https://www.instagram.com/apnews 
 AP Images on Twitter: https://twitter.com/AP_Images 
 AP Images blog: https://apimagesblog.com 
MINNEAPOLIS (AP) — A mural honoring George Floyd was projected above his golden coffin, where mourners knelt and cried, paused and prayed Thursday at his memorial service. Its simple message: “I can breathe now.” 
 But for far too many black Americans, dreams have been dashed and goals not achieved because they still cannot breathe, said the Rev. Al Sharpton, who eulogized Floyd in Minneapolis on Thursday. 
 “The reason we could never be who we wanted and dreamed to be is you kept your knee on our neck,” Sharpton said in reference to Floyd’s May 25 arrest, during which a white Minneapolis police officer pressed his knee into the handcuffed black man’s neck for several minutes even after Floyd stopped moving and pleading for air.  
 “What happened to Floyd happens every day in this country,” Sharpton said. “It’s time for us to stand up in George’s name and say, ‘Get your knee off our neck!’” 
 Floyd’s memorial service was a send-off that his family felt he deserved — they paid heartfelt tribute to a man they affectionately called “Perry.” With many of Minnesota’s top elected leaders in the room, along with members of Congress, the service included strong calls for meaningful changes in policing and the criminal justice system. 
 During eulogy remarks, Sharpton revealed plans to hold a commemorative march on Washington in August as part of a push for federal policing reforms. 
 “When we fight for the George Floyds of the world — and more importantly, the unknown George Floyds of the world — we are helping America be America for all Americans,” said Floyd family attorney Ben Crump, who listed off the names of other African American men and women killed by police. 
 Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee, who represents Floyd’s native Houston and attended the service, said she and other lawmakers on Thursday introduced police accountability legislation named after Floyd. The measure calls for improved training for police departments and standards for how the use of deadly force and misconduct are investigated, among other aims.  
 “We have put a stop sign in front of America — there will be no more” unchecked killing by police, Jackson Lee told The Associated Press. “I will never forget the words ‘I can’t breathe.’ America cannot allow people to die in the 21st century.” 
 She was among dozens of other politicians, celebrities, civil rights activists and family members of Floyd who sang “Amazing Grace,” prayed and joined together in a rousing memorial that was a celebration for a man whose death at the hands of police has sparked protests nationwide and calls for an end to racial injustice.  
 Inside the service, held in the Frank J. Lindquist sanctuary at North Central University, mourners wore masks, some with the words “I can’t breathe” on them. Organizers issued several reminders for attendees to keep some social distance. Many attendees bumped elbows rather than hug or shake hands at the memorial taking place in the midst of the coronavirus pandemic.  
 It was not the coronavirus that killed Floyd, Crump said in his service remarks, but the “pandemic of racism and discrimination.” 
 Floyd’s brother and other family members told personal stories about dancing, playing football, cooking and enjoying life together. They said he was also known by other endearing nicknames such as “Georgie Porgie.” 
 “George, he was like a general,” brother Philonise Floyd said. “Every day he would walk outside, there would be a line of people wanting to greet him. ... He was powerful, man. He had a way with words. ... Everybody loved George.”  
 Projected above the pulpit inside the sanctuary was the blue and orange mural that was painted at the site of a makeshift memorial in the neighborhood where Floyd pleaded for air. A small band and choir sang “Goin’ Up Yonder” and other classic gospel songs as mourners gathered. Grammy Award-winning gospel singer Bishop Hezekiah Walker closed the service with the song “Every Praise.” 
 Others in attendance included Martin Luther King III; Minnesota Sen. Amy Klobuchar; Reps. Ilhan Omar, Ayanna Pressley and Joyce Beatty; rapper T.I. and his wife Tameka “Tiny” Harris; rapper Ludacris; singer Tyrese Gibson; comedians Kevin Hart and Tiffany Haddish; and actress Marsai Martin. 
 Floyd’s body will go from the first service to Raeford, North Carolina, the state where he was born 46 years ago, for a two-hour public viewing and private service for the family on Saturday. 
 Finally, a public viewing will be held Monday in Houston, where he was raised and lived most of his life. A 500-person service on Tuesday will take place at The Fountain of Praise church and will include addresses from Sharpton, Crump, and the Rev. Remus E. Wright, the family pastor. Former Vice President Joe Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, may attend, and other political figures and celebrities are expected as well. A private burial will follow. 
 Floyd’s final journey was designed with intention, Sharpton said ahead of Thursday’s service. Having left Houston for Minneapolis in 2014 in search of a job and a new life, Floyd will retrace that path in death. 
 Many mourners have noted that among the wrenching cries that Floyd made in his final moments, one was for his mother, Larcenia Floyd, who had died two years earlier.  
 Sharpton said George Floyd was calling for his mother because, as he neared death, she had her hands outstretched to him calling him back home. 
 “Come on, George,” Sharpton said. “I’ll welcome you where the wicked will cease from troubling you, where the weary will get rest. It’s a place where police don’t put knees on you, George.” 
 ___ 
 Associated Press writers Amy Forliti in Minneapolis, Scott Bauer in Madison, Wisconsin; and Nomaan Merchant in Houston contributed to this report.  
SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. (AP) — Social media influencer Jake Paul faces misdemeanor charges following a riot at a mall outside Phoenix, police said Thursday. Paul, who has 20 million followers, says he was merely trying to find people protesting against the death of George Floyd. 
 Paul, 23, was identified as a participant in a riot last Saturday night at Scottsdale Fashion Square and has been charged with criminal trespass and unlawful assembly, the Scottsdale Police Department said in a statement. 
 Police determined that “Paul was present after the protest was declared an unlawful assembly and the rioters were urged to leave the area by police.” He entered and remained inside of the mall when it was closed, police said. 
 Sgt. Benjamin Hoster said he didn’t know whether Paul has an attorney and that he was issued a summons to appear in court “in a month.”  
 Paul, who has over 20 million YouTube subscribers, said in video posted Wednesday, that he and friends went to the mall to attend a protest against the death of George Floyd while in custody of Minneapolis. 
 They instead found people engaged in looting and property damage that included shattered windows of offices and stores, Paul said, adding that he didn’t participate in that activity.  
 “That’s the way it looked on camera. However that isn’t the case,” he said. 
 Paul said he kept walking in the mall area despite encountering the criminal activity because he still wanted to find the protest.  
 He said it was upsetting that social media posts accused him of vandalism. “I’m above that. I don’t’need to vanadalize. I don’t need to loot and I know it’s not the way forward.” 
 Paul said he was an “easy target” and that he has learned a lesson about entering situations that could pose problems. “But it’s not going to stop me from doing what I need to do.”” 
WASHINGTON (AP) — The death of George Floyd in police hands has pushed the U.S. military to search its soul and to admit that, like the rest of America, it has fallen short on racial fairness. 
 Although the military historically has prided itself on diversity, leaders acknowledge that black troops often are disproportionately subject to military legal punishment and are impeded in promotions. 
 “I struggle with the Air Force’s own demons that include the racial disparities in military justice and discipline among our youngest black male airmen,” Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force Kaleth O. Wright, an African American and the service’s top enlisted airman, wrote in a social media post this week. 
 While tensions simmer between the Pentagon and the White House over the proper limits of military involvement in policing protests prompted by the May 25 killing of Floyd in Minneapolis, what goes largely unspoken is that many of the troops being called upon to help keep order are African Americans and other minorities. 
 Defense Secretary Mark Esper said little about the Floyd killing until Wednesday, when he called a news conference and declared the death a police murder. “It is a tragedy that we have seen repeat itself too many times,” he said. 
 Esper, a West Point graduate who served 10 years on active duty in the Army, called the military a leader on the racial front. But he acknowledged it has “much to do” to improve diversity and stop discrimination. 
 Wright, the chief master sergeant, said his greatest fear is waking up one morning to learn that a black airman has “died at the hands of a white police officer.” 
 On a less drastic, more subtle level, many African Americans who have served say they feel angst. 
 “I’m black, and when I walk up to somebody and say Hi, unless I have my veteran’s sticker on my car or I’m on base, people look at me with a frown or walk away. Tensions are high,” said Elvin Carey, a 35-year-old Iraq War veteran who is a civilian employee at Marine Corps Air Station Miramar in a San Diego suburb. 
 Wright was the first senior military leader to speak out after Floyd’s death. He was followed by an outpouring of anger and anxiety — some directed at the services’ own racial failings — from senior leaders throughout the military. Few concrete proposals for improvement have been offered, though, reflecting the difficulty of rapid change in such a large and tradition-bound institution. 
 “Over the past week, after we’ve watched what is going on, we can’t be under any illusions about the fact that racism is alive and well in our country. And I can’t be under any illusions that we don’t have it in our Navy,” Adm. Mike Gilday, the chief of naval operations, said in a video message to all sailors Wednesday. 
 Army leaders took a similar tack. 
 “Though we all aspire to live by the Army values of loyalty, duty, respect, selfless service, honor, integrity, and personal courage, the Army has sometimes fallen short,” Army Secretary Ryan McCarthy and the Army chief of staff, Gen. James McConville, wrote in a message to the force Wednesday. “Because just as we reflect the best of America, we reflect its imperfections as well.”  
 The military, with African Americans making up a little over 17 percent of its active duty ranks, is more racially diverse than the country, which is 13 percent African American, according to 2019 Census estimates. The Army is the most diverse with more than 21 percent African Americans, while the Marine Corp is the least, with 10 percent. Blacks make up about 17 percent of the Navy and less than 15 percent of the Air Force. 
 But there is a much greater racial divide within the active duty military based on rank. 
 Fully 19 percent of active duty enlisted troops are black, but they make up only 9 percent of the officer corps. Of those, there are just 71 who are general or flag officers, wearing one to four stars, including only two who have attained the top four-star rank. 
 Colin Powell, an Army four-star, was White House national security adviser and then chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff before President George W. Bush named him secretary of state. 
 However, none of the military services has ever been led by a black officer, although that is expected to change soon. Gen. Charles Q. Brown Jr., has been nominated to lead the Air Force, succeeding Gen. David Goldfein. 
 In a tangible sign of openness to forcing change on the racial front, Goldfein declared in an internal message June 2, “We must look inward at our Air Force.” The service’s inspector general, he said, will review the Air Force’s legal system as well as “racial injustice and opportunities for advancement.” 
 Wright, the senior Air Force enlisted airmen, faulted himself for not doing enough and encouraged all airmen to suggest solutions. 
 Gen. Mark Milley, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, joined the chorus of voices with a message to the force that addressed more broadly the need for troops to stay true to the Constitution. 
 “We all committed our lives to the idea that is America,” he added in a hand-written note beside his signature. “We will stay true to that oath and the American people.” 
 The military has not ignored the race issue entirely. In April, the top Marine, Gen. David Berger, took on the issue of racial tensions within the Corps by banning the display of the Confederate flag and other such symbols. 
 In a memo to the Corps on April 20, he said, “I am mindful that many people believe that flag to be a symbol of heritage or regional pride. But I am also mindful of the feelings of pain and rejection of those who inherited the cultural memory and present effects of the scourge of slavery in our country.” 
 “Anything that divides us, anything that threatens team cohesion must be addressed head-on,” he declared. 
 ___ 
 AP writer Julie Watson in San Diego contributed. 
LAWRENCE, Mass. (AP) — For Albert Baraka, the ceremony outside the federal immigration office in Lawrence, Massachusetts, was brief, but life changing. 
 The 20-year-old, who came to the country six years ago as a refugee from Congo, joined nine others Thursday morning to recite the oath of allegiance, the final, ceremonial step to becoming a U.S. citizen. 
 A junior studying business management at Norwich University, a private military college in Vermont, he said he’s looking forward to being able to cast his very first ballot this election. 
 “In these hard times, it’s a blessing,” Baraka said, standing with his mother, who became a citizen earlier this year, and his younger sister. “Voting is the most important thing for me now because I feel like it’s important to choose wisely in who you want to be your leader, and to speak out on what you believe in.” 
 U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, which is charged with overseeing the nation’s legal immigration system, resumed in-person services in many cities across the country Thursday after closing offices mid-March because of the coronavirus pandemic.  
 The agency conducted naturalization ceremonies in small groups and allowed limited, in-person visits for interviews, biometric intakes and other immigration matters. In Massachusetts, Baraka was among more than 100 people to officially became a U.S. citizen outside the Lawrence office Thursday.  
 But immigrant rights groups say the agency still hasn’t come up with an efficient plan to get through the backlog of people already approved to become citizens who had oath ceremonies cancelled in recent months because of the pandemic. 
 More than 100,000 people nationwide are impacted, and thousands of them each day risk running out of time to become an American citizen before the presidential election, according to Boundless Immigration, a Seattle-based tech company that helps immigrants through the citizenship process.  
 Registration deadlines for primary elections are approaching in a number of states this summer, and would-be voters must be citizens when they register or risk facing criminal charges or even deportation, Boundless and immigrant rights groups have said. 
 Xiao Wang, co-founder and CEO of Boundless, said he’s skeptical the agency’s reopening plan will meaningfully address the backlogs, which he predicts will only grow as the election nears.  
 “Just holding naturalization ceremonies that are smaller and socially distanced is missing the broader opportunity to dramatically improve the process,” he said. 
 USCIS, which has said it needs $1.2 billion in emergency funding  just to avoid insolvency because of pandemic-related economic shutdowns, said reopened field offices are sending out notices to applicants to reschedule their cancelled ceremonies. 
 “A key aim of this agency has been and continues to be the timely naturalization of qualified and vetted candidates for American citizenship, any suggestion to the contrary ignores an 11-year high in naturalizations last year and a 12% reduction in pending naturalizations,” spokesman Joe Sowers said in a statement Thursday. 
 In Massachusetts, meanwhile, local immigrant rights groups have asked the federal court to intervene. 
 More than 4,000 people in the state have been denied the ability to vote because of the delayed ceremonies, a number that will swell to more than 12,000 if oath ceremonies are not consistently conducted before the fall, Harvard Law School’s Immigration and Refugee Clinical Program and other organizations said in a letter to the U.S. District Court for Massachusetts on Wednesday. 
 The Boston court and USCIS should consider holding virtual ceremonies, or at least waive the oath requirement during the pandemic, said Sameer Ahmed, a clinical instructor with the Harvard Law School program.  
 Coming up with a plan in case a resurgence of COVID-19 cases forces further economic shutdowns is critical to “ensure even more aspiring Americans do not have to wait indefinitely in the future,” he said. 
 USCIS has said federal law requires people to take their oath “publicly” and “in person” and that key parts of the ceremony can’t be done virtually, such as collecting permanent resident cards and issuing citizenship certificates. 
 The current plan in Massachusetts calls for USCIS to swear in 80 to 200 new citizens a day, starting with Thursday’s small group ceremonies in Lawrence, a predominantly Latino city along the New Hampshire state line, according to Judge Dennis Saylor, chief justice of the Boston federal court. USCIS’s Boston office will follow suit Monday, he said. 
 Then, around mid-July, when the state enters the next phase of its economic restart, the Boston federal court will hold about four ceremonies each day with up to 25 people in each group, according to Saylor. That should clear the backlog of citizenship cases by at least early August.  
 “Every single judge of this court views this as a priority,” he said. “If I have to stand outside in a parking lot with a bullhorn to get it done, I’d do it. But it’s more complicated than that.” 
OAKLAND, Calif. (AP) — Police in a small San Francisco Bay Area community were about to help authorities in neighboring Oakland keep the peace during a protest when a more pressing crisis hit home: groups of thieves were pillaging malls, setting fire to a Walmart and storming a car dealership. 
 By the time San Leandro officers arrived at the Dodge dealership, dozens of cars were gone and thieves were peeling out of the lot in $100,000 Challenger Hellcat muscle cars. Nearly 75 vehicles were stolen Sunday, including models driven through glass showroom doors to escape.  
 “It was very strategic,” Sgt. Ray Kelly of the Alameda County Sheriff’s Office said about the auto thefts and other recent heists. 
 The brazen heist, carried out by well-coordinated criminals, was one of many thefts nationwide in the last week at big box electronics stores, jewelry shops and luxury designers. Many of the smash-and-grab thefts have happened during or following protests over the death of George Floyd, who struggled to breathe as his neck was pinned down by a white Minneapolis police officer’s knee.  
 Caravans of burglars have capitalized on chaos, communicating with each other via messaging apps during heists and using both the protests and other tactics to throw police off their trail. While opportunists have sometimes joined the frenzy, police and experts say there is a sophistication that suggests a level of planning that goes beyond spontaneous acts.  
 It’s hardly the first time legitimate protest has been used as a cover for crime. But crime experts note the scale of the thefts, which have taken place coast-to-coast, in big and small cities and in suburbs. 
 “I’ve been a student of these things. And I have never seen anything like it,” said Neil Sullivan, a nationally recognized expert on mass-events security and retired Chicago Police Department commander. 
 People who stole during civil-rights protests in the 1960s, he said, tended to be individuals who saw crimes of opportunity as demonstrations spun out of control. By contrast, many of the break-ins that have happened the last week appear to be meticulously planned and coordinated, he said.  
 One of the first of these crimes unfolded Saturday in Emeryville, a tiny city of retail shopping centers next to Oakland, when a crowd showed up and broke into stores after an Instagram post said they would “hit” the Target and “break every stores” (sic).  
 “This wasn’t the mafia and organized crime, but this wasn’t individuals acting alone,” said Mayor Christian Patz. “There definitely was some organization.”  
 In New York, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said this week that some people stealing from stores were using encrypted messaging to communicate and posted lookouts to warn if police were coming.  
 In the Southern California city of Long Beach, groups of thieves hit store after store Sunday as marchers demonstrated nearby. Mayor Robert Garcia said they went “from protest to protest” so they had cover to steal.  
 Police in Los Angeles, which had widespread burglaries for several days, said the crimes didn’t occur until a third night of protests and shifted from thieves on foot to those in cars able to haul more off.  
 The arrival of more than 1,000 National Guard troops in Los Angeles County to provide security freed up officers to more aggressively try to stop crimes. Sheriff Alex Villanueva said his department was able to thwart “a very significant operation to sack” a large outlet mall in the nearby City of Commerce. Dozens were arrested. 
 “They were there for only one purpose and that was to loot,” he said.  
 In the San Francisco Bay Area, tweets warning of looting and rioting turned out to be false, though they led some businesses to close and may have been attempts to divert police elsewhere. Richmond police tweeted that a bogus rumor on social media of an officer being shot occurred around the time a pot shop was ransacked.  
 Groups of thieves struck a series of big box stores on Chicago’s South Side on Sunday while periodically calling 911 to falsely report that a mall several miles away was being ransacked, Alderman Ray Lopez said. 
 By the time police rushed to the mall to find no one there, the thieves had moved on to another large store — and phoned in additional false reports to again shake police off their trail. 
 “It was a game of whack-a-mole,” Lopez said. 
 In other instances, caravans of 10 or more cars would pull up to a store, smash the windows, then wait nearby to see if police would arrive. If they didn’t, some of the same cars would return to load up with goods and speed off. 
 A reluctance of officers to use force amid intensified scrutiny of police tactics has emboldened would-be thieves, said Eugene O’Donnell, a professor of police studies at New York’s John Jay College of Criminal Justice.  
 “All you have to tell police is to do nothing and they will do nothing,” he said. “And they are implicitly being told, ‘Don’t do anything.’” 
 Some shoplifters displayed surprising brazenness, walking out of stores with stolen goods. TV helicopters captured some people changing into their pilfered attire outside Long Beach shops and a thief struggling to close the trunk of a car stuffed with clothes at a Walnut Creek mall near Oakland.  
 Kelly, from the Alameda County Sheriff’s Office, said the county began to get a handle on things after imposing evening curfews on Monday. He noted there was a clear distinction between protesters who got out of hand while demonstrating for social justice and other people who seized on the uprising to steal. 
 “Some of the burning was done out of anger and that was understandable,” he said. “But the strategic looting was definitely for personal gain. It was not to push forward the community concerns around police brutality and reform.” 
 ___ 
 Tarm reported from Chicago. Associated Press reporters Brian Melley and John Antczak in Los Angeles, and Alan Suderman in Richmond, Virginia contributed. 
It started with a simple spreadsheet created by a group of college students who wanted to help during the pandemic.  
 In just two months, that spreadsheet has grown into an online platform that has connected would-be do-gooders with nearly 3,000 opportunities to volunteer across the United States.  
 Corona Connects (coronaconnects.org) includes 170 volunteer categories, from food delivery and tutoring, to mental health and supporting the elderly. The site created by three students at the University of Pennsylvania now is run by a team of 25 students from colleges nationwide.  
 “We called this Corona Connects because we knew that Corona spreads through droplets, but kindness can spread through connecting,” said Hadassah Raskas, a Penn senior.  
 When the coronavirus crisis forced schools to go virtual, Raskas and University of Maryland junior Elana Sichel started a list of organizations in need of help. They realized that there were many needs and many students with extra time on their hands.  
 “We started with just a spreadsheet. We thought we could post it to social media and try to get it spreading around and figured if we help 10 people or 50 people, that’s amazing,” Raskas said. “And we quickly realized that that spreadsheet was getting passed around and we needed something better.” 
 Penn seniors Steven Hamel and Megan Kyne found out about the initiative through the Class of 2020 Facebook page and offered to build an easy-to-navigate site. Users can filter volunteer opportunities following their interests, location and availability. Organizations can also submit needs and recruit volunteers. 
 “It’s a two-sided platform ... so it’s a win-win,” said Shalva Gozland, who’s in charge of the platform’s marketing. She found out about Corona Connects on social media and used it to find a volunteering opportunity as a crisis counselor.  
 “I think the beauty of this platform is that we’re reminding people you might be geographically and physically alone right now, but we’re all interconnected,” she said. “We’re here for you. And we’re one society. We’re one humanity.” 
 ___ 
 While nonstop global news about the effects of the coronavirus have become commonplace, so, too, are tales of kindness. “One Good Thing” is a continuing series of AP stories focusing on glimmers of joy and benevolence in a dark time. Read the series here: https://apnews.com/OneGoodThing 
BOSTON (AP) — Like George Floyd, he was black, in his mid-40s, and died at the hands of a white man. And like Floyd, he may have helped touch off a revolution. 
 Many in the Black Lives Matter movement are invoking Crispus Attucks — an African American gunned down by a British soldier in the Boston Massacre of 1770 — as a symbol of entrenched white-on-black violence and oppression. 
 Attucks is widely seen as the first casualty of the American Revolution, and 250 years after his death, he’s become a rallying figure for a nation battling old demons. 
 “Crispus Attucks was a black man and the first person killed during the Boston Massacre that started the Revolutionary War,” said Jeff Nadeau, 45, a health care industry worker in Los Angeles County. 
 “George Floyd was another black man killed who started this revolution. History does repeat itself,” he said. 
 To be sure, the circumstances of each man’s death are starkly different. Attucks, 47, died in a confrontation with occupying forces. Floyd, 46, died on Memorial Day in Minneapolis after a white police officer pressed his knee into the handcuffed man’s neck, ignoring cries that he couldn’t breathe. 
 But in memes on social media and in commentary on the airwaves, they’ve become inextricably linked by those who see troubling parallels in the two and a half centuries that separate them. Poignantly, if somewhat improbably, “Crispus Attucks” was trending on Twitter this week. 
 Attucks, of African and Native American descent, and four other men died on March 5, 1770, after British soldiers opened fire on an unruly crowd. The victims were posthumously hailed as heroes, with thousands turning out for their funeral procession and their burial together, and their deaths stoked anti-British sentiment throughout the colonies, leading a few years later to the war for independence from Britain. 
 Two years ago, a grassroots movement was launched to push Boston’s leaders to honor Attucks by renaming the city’s famed Faneuil Hall — which bears the name of a wealthy 18th-century slave owner — in Attucks’ honor. That campaign continues. 
 Attucks’ story has been retold at critical moments in the nation’s history. 
 In the 1850s, black abolitionists in Boston marked each massacre anniversary as Crispus Attucks Day, using the memory of his sacrifice to mobilize support for efforts to end slavery. 
 “They presented Attucks as the first martyr of the Revolution who died fighting for liberty. The image resonated powerfully in a nation that placed millions of African Americans in bondage despite its stated ideal of freedom,” reads a new exhibit by Revolutionary Spaces, “Reflecting Attucks,” in Boston’s Old State House. 
 The Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. mentioned Attucks in his 1964 book, “Why We Can’t Wait,” noting that “the first American to shed blood in the revolution that freed his country from British oppression was a black seaman.” 
 Adding to the injustice of Attucks’ death, founding father John Adams — a lawyer — publicly defended the British soldier who shot him while privately praising Attucks’ courage. 
 “Our country was literally founded on the death of a black man,” tweeted Chris Echols, 37, an insurance company employee from Glendale, Arizona. 
 Miranda Adekoje, a Boston writer who’s working on a new play about Attucks, cautions that his indigenous roots — and the parallel suffering of native peoples today — shouldn’t be ignored. 
 “He represented two groups that were incredibly brutalized and still are,” she said. “The message of this play will resonate even stronger than it would have had George Floyd’s death not happened. These themes are centuries old.” 
 And Adekoje points to one way history isn’t repeating itself in 2020: 
 “The revolution that began with Crispus Attucks’ murder had no real regard for the lives of African and indigenous people,” she said. “The revolution that has begun as a result of George Floyd’s murder is for the sole purpose of making America inhabitable for all people.” 
 ___ 
 Follow AP New England editor Bill Kole on Twitter at http://twitter.com/billkole 
LOS ANGELES (AP) — A writer from a “Law & Order” spin-off and the play-by-play broadcaster for the NBA’s Sacramento Kings found themselves out of jobs after making social media posts this week that their bosses found too incendiary or insensitive, highlighting an apparent surge in such firings across many lines of work.  
 Lost jobs over social media statements that seemed like a good idea at the time have become a common occurrence, but the tense environment of nationwide protests against racism and police brutality with the backdrop of the coronavirus pandemic have made Twitter, Instagram and Facebook especially dangerous for those who want to remain among the employed.  
 With the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis, who died after a police officer pinned his knee into his neck, even when he had become unresponsive, and the coronavirus that has killed over 100,000 and left others unemployed and many socially distant, feelings and emotions are strong. It can be difficult to resist the urge to post or tweet, even for people such as police officers, local officials or teachers who are bound to draw scrutiny.  
 “People when they see a breaking news story they get that rush of wanting to be a part of something,” said Danny Deraney, a publicist who often works in crisis management. “There’s an adrenaline. They feel like they’re saying something so profound. But they need to think before they tweet.”  
 Craig Gore, who has worked on the shows “S.W.A.T.” and “Chicago P.D.,” was fired Tuesday from the forthcoming “Law & Order: Organized Crime” spin-off because of Facebook posts. One was captioned “Curfew…” in which he’s shown holding a rifle on his front porch, and in another full of expletives, he threatens to shoot looters who come near his home.  
 Given the gravity of the moment, Gore’s boss, “Law & Order” franchise creator Dick Wolf, did not warn or suspend him but went straight to firing, saying in a statement, “I will not tolerate this conduct, especially during our hour of national grief.” 
 A lawyer for Gore did not respond to a request for comment.  
 Grant Napear, longtime TV announcer for the NBA’s Sacramento Kings was fired from his talk radio job and subsequently resigned Tuesday from the team’s broadcast crew after he tweeted “ALL LIVES MATTER” and more to former Kings player DeMarcus Cousins when asked his opinion on the Black Lives Matter movement.  
 Bonneville International, owner of the radio station that fired Napear, said in a statement, “The timing of Grant’s tweet was particularly insensitive.” 
 Napear later tweeted, “I’ve been doing more listening than talking the past few days,” and “I believe the past few days will change this country for the better!” 
 And social media-based firings are not just for the prominent.  
 Many others from public-facing institutions and businesses have been sanctioned, demoted, suspended or fired for impolitic statements online in recent days.  
 The principal trombonist from the Austin Symphony Orchestra was let go after a string of Facebook comments, including one in which she said black protesters “deserve what they get.”  
 The personal accounts of police are under especially tight scrutiny.  
 A Denver officer was fired Tuesday for writing “Let’s start a riot” as the caption to an Instagram picture of himself and two fellow officers smiling in riot gear. An officer in Fulton, New York, posted an Instagram image that read, “Black lives only matter to black people unless they are killed by a white person” and found himself out of a job. 
 The poor timing cited by the former bosses Gore and Napear can make posts that might otherwise pass unnoticed have major consequences, especially in a moment marked by a volatile combination of politics and race. 
 “If you’re in a situation like this, you’ve got to read the room,” Deraney said. You’ve got to get a sense of what’s going on. You don’t need to always say something. These people who are getting fired or resigning, they’re not realizing this.”  
 ___ 
 Follow AP Entertainment Writer Andrew Dalton on Twitter: https://twitter.com/andyjamesdalton. 
LITTLE ROCK, Ark. (AP) — After 60-plus days, I threw in the towel. Mr. Rich had to go. 
 Mr. Rich is a hamster who most recently served as the classroom pet in my 9-year-old’s science class.  
 In normal times, kids clamor over who gets to be its caretaker over holiday and school breaks. My daughter Claire, shut out over the winter holidays, volunteered in January to take Mr. Rich home over spring break. Then, my biggest worry was how to keep our two pet cats from eating him for a week. 
 Flash forward to March 12, where the news kept tumbling all afternoon long. Arkansas was shutting down schools in a handful of counties, essentially adding an extra week to spring break. My 5-year-old’s preschool was following suit. 
 As I got ready to pick up my kids, my head swimming with how we would manage childcare while also working, my phone rang. The caller ID showed it was my older daughter’s school. As all parents know, that’s never good. 
 “Mom? I’m not in trouble,” Claire began, “but is it OK if we bring home Mr. Rich today?” 
 That’s right. The hamster. 
 We loaded up Claire’s backpack with Mr. Rich’s food and bedding. Claire marched outside carrying his cage, the envy of all the third-graders. We were lacking a key fact at that moment: We didn’t know that we were leaving for the rest of the school year. 
 At home, the cats never noticed Mr. Rich and he provided a pleasant diversion, something for me to document on social media while I tried not to spin into a pit of anxiety over the impossibility of working from home (and doing it well) and caring for my children (and doing it well.)  
 At least a dozen friends sent me this meme: “Somewhere out there there’s a kid that brought home the class hamster for the weekend. Their parents are not happy!!”  
 We were happy. For a while. This all felt doable when we naively believed an end was in sight. 
 But the uncertainty dragged on. K-12 schools in Arkansas shut down for the remainder of the academic year. Our summer plans went poof. My 5-year-old will never return to her preschool.  
 And the novelty of Mr. Rich faded, much like the chalk rainbows that once brightened our neighborhood back in March. 
 Now Claire has to be repeatedly reminded to clean Mr. Rich’s cage. The fragrance of hamster lingers. The 5-year-old loves on him a little too aggressively. We are tired. 
 “How long can we keep doing this?” I ask myself. Sometimes I mean socially distanced parenting and homeschooling. Sometimes I mean working from home. Sometimes I mean keeping the kids away from their friends. And yes, sometimes I mean hamster ownership. 
 I gave up. I emailed Claire’s teacher to coordinate a hamster handoff as the school year wrapped up. We bid Mr. Rich a fond farewell, putting at least one tiny bookend on a time that seems unknowable and endless.  
 We can only hope that this fall, there’s a classroom — with schoolchildren in it — to welcome him home.  
 ___ 
 
Virus Diary, an occasional feature, showcases the coronavirus saga through the eyes of Associated Press journalists around the world. Follow Arkansas-based AP journalist Jill Bleed on Twitter at http://twitter.com/jzbleed 
BRUSSELS (AP) — Remember Happy Hour, when you ordered one beer and got two? 
 Well, that was before the coronavirus hit. It’s now time for “Helpy Hour” in Belgium, a country whose beer culture is on UNESCO’s intangible cultural heritage of humanity list. 
 As bars and restaurants prepare to reopen next week following two and a half months of closed doors due to the coronavirus pandemic, Belgian beer lovers are being urged to buy one drink for the price of two in support of their favorite locals.  
 “Now that bars are slowly reopening after they had to close for months, it’s time to return the favor,” the federation of Belgian cafes said to promote the campaign to change Happy Hour into Helpy Hour. 
 Bars and restaurants in Belgium will be allowed to reopen starting Monday under strict conditions, with tables spaced at least 1.5 meters (5 feet) apart, and a maximum of 10 people per table. Ordering and drinking at the bar won’t be possible and waiters will have to wear face masks. 
 Diane Delen, the federation’s president, said the draconian measures will reduce attendance in bars by at least two thirds. She told The Associated Press on Thursday that the “helpy hour” initiative will help bar owners bear the shock of the economic crisis triggered by the virus.  
 “I don’t think the Belgians will be happy to see their beloved cafes disappear,” she said. “It’s a temporary measure that will help avoid an avalanche of bankruptcies. And once everything is back to normal, clients will be satisfied because happy hours will return.” 
 An average beer at a Brussels bar or cafe costs about 2.8 euros ($3.2). 
 According to the federation, half of Belgium’s 12,000 cafes may not survive the coronavirus crisis.  
 ___ 
 Follow AP pandemic coverage at http://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak 
BEIRUT (AP) — Dozens of domestic workers gathered outside the Ethiopian Consulate in Beirut on Thursday, some inquiring about flights home, others stranded after they were abandoned by employers who claimed they could no longer afford to pay their salaries.  About 180,000 domestic workers in Lebanon, most of them women from Ethiopia, are growing more desperate as a crippling economic and financial crisis sets in, coupled with coronavirus restrictions. The Labor Ministry organized buses late Wednesday that transported about 35 women left stranded outside the consulate to a hotel in Beirut after they spent the day on the street with their belongings, some of them crying. Scenes on local television prompted the ministry to take action, offering the women shelter until they could be flown out of the country. Lebanon’s airport has been shuttered since mid-March as part of measures to help step the spread of the new coronavirus.  On Thursday, there were new arrivals.  “They are dumping us like trash,” said one worker who had been in Lebanon for seven years and was now looking to go back home after her employers drove her to the consulate.  “We are human, would they accept for their children to be treated this way?” said the woman, Aster, who gave only her first name for fear of reprisal for speaking to the media.  Labor Minister Lamia Douaihy vowed on Twitter to take necessary measures against employers who commit “humanitarian violations.”  Lebanon has been hit by an unprecedented economic and financial crisis made worse by the lockdown related to the virus. The foreign currency crisis has led to many migrants not being paid for months or the value of their salaries declining by more than half. Others have lost their jobs after employers dumped them on the streets or outside their embassies. Many are unable to go home, because they cannot afford the price of a repatriation flight or because global air travel is severely restricted.  Some among Thursday’s crowd came to inquire about flights back home. “I came here because I want to travel home. ... I have a daughter and I have no work (here), I have no house, I have nothing. Where shall I stay?” said worker Birke Angello.ATHENS, Greece (AP) — For nearly four months, Capt. Andrei Kogankov and his oil tanker crew haven’t set foot on dry land. With global travel at a virtual standstill due to the coronavirus pandemic, the Russian captain was forced to extend his normal contract. He still doesn’t know when he’ll be able to go home. 
 Countries across the world have imposed lockdowns, shut borders and suspended international flights to curb the spread of the new coronavirus. The move was deemed essential to prevent rampaging contagion, but merchant ship crews have become unintended collateral damage. 
 With more than 80% of global trade by volume transported by sea, the world’s more than 2 million merchant seafarers play a vital role.  
 “In some ways, they’ve been the forgotten army of people,” said Guy Platten, secretary general of the ICS. “They’re out of sight and out of mind, and yet they’re absolutely essential for moving the fuel, the food, the medical supplies and all the other vital goods to feed world trade.”  
 About 150,000 seafarers are stranded at sea in need of crew changes, according to the International Chamber of Shipping. Roughly another 150,000 are stuck on shore, waiting to get back to work. 
 “It’s not a tenable position to keep on indefinitely. You can’t just keep extending people,” said Platten.  
 International shipping organizations, trade unions and shipping companies are urging countries to recognize merchant crews as essential workers and allow them to travel and carry out crew changes. 
 “Our challenge now is to get a very strong message to governments. You can’t expect people to move (personal protective equipment), drugs and all the issues that we need to respond to COVID, and keep cities and countries that are in lockdown fed, if you don’t move cargo on ships,” said Steve Cotton, General Secretary of the International Transport Workers’ Federation, or ITF. “They’ve got to recognize the sacrifice seafarers are making for our global society.” 
 Kogankov is seven months into a four-month contract and was supposed to be replaced in mid-March in Qatar. But a few days before he arrived, Qatar imposed a lockdown and banned international flights.  
 From there to South Korea, Japan, South Korea again and on to Singapore and Thailand, each time the same story: Lockdown. No flights. No going home. 
 The uncertainty and open-ended extension of his contract — and with it the responsibility for his 21-man crew and a ship carrying flammable cargo — is taking its toll.  
 “When you are seven months on board, you are becoming physically and mentally exhausted,” Kogankov said by satellite phone from Thailand. “We are working 24/7. We don’t have, let’s say, Friday night or Saturday night or weekends. No, the vessel is running all the time.” 
 Officers sign on for three to four months, the rest of the crew for around seven months. But they always have an end date. Take that away, and suddenly the prospect of endless workdays becomes a strain. 
 “We’re gravely worried that there could be a higher increase of incidents and accidents. But we also are seeing a high level of what I would describe as anxiety and frustration,” Cotton said. “If you don’t know when you’re going to get off a ship, that adds to a high level of anxiety that really is quite demoralizing.” 
 Unless governments facilitate crew changes, Cotton warned, “it’s difficult for us to convince the seafarers not to take more dramatic action, and ... stop working.” 
 It’s not just crew changes that are problematic during the pandemic. Getting medical help for seafarers has also become difficult, as Capt. Stephan Berger discovered when one of his crew fell ill — not with coronavirus. 
 Lockdowns in successive ports made visiting a doctor impossible. It took multiple phone calls and the combined efforts of a Dubai paramedic, Berger and the German ship-owning company to eventually get the necessary care for the crewmember, who was hospitalized for three weeks.  
 Of the 23 people aboard Berger’s Berlin Express, 18 were due for a crew change when it moored in Valencia, Spain, in late May. The officers had extended what were normally three-month contracts to four and five months, while the mostly Filipino crew had been on board for eight or nine months, instead of three or four. 
 Despite this, morale has been good, Berger said. 
 Nobody is particularly happy with the contract extensions, “but we have to take it as it is,” he said. “It feels sometimes like a prison.” 
 Ship-owning company Hapag-Lloyd was doing everything it could to arrange crew changes and managed to arrange for the seven European crew members to sign off in Barcelona on May 30, Berger said. But there are still no flights home for the Filipino crew. 
 “We are very much hidden. We are on board our vessels, and the people might see the big ships coming in and out of the ports, but very seldom they see the people who are operating the ships,” Berger said. “We hope that people would recognize it a little bit more now.” 
 On another Hapag-Lloyd container ship, apprentice Hannah Gerlach was to sign off in mid-March in Singapore. But even as her vessel headed to Asia, it was clear that wouldn’t happen. Gerlach packed her bags for an earlier departure from Sri Lanka, but by the time she arrived, so had the lockdown.  
 “I definitely miss my family very much. ... And I miss just these moments of a normal life, to have the possibility to go out for a walk, to the forest, to ride the bicycle,” Gerlach said. “You don’t know any more when your contract will end, when you have the chance to see your family again.” 
 David Hammond, founder of the Human Rights at Sea organization, said many seafarers “have really been at the end of their tether” due to contract extensions. “The reality is that until there is global cooperation among states and shipping entities .... then crew change is going to be very problematic.” 
BARCELONA, Spain (AP) — For florist Laura Gómez and many other Barcelona residents, the COVID-19 pandemic has one silver lining, amid all the death and suffering. 
 For the first time in decades, locals won’t feel outnumbered by the throngs of foreign visitors that flood Spain’s top tourist destination each summer.  
 No one doubts that their absence will deepen Spain’s pandemic-induced economic slump, but those like Gómez who have avoided infection hope to enjoy at least a few weeks’ respite from mass tourism, which they believe is ruining their hometown. 
 “Las Ramblas are ours again,” Gómez said, tending the flower stall her family has run for four generations in a prime location on that iconic Barcelona promenade. She reopened it last week after two months of lockdown due to the coronavirus outbreak that has killed more than 27,000 in Spain. 
 Where caricature artists normally hawk their works and the incessant chatter of the flowing crowds masks all gentler sounds, you can now hear something unfamiliar: birdsong. 
 “You can’t imagine how annoying it is” with tourists, Gómez said. “People asking you all day long where the cathedral is, where the beach is. I am not a tourist information office!”  
 She still sells her dwindling number of local clients cut roses and sunflowers, bouquets, seed packets and potted geraniums, shunning the cacti in souvenir mugs that are a staple of other flower stalls.  
 “Tourists only want to take a photo, why would they want to buy flowers?” said Gómez. “No one lives here anymore. Go to the outer neighborhoods and you see people in the street. Here the people couldn’t take it any more and left.”  
 Some, however, miss the vibrancy they say tourists provide.  
 “It is a pity to see Las Ramblas like this,” said José Montero, who works nearby and lunches daily at an outdoor restaurant on the street. “Las Ramblas needs life.” 
 The city’s other top site, Antoni Gaudí’s La Sagrada Familia Basilica with its sandcastle-like spires, remains closed. Without the gawking multitudes, the only sign of life outside was an elderly man dozing on a bench.  
 But whatever their feelings on tourism, Barcelona’s residents are about to feel the economic pain of living without a huge chunk of the 10 million foreigners who visit each year. 
 Unlike Italy, which is opening up to foreign tourists, Spain is waiting until July to lift its 14-day quarantine on incoming travelers — despite pressure to restart its economy that relies on tourism for 12% of its activity. The national statistics office said on Monday that zero tourists arrived in April. A year earlier, 7 million tourists spent 7 billion euros ($7.8 billion) in Spain.  
 While Europe considers how to safely resume continental travel during a pandemic, Spain’s government is encouraging Spaniards to vacation domestically. Catalonia’s separatist-led regional government has even launched a tourism campaign to attract people from elsewhere in Spain. 
 Many business owners and workers, however, fear they may not make it without foreigner customers. 
 Jesús Martín runs the Can Ramonet restaurant specializing in paella near Barcelona’s seaside. He is unsure whether he can cover his costs with local clients. 
 “This place has been in my family for three generations, so staying open is about more than just money,” Martín said. “We depend on foreign tourists... I am not sure if we can get by with just Spaniards.” 
 Barcelona became one of the world’s top destinations after using the 1992 Summer Olympics to showcase its Mediterranean climate and cuisine, mesmerizing architecture, and liberal lifestyle.  
 Visitors kept on coming, despite a terror attack on Las Ramblas in 2017 and rioting by Catalan separatists last year. The city of just 1.6 million people welcomed a record 11.9 million tourists in 2019, almost 10 million of them from abroad.  
 But even though the sector provides Barcelona with 15% of its economic activity and 10% of its jobs, a growing number of citizens have soured on tourism. A survey of 3,600 residents by the city hall last year found that 61% felt Barcelona could not handle greater inflows.  
 Graffiti saying “Tourists, go home” popped up, along with protests against short-term rental platforms like Airbnb which residents blame for driving up real estate prices and forcing locals to move out. Many complain about the replacement of family-run stores by global chains, and the rowdy behavior of foreign youths lured by low-cost flights. 
 “Barcelona has become a top destination for cheap, drunk partying. I’m all for partying, but I’m the first one to go out on my balcony and shout for people to be quiet,” said Mario, who did not share his last name because he works in the tourism sector.  
 Mario was rollerblading along a beachfront free of rental bikes and Segways weaving around couples taking selfies. In place of sun-baked bodies luxuriating in the warm sun and gentle breeze, the sand was occupied by a handful of families who flouted a temporary prohibition on sunbathing and let their children frolic in the surf.  
 “The beach has become wholesome and pure again,” Mario said. 
 Rafaela Pérez and her husband considered the hiatus from the hubbub bittersweet as they lingered on the boardwalk. 
 “It is glorious to have all this space for ourselves, but we know that it is not good for the economy,” the 63-year-old Pérez said. “We have neighbors who are having (financial) difficulties. And the worst is yet to come.”  
 ___ 
 Follow AP coverage of the virus outbreak at https://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak 
KOHIMA, India (AP) — There are no secrets in the tightly packed lanes of Dharavi, India’s largest slum. Everyone knows when an alcoholic husband turns violent, when children are scolded, or when a family has its television turned up too loud. So, news that someone had been hospitalized with the new coronavirus rocketed through the 1 square mile (2.5 square kilometers) that is home to around a million of Mumbai’s poorest residents. Born and bred in Dharavi, Kunal Kanase watched authorities ignore everyday disasters, like overflowing sewers and domestic violence. He knew better than to wait for help.  The 31-year-old student and community activist hounded government helplines trying to get authorities to quarantine the neighbor’s family. Unable to get through, he tweeted at the Mumbai police, who quickly came to take the man’s family to a quarantine center. “I used to teach his two children and felt good for the family since they were relatively safer now,” he said from the tiny two-room apartment he shares with his parents and younger brother. Kanase is among many unsung heroes working to protect some of India’s most vulnerable people from the ravages of the coronavirus and the economically devastating nationwide lockdown that has left millions unable to feed themselves. When a woman who lives just two houses — less than 10 feet (3 meters) away — from Kanase became sick with COVID-19, he once again tried to notify authorities. He was unsuccessful and no one ever came to test or isolate the six other members of the woman’s household. Kanase would watch as health workers scrambled to stem the outbreak, suiting up to disinfect the squalid lanes and flying drones over the shantytown to surveil people’s movements. Dharavi has had more than 1,800 confirmed COVID-19 cases, and is among Mumbai’s most affected pockets.  The caseload in the city known for Bollywood and the country’s most important stock exchange stood at more than 41,000 on Thursday, and has overwhelmed the under-funded health system.  Mumbai and elsewhere in Maharashtra state in central India account for the largest share of the country’s more than 210,000 confirmed infections , of which more than 104,000 have recovered. India has recorded about 6,000 deaths. The rate of infection and the loss of life have been relatively small compared to the United States, United Kingdom and other hard-hit countries. But epidemiologists say India is still weeks away from peak coronavirus transmission. Dharavi is known to the world as the setting of the 2008 Oscar-winning film “Slumdog Millionaire.” Set between busy train tracks and the heavily polluted Mithi River, which separates the slum from Mumbai’s modern skyscrapers, the neighborhood is a maze of tiny alleys, each one full of scores of people, many living in tin shacks. Families or groups of migrant workers often pile into a single room. Hardly anyone has a private bathroom. Without reliable running water, the most worrying concern is sanitation. The neighborhood was able to avoid another disaster this week when it was spared damage from a cyclone that hit the city. Kiran Dighavkar, a Mumbai official who is overseeing medical workers and volunteers in Dharavi, said his staff is focused on cleaning the neighborhood’s 500 toilet complexes. Each is visited by at least 1,000 people a day. “These people have to come out twice a day, for food and to use the toilets. So you can imagine how tough it is to practice social distancing,” Dighavkar said. Kanase and his team at Dharavi Diary, a group of young leaders who work to improve conditions in the slum, have been working to help those affected by the pandemic, handing out bags of rice, flour, cooking oil and sugar — enough to feed a family for two weeks. But they lack the resources to provide for everyone and often must filter out the needy from the neediest. Each day the slum’s poorest — often migrant workers originally from elsewhere in the country — line the main street waiting for food handouts from Dharavi Diary and other volunteers, groups and government agencies. India’s poor — in Dharavi and the rest of India — have born the brunt of the nationwide lockdown, which finally began to ease this week. Many migrant workers fled cities for their native villages in the countryside rather than risk starvation, sometimes walking for hundreds of miles (kilometers). For Kanase, the pandemic has highlighted how even in hardship this tightly knit community can come together to aid each other. “I live in Dharavi and I am proud of it,” he said.Can I get COVID-19 through my eyes or ears?  It’s possible through the eyes, but not likely through the ears. As with the nose and mouth, doctors say the eyes may be a route of infection if someone with the virus coughs or sneezes nearby. Infection is also possible when rubbing your eyes with hands that have been exposed to the virus. Tears from an infected person could  also spread the virus.  Frequent hand washing, social distancing and the use of facial coverings in public are ways to keep the virus from spreading, including through the eyes. Glasses may also offer added protection, according to the American Academy of Ophthalmology. Health care workers are advised to use safety goggles when treating potentially infected patients.  Ears, on the other hand, are not believed to be a route of COVID-19 infection, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The skin in the outer ear canal is more like regular skin, unlike the tissue in the mouth, nose and sinuses. That creates a barrier that makes it difficult for the virus to enter, according to Dr. Benjamin Bleier at Massachusetts Eye and Ear in Boston.  __ The AP is answering your questions about the coronavirus in this series. Submit them at: FactCheck@AP.org. Read previous Viral Questions: — When could a COVID-19 vaccine be ready? — How should I clean and store my face mask? — Should runners wear a face mask outdoors?PHILADELPHIA (AP) — Mayor Jim Kenney kicked off a recent briefing on Philadelphia’s coronavirus response with an unusual request for residents: Be careful what you flush. Between mid-March, when the city’s stay-at-home order was issued, and the end of April, most of the 19 sewer and storm water pumping stations in Philadelphia had experienced clogs from face masks, gloves and wipes residents had pitched into the potty, Kenney said. “Please do not flush any of these items down the toilet,” the mayor said.  Officials in other U.S. cities and rural communities — and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency — have issued similar pleas as wastewater plant operators report a surge of stopped-up pipes and damage to equipment. The problem has sharpened the longstanding clash over whether wipes are suitable for flushing.  While drain clogs aren’t new, most of the more than 15 cities contacted by The Associated Press said they’ve become a more costly and time consuming headache during the pandemic. Home-bound Americans are seeking alternatives to bathroom tissue because of occasional shortages, while stepping up efforts to sanitize their dwellings and themselves. “When everyone rushed out to get toilet paper and there was none ... people were using whatever they could,” said Pamela Mooring, spokeswoman for DC Water, the system in the nation’s capital. Sanitary sewer overflows jumped 33% between February and March in Houston because of clogs from rags, tissues, paper towels and wipes, said public works department spokeswoman Erin Jones. In Murfreesboro, Tennessee, crews are cleaning sewage pumping stations a couple of times a week that previously needed it once a month, said John Strickland, manager of the treatment facility. At Beale Air Force Base in Northern California, a squadron that usually deals with airfield maintenance and weaponry disposal has been yanking wipes from the base’s plumbing. “Our airmen are working 16-plus hours to unclog the pipe systems and that takes them out of the mission and puts a strain on the rest of the team,” Master Sgt. Destrey Robbins said in an article on the Beale website. By flushing the wrong things, people are taxing infrastructure that’s already deteriorating, said Darren Olson, vice chairman of the American Society of Civil Engineers’ Committee for America’s Infrastructure. “Your latex glove may not be the thing that causes a clog, but you are adding to the burden.” Hundreds of areas, like a portion of Philadelphia, have combined sewage and stormwater systems so sanitation officials say that means discarded masks and gloves that litter sidewalks and parking lots can also reach and help gum up treatment plants. Olson said masks and gloves thrown in the street can travel through storm drains in separate systems to lakes and other waterways. George Leonard, Ocean Conservancy’s chief scientist, said he’s concerned discarded personal protective equipment could wash out to sea and eventually add to “the plastics burden that the ocean is already suffering from.” Costs of clearing, cleaning and restarting equipment are mounting for utilities. To reduce the likelihood of clogs, WSSC Water — a wastewater utility that serves nearly 1.8 million customers in Prince George’s and Montgomery counties in Maryland — installed about 27 debris grinding pumps over the last decade at a cost of $1.5 million.  “At one wastewater pumping station alone, one that does not have grinder pumps, we have seen an increase of 37,000 pounds of wipes during January–March 2020 compared with the same time period in 2019,” said utility spokeswoman Lyn Riggins. Michigan’s Macomb County spent $50,000 in 2018 removing a “fatberg” of debris, oils and grease that was 100 feet long and 11 feet wide, said Candice Miller, public works commissioner. The suburban Detroit community also spent millions to install screens that snag thousands of pounds of wipes weekly. Municipal officials say the solution’s simple: Put nothing in toilets but human waste and toilet paper. “Don’t be fooled by wipes packaging claims that these products are flushable,” DC Water said in a March advisory. “They are not.” The Association of the Nonwoven Fabrics Industry, which represents hundreds of companies including major wipes producers, agrees most wet wipes are unsuitable for toilet disposal and says they’re labeled as such. But one type is designed to perform the same functions as toilet paper and merits the “flushable” label, said Dave Rousse, president of the industry group. These cellulose wipes begin breaking down immediately and dissolve within hours, Rouse said. “These wipes are incapable of causing the kinds of problems that wastewater operators are accusing them of,” he said. Critics contend “flushable” wipes don’t biodegrade as manufacturers claim. In Macomb County outside Detroit, maintenance workers are removing two tons of wipes per week from one pump station, and officials say some clearly are the “flushable” variety. This month, the county sued wipe manufacturers, alleging voluntary flushability standards are based on testing that doesn’t reflect actual conditions in a sewer system. In March, Washington became the first state to adopt requirements for the size, placement and visibility of “Do Not Flush” warnings on wipes that manufacturers and local officials agree should not go down toilets. Similar legislation is under consideration in California. Meanwhile, many cities are using public education campaigns to make their case against flushing pandemic debris. The message may be getting through, says El Paso, Texas water utility spokesman Carlos Briano. Before the media blitz, emergency maintenance teams were dispatched about seven times a day to clear pipes. Now, it’s once a day. “It’s slowed, but it’s still not pre-pandemic,” Briano said. ___ Flesher reported from Traverse City, Michigan. Associated Press writers Michael Casey in Concord, N.H., and Cedar Attanasio in El Paso, Texas, contributed to this report. ___ On Twitter follow Lauer:@ClaudiaLauer and Flesher:@JohnFlesherMINNEAPOLIS (AP) — All protest movements have slogans. George Floyd’s has a number: 8:46 Eight minutes, 46 seconds is the length of time prosecutors say Floyd, a 46-year-old black man, was pinned to the ground under a white Minneapolis police officer’s knee before he died last week.  In the days since, outraged protesters, politicians and mourners have seized on the detail as a quiet way to honor Floyd at a time of angry and sometimes violent clashes with police. Even as prosecutors have said little about how they arrived at the precise number, it has fast grown into a potent symbol of the suffering Floyd — and many other black men — have experienced at the hands of police.  
In Boston and Tacoma, Washington, demonstrators this week lay down on streets staging “die-ins” for precisely 8 minutes, 46 seconds. Companies, including ViacomCBS and Google, used the time span in their shows of solidarity. In Washington, Democratic senators on Thursday gathered in the U.S. Capitol’s Emancipation Hall, some standing, some kneeling on the marbled floor for the nearly nine minutes of silence. 
Mourners at a memorial service for Floyd in Minneapolis on Thursday stood in silence for 8 minutes, 46 seconds, asked by the Rev. Al Sharpton to “think about what George was going through, laying there for those eight minutes, begging for his life.” “We can’t let this go,” he said. “We can’t keep living like this.” Pausing for a full 8 minutes, 46 seconds helps turn the abstract into a reality, said Monica Cannon-Grant, the founder of Violence in Boston Inc., which organized a Tuesday protest that included the minutes of silence.  “You find that that’s an extremely long time to have someone have their knee in the side of your neck,” Cannon-Grant said.  As she observed the silence, she said found herself thinking about the safety of her family. “All kinds of things were going through my head,” she said. “Mainly that I was the mom of four black sons and I’m married to a black man.” Some of the power in the number comes from its striking specificity. In a criminal complaint charging Officer Derek Chauvin in Floyd’s murder, prosecutors say they know precisely how long Floyd was pinned to the ground. “The defendant had his knee on Mr. Floyd’s neck for 8 minutes and 46 seconds in total. Two minutes and 53 seconds of this was after Mr. Floyd was non-responsive,” the complaint concludes. “Police are trained that this type of restraint with a subject in a prone position is inherently dangerous.” But the timestamps cited in the document’s description of the incident, much of which is caught on video, indicate a different tally. Using those, Chauvin had his knee on Floyd for 7 minutes, 46 seconds, including 1 minute, 53 seconds after Floyd appeared to stop breathing.  Prosecutors involved in the case have not responded to questions about the discrepancy.  On Thursday, John Stiles, a spokesman for the attorney general’s office — which is leading the prosecution in the case — said the office has reviewed additional video footage “since the original complaint was filed.” “There is more evidence to review and the attorney general’s office is continuing to review it,” he said.  Prosecutors repeated their timeline and the 8 minutes, 46 seconds detail in charges filed Wednesday against other officers involved. In this case, one minute is unlikely to have a major legal significance. “Seven minutes is a long time to have a knee on someone’s neck regardless,” said Jared Fishman, a former federal civil rights prosecutor. That said, Fishman said it’s a detail defense lawyers will scrutinize in court.  For those who hold up the number as part of a peaceful call for change, the precise length of time is beside the point: “It should never have happened to begin with,” Cannon-Grant said.  It would not be the first time that a detail takes on a life of its own.  After the 2014 death of Michael Brown, word spread in the community that the black 18-year-old had his hands up in surrender when he was shot by a white police officer. The chant “Hands up. Don’t shoot!” quickly became a rallying cry for protesters both in the St. Louis suburb and across the country. 
But it never was clear whether Brown actually raised his hands. There were no videos or photos of the shooting. Some witnesses swore to a grand jury that his hands were raised while others swore they were not. Officer Darren Wilson testified to grand jurors that Brown was charging at him, with one hand clenched at his side and the other under his shirt, when Wilson fired the fatal shots.  Several protesters said it didn’t matter if Brown’s hands literally were raised, because his death remained symbolic of wider racial injustices at the hands of police. ___ Associated Press writer Lisa Mascaro contributed from Washington. LeBlanc reported from Boston. COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) —  A wave of police killings of young black men in 2014 prompted 24 states to quickly pass some type of law enforcement reform, but many declined to address the most glaring issue: police use of force. Six years later, only about a third of states have passed laws on the question.  The issue is at the heart of nationwide protests set off by the May 25 death of George Floyd, a black man who died after a white police officer in Minneapolis pressed a knee into Floyd’s neck for several minutes while he pleaded for air. Now, some lawmakers and governors are hoping to harness the renewed wave of anger to push through changes on the use of force they couldn’t manage after 2014, a year that included the deaths at the hands of police of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri, Eric Garner in New York and 12-year-old Tamir Rice in Cleveland. “We’re absolutely at a point in time where we have to do more,” said Maryland state Del. Vanessa Atterbeary, a Democrat who will chair a working group announced this week that will take up use-of-force standards for that state. Pushback from politically influential law enforcement unions prompted some states’ use-of-force proposals to stall, while others have opted for voluntary programs to change policing practices. In some states, lawmakers have even broadened the powers of police, such as increasing penalties for those who attack officers or, as in Tennessee and Utah, limiting the power of independent review boards that investigate police conduct. As of August 2018, at least 16 states had passed use-of-force laws, according to the nonpartisan National Conference of State Legislatures. A handful of those directly restricted what police could do. In Utah and Missouri, for example, force used by officers must be “reasonable and necessary.” Colorado has banned chokeholds, the maneuver used on Garner. Other laws created task forces to set new standards, boosted training or improved tracking of officers’ use of guns and deadly force.  In 2014, Republican-led Wisconsin became the first state in the country to enact a law requiring outside investigations when people die in police custody — a law supported by the state’s largest police union. This week, Democratic Gov. Tony Evers asked the Legislature, still controlled by Republicans, to go further and pass a bill that would require law enforcement agencies to minimize the use of force and prioritize preserving life. In New Jersey, Democratic Gov. Phil Murphy and the attorney general said they will update state guidelines governing police use of force for the first time in two decades. Democratic lawmakers in at least two states — Arizona and Oregon — said this week they want to reform their states’ use-of-force policies in upcoming legislative sessions. A legislative caucus in Oregon representing people of color has asked for a bipartisan effort to recommend changes that can be included in legislation next year. “The issue is simply two words: accountability and trust,” state Sen. Lew Frederick, a Democrat from Portland, said in the group’s statement. “Both are broken. It will take a major effort to establish them in our society.” In Colorado, Democratic lawmakers introduced a bill Wednesday that, among other things, would require departments to compile civilian demographic data in use-of-force cases and allow citizens to file lawsuits against police officers for misconduct. Colorado law currently grants them immunity. Despite the sense in many places that this moment could produce real change, challenges remain. Police unions have often resisted attempts to restrict officers’ use of deadly force and are politically potent in most states.  Paige Fernandez, a policing policy adviser at the ACLU, said many unions “have convinced themselves that police are unable to protect themselves if they value the bodily integrity and personal lives of the the people they are supposed to be serving.” The National Fraternal Order of Police issued a statement acknowledging there is “no doubt” Floyd’s death has diminished public trust in police. “Police officers need to treat all of our citizens with respect and understanding and should be held to the very highest standards for their conduct,” the organization said.  Since 2016, groups representing police nationwide have contributed $1.3 million directly to candidates for governor and attorney general and given at least another $1 million for independent expenditures that advocate for or against candidates for all state-level offices, according to an Associated Press analysis of data collected by the National Institute on Money in Politics. Much of that money has been spent in California, where unions initially defeated reforms before the state enacted a pair of laws last year. One allows police to use lethal force only when necessary to defend against an imminent threat of death or serious injury to officers or bystanders. The second requires additional officer training. The California debate was driven in part by the fatal 2018 shooting by Sacramento police of 22-year-old Stephon Clark, who was clutching a cellphone that officers said they mistook for a weapon. The shooting in Ohio of Rice, whose toy Airsoft gun officers said they mistook for a real one, contributed to then-Gov. John Kasich creating the Ohio Collaborative Community-Police Advisory Board. In 2015, the board adopted statewide standards limiting use of deadly force by police officers to defending themselves or others from serious injury or death. The state’s Republican-led Legislature opted against turning those recommendations into law, leaving police agencies to comply voluntarily. Karhlton Moore, who leads the Ohio Department of Public Safety division that oversees the standards, said roughly three-quarters of Ohio residents now live in areas covered by police agencies that are either certified or in the process of being certified as upholding the standards. But Ohio House Minority Leader Emilia Sykes, a Democrat who is black, criticized Republican lawmakers this week for failing to enact laws recommended by Kasich’s task force, saying their actions “show us time and time again that black lives do not matter.”  Ohio Democrats want immediate reforms addressing racism and inequality.  In Pennsylvania, a package of bills seeking to limit the justifications for the use of deadly force by police has stalled in the state’s Republican-controlled Legislature. But changing the law isn’t enough, said Democratic Rep. Summer Lee, a chief sponsor of the bills who represents East Pittsburgh. Police around the nation have condemned the way Floyd was restrained.  Inherent racism must be dealt with as well, said Lee, who is black.  She said some lawmakers were paying lip service to the necessity of fighting racism — but weren’t taking action. “We have bills — we have tangible things the Legislature can do today,” Lee said.  ___ Associated Press writers James Anderson in Denver; Scott Bauer in Madison, Wisconsin; Mike Catalini in Trenton, New Jersey; Bob Christie in Phoenix; Kimberlee Kruesi in Nashville, Tennessee; Marc Levy in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania; David Lieb in Jefferson City, Missouri; Geoff Mulvihill in Cherry Hill, New Jersey; Andrew Selsky in Salem, Oregon; Don Thompson in Sacramento, Calif.; Andrew Welsh-Huggins in Columbus; Lindsay Whitehurst in Salt Lake City; and Brian Witte in Annapolis, Maryland, contributed to this report.NEW YORK (AP) — As an African American parent, Cassandre Dunbar in Charlotte, North Carolina, always knew she and her husband would have “the talk” with their son, the one preparing him for interactions with law enforcement.  But she never dreamed it would be necessary at 5 years old. “I thought the cops were supposed to help us? Are they only helpful to white people?” he asked after taking in TV coverage of protests and overhearing his parents discuss the deaths of George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery and Breonna Taylor. Dunbar explained to her eldest child: “Some people have a hard time understanding that skin color doesn’t have anything to do with what kind of person you are. I said that, yes, cops are meant to help us all, but some cops aren’t good cops and the bad ones really aren’t helpful to people who look like us.” Many parents of all races are struggling with similar conversations after a week of outrage and sadness that spilled into streets worldwide after video of Floyd’s death emerged. It came after months of family togetherness in coronavirus lockdown, a time when kids have been cut off from schools and peers.  Floyd, a handcuffed black man, died after a Minneapolis police officer pressed his knee into his neck as he pleaded for air.  To help her kids going forward, Dunbar has been reaching out for guidance from child therapists, early childhood educators and seasoned parents.  How conversations with kids about race and racism play out can be intensely personal for parents. Many white parents in particular believe children are too young for such discussions at age 10 or 11, said Andrew Grant-Thomas, co-founder of Embrace Race, a nonprofit that provides resources for parents and educators. “They think that kids are too naive and fragile and will crumple the moment you even mention the word,” he said. ”By not engaging kids explicitly, essentially you’re leaving them to flounder in this tidal wave of communication about race that they are receiving from a very early age, but without you there to deliberately mediate how they make sense of what they get.” Howard Stevenson, a clinical psychologist in the Graduate School of Education at the University of Pennsylvania, works with educators and families to understand the trauma and stress of race-based hate. Insights that he offered online in 2016 have been shared by school districts around the country in the past week with parents. “Both verbal and non-verbal approaches influence what children not only know about race but whether they should speak to it or how they should manage the stress of it,” Stevenson told The Associated Press. “Children watch what their parents don’t do during racial moments as much as what they actually purposely teach.” He said research shows that the more parents talk to children about race, the more those children “tend to be less overwhelmed by the politics.” For African American mom Sonya Horton in Brooklyn, New York, that means putting it all on the line for her 11-year-old daughter, Samirah, a budding DJ and anti-bullying activist who attends a predominantly white private school.  The sixth-grader belongs to a school club for black and brown students where they feel free to discuss slights from classmates over things like how they wear their hair, certain foods they particularly like and family traditions. Of her white classmates, Samirah said: “I feel like they know what racism is but not to the full extent of the meaning of it. I feel like they might think making an inappropriate joke could be racist, but racist could be imitating someone or saying a comment that’s not particularly nice.”  Horton, whose husband is a retired police officer, said they have never “sugar-coated things” for their child. “I never feel that she’s too young to know or to understand,” Horton said. “We live in a world where it’s out there, and if you’re not open and you’re not talking about it then they may come away with misinformation and miseducation.” For parents, the first step is checking their own feelings, Stevenson and other experts said. A good second step is listening to the experiences of parents and children of color without judgment, and accept that racism does exist. Val Whiting, who is African American and lives in suburban Seattle, said her 19-year-old son, the eldest of two teen boys, has had plenty of practice handling racism in their predominantly white neighborhood, from racial slurs on the soccer field to a car full of young people shouting the “N-word” before speeding off. “I wanted to pull out a bazooka and blow up that car full of cowards,” she said. “But we’ve taught him how to make connections and nurture relationships with other people of color, so he immediately contacted a Facebook group he belongs to in order to share what happened, and get support and guidance. I’m OK with that.”  In Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, Traci Sumter wouldn’t allow her black 15-year-old son to participate in protests. “I’ve read threats and horrible comments online by neighbors, teachers and people I had considered friends,” she said. “I cried when I saw the George Floyd video. I cried again when I watched my son watch it. The look of disappointment on his face let me know that he felt the world had failed him. Again.” Ibram X. Kendi is a National Book Award winner, activist, history professor and founding director of the Antiracist Research and Policy Center at American University.  He’s also dad to 4-year-old Imani. When his daughter was born, Kendi found few books on race and racism for the very young. He wrote his own, a board book in rhyme out this month from the Penguin Young Readers imprint Kokila Books. Titled “Antiracist Baby,” it’s one of a surge of titles on racism making their way up the Amazon bestseller list.  “The data points to the fact that children as young as 5 or 6 months begin recognizing race, and children as young as 2 to 3 years old start recognizing or even believing in racist ideas,” Kendi said. “Typically parents don’t even know how to begin to have these conversations with these very, very young people, let alone recognizing the importance of having these conversations.” Through illustrations by Ashley Lukashevsky, Kendi shows that the first step toward making racial equity a reality is opening your eyes to all skin colors.  “Antiracist Baby learns all the colors, not because race is true,” he writes. “If you claim to be color-blind, you deny what’s right in front of you.” At Manhattan’s Little Red School House and Elisabeth Irwin High School, Alisa Soriano is an assistant principal who filled in this week as a first-grade teacher. At the school’s regular classroom morning meetings, the recent protests and deaths were discussed via Zoom. The progressive school is committed to diversity, equity and inclusion work year-round, so even the youngest children weren’t taken aback, Soriano said. “When you speak to young children with passion and with respect, and with information that is valid to their lives, they listen,” she said. ___ This story corrects the spelling of Traci Sumter.When Berto Aguayo heard that Chicago protests started turning violent over the weekend, he called a few dozen people to meet in front of a colorful mural in a South Side neighborhood.  “Number one, we are here to peacefully protect small businesses,” Aguayo — co-founder of Increase the Peace, a community organizing group in the city — told the small crowd. He said the the businesses were locally owned, and residents relied on them: “That is it. If somebody is trying to loot, don’t greet them with hostility. Ask them if they want water, a, snack, engage in dialogue. If that doesn’t work, don’t put your life at risk.” There was no formal training, just a pep talk and a short prayer. Then the group took its place in front of one street’s storefronts, many of them immigrant-owned: mom-and-pop grocery stores, restaurants and a homeless youth shelter.  Aguayo, a former gang member and activist for many Chicago issues, said the group was successful in helping to maintain calm that day. It’s part of several efforts around the country that aim to quell tension — and therefore potential violence — at protests, while encouraging folks to march and speak their minds about the deaths of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor, Ahmaud Arbery and other African Americans. With daily protests around the United States in dozens of cities — some stretching for a week and showing no sign of slowing — organizers say it’s essential to de-escalate any conflict and to avoid theft, vandalism and clashes with police.  Some groups, such as Black Lives Matter, have years of experience protesting and use training and proven strategies: fluorescent vests or colored ribbons to designate legal aid, volunteer medical help or peacekeepers who can try to diffuse spats on the spot. Other people are creating more informal networks as protests pop up in new corners of their cities and states daily, with many attendees who’ve never protested before.  “We want to be vocal and peaceful at the same time. Those two do coexist,” said Bruce Wilson, of South Carolina. “As soon as you throw a bottle, your message is gone.” He and about 20 others met briefly before protests in Greenville over the weekend to discuss strategies. He urged his group to carefully study fellow protestors and be mindful if someone appeared extremely agitated. “You can look at someone and tell they’re about to cross the line,” he said. Like Aguayo, he offers snacks, water, and the space to speak. “I tell them, ‘I feel the same way you feel.’ You have to lead by example.”  In Tampa, Black Lives Matter organizers over the weekend had nearly 100 safety marshals in fluorescent vests patrolling their march, trained in de-escalation tactics and ordered to be on the lookout for antagonists. The group also had medics, used walkie talkies to identify and squelch outbursts, and enlisted lawyers and others with legal training to watch out for protesters’ rights from the sidelines.  “We wanted to be able to provide a safe space for their voice and rage to be heard within a controlled environment. It’s part of their amendment rights for them to be able to express themselves,” said Chaikirah Parker, who helped organize the event. The veteran activist said they purposely held the event early Sunday, despite sweltering heat. Afterward, a younger crowd held another protest, and she said the veteran activists felt obliged to help. “We really feel it’s our duty to pass the torch and teach the kids how to organize,” she said. “They’re cocky, and then they realize the rapid response organization is a whole other level.  “You need some of everybody to move the mission forward … you need the yard dogs, but you also need the diplomacy.” In Cincinnati, as hundreds of protestors marched to City Hall, safety marshals wore their fluorescent vests, and some toted bullhorns. Organizers with newly formed Coalition of Queen City occasionally stopped the crowd to make sure the volunteer marshals remained at the front, protester Abbey Smith said. As the group approached an intersection, a police car tried to push its way forward. The marshal calmly positioned herself at the bumper, between the patrol car and the crowd. The officer inside gestured for the marshal to get out of the way.  “The marshal just stood there and held their hands up and kept shaking their head at them, like ‘No I’m not gonna move’ while everybody passed,” Smith said. With the marshal’s guidance, the crowd and officer moved on without incident.  “Having the people there who were very clearly making sure that we were safe also helped make things feel peaceful,” Smith said. “When you feel like people are making sure that you’re safe, it’s easier to just focus on the message that you’re trying to convey.”  As demonstrators in the nation’s capital chanted Floyd’s name Tuesday night, a single protester climbed a light post and took down a street sign. The crowd booed. Some threw bottles at him; others tried to grab him before he jumped down and disappeared into the crowd. But a chant soon went up: “Peaceful protest,” and the crowd eventually calmed. The same night in Houston, the police chief remained after a rally and march to talk to the crowd of about 65 people and explain his department’s efforts to collaborate with local activists. He encouraged people to informally monitor and help fellow demonstrators, to prevent violence from hijacking protests. “God as my witness, change is coming,” Acevedo said. “And we’re going to do it the right way.” ___ Lush reported from St. Petersburg and Kennedy from Fort Lauderdale, Florida. Associated Press journalists Ashraf Khalil in Washington, Juan Lozano in Houston, and Sophia Tulp in Atlanta contributed.CANNON BEACH, Ore. (AP) — As the coronavirus raced across America, this quaint seaside town did what would normally be unthinkable for a tourist destination.  Spooked by a deluge of visitors, the tiny Oregon community shooed people from its expansive beaches and shut down hundreds of hotels and vacation rentals overnight. Signs went up announcing that the vacation getaway 80 miles (129 kilometers) from Portland known for towering coastal rock formations was closed to tourists — no exceptions.  “It was unprecedented,” said Patrick Nofield, whose hospitality company Escape Lodging owns four hotels in Cannon Beach and abruptly laid off more than 400 employees in March. “We really went into survival mode.” Now, with summer looming and coronavirus restrictions lifting, the choices facing Cannon Beach are emblematic of those confronting thousands of other small, tourist-dependent towns nationwide that are struggling to balance their residents’ fears of contagion with economic survival. It’s a make-or-break summer in these vacation spots — and the future is still terrifyingly unclear. “How do you regulate people inundating your town on a day-to-day basis?” Nofield said. “One of the great things about Oregon is our beaches are free to all. We don’t want to take away people’s rights, but how do we manage it and still stay safe? That’s the thing.” Answering that question is especially critical for small, rural towns like Cannon Beach, which are too far from major cities to benefit from their economies and remote enough that they worry about medical care should infections spike again. Far-flung communities that are gateways to national parks or fly fishing or hiking destinations have similar concerns, said Carl Winston, director of the Payne School of Hospitality and Tourism at San Diego State University. “How do you diversify if you are Cannon Beach and all the others? There’s not a lot of possibility there,” said Winston, who has watched his students’ summer internships in resort towns dry up. “The question is, how much is survivable for them?” Clatsop County, which is home to Cannon Beach and other small coastal towns, has just 45 confirmed cases of the coronavirus so far. But Portland — Oregon’s largest city — is less than two hours away and saw its hospitals overwhelmed with COVID-19 patients during the pandemic’s peak. Hundreds of tourists also come to Cannon Beach from Seattle, where the virus first took hold in the U.S. The nation has reported more than 106,000 coronavirus deaths, nearly a third of the worldwide total of over 380,000, according to a tally kept by Johns Hopkins University. The annual influx of visitors is a concern for this tight-knit community, best known for the iconic coastal formation Haystack Rock and where a large percentage of its 1,700 year-round residents are older and more susceptible to COVID-19. That was one of the factors influencing the decision to shut down the town so abruptly after huge crowds swarmed its beaches on a warm March weekend, said Jim Paino, executive director of the Cannon Beach Chamber of Commerce. The City Council held an emergency meeting and took immediate action, making headlines across the region a day before Gov. Kate Brown issued her own statewide stay-at-home order on March 23. “The big fear is the people who don’t respect the safety measures. That was probably the biggest fear in our community at the moment — and it is still,” Paino said. But “the businesses are what drive our economy, and if we lose too many, we’re going to lose the character of Cannon Beach and the reason everybody loves coming here.” For two months, the town was a ghost of itself, a tableau of desolate streets and shuttered businesses. The closure forced at least four businesses to shut their doors for good, and hundreds of workers — almost all locals — were laid off. Cannon Beach relies on a hotel lodging tax for nearly three-quarters of its general fund and stands to lose hundreds of thousands to the pandemic. The town reopened on May 15 and its hotels took bookings 10 days later, and on a recent warm, sunny day, Cannon Beach appeared to be coming back to life.  American flags hung on almost every street corner, families flew kites on the beach, people lingered over lunch at local brewpub and a line formed at a hamburger shop. Popular businesses like Bruce’s Candy Kitchen were bustling again, with customers watching through a glass window as the owner’s son-in-law pulled saltwater taffy on a giant wheel. Tourists filled the sidewalks, sometimes making social distancing difficult. Yuri Vidal is celebrating his restaurant Crepe Neptune’s ninth summer season, and he needed to reopen to survive. But he said he’s also afraid of bringing the coronavirus home to his family. “Right now, we’re just gonna work as hard as we can,” Vidal said. “I have a feeling that’s what everybody’s going to be doing to catch up from missing spring break — and the unknown is that it all could shut down again.”  But tourists do not always equal customers, another hard lesson Cannon Beach is learning. Gwen Partlow drove from Portland for a few hours of respite and kite-flying with her sister, parents and two sons, ages 5 and 2. The family packed their own picnic and headed straight for the sand, making sure to stay 6 feet (2 meters) from others.  The only money they would spend would be on ice cream, she said. “I heard they started opening, but we didn’t come with the intention of going to any businesses,” Partlow said. “We’re hoping to just stay outside.” ___ Follow Gillian Flaccus on Twitter at http://www.twitter.com/gflaccus. ___ Follow AP pandemic coverage at http://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak.LOUISVILLE, Ky. (AP) — She couldn’t eat and she couldn’t sleep, jolting awake an hour after going to bed. Kelly Bundy felt haunted by the people who died by police bullets, or had an officer’s knee on their neck.  She could hear her grandmother screaming when police gunned down their family friend, 19-year-old Michael Newby, in a 2004 killing that scarred this city. That was 16 years ago, but suddenly it felt like yesterday, and like nothing had changed since. The list has only grown, in Louisville and beyond: Trayvon Martin, Michael Brown, Eric Garner, Tamir Rice, Freddie Gray, Breonna Taylor, George Floyd.  “It’s almost as if I’m being haunted by them because I’m not doing enough,” Bundy said, so she got out of bed after two hours of sleep and headed out to the streets for her third day of protest.  The unrest has engulfed cities across America in honor of George Floyd, who died after an officer pressed his knee into in his neck while he pleaded for air in Minnesota; Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old EMT who was shot in Louisville by detectives knocking down her door in the middle of the night; and other African Americans. Tens of thousands of people protest nightly, in dozens of cities and towns, touching every state. They raise signs, chant for justice, and repeat the names of those lost.  Much of the focus has been on burning buildings and police cruisers, smashed windows, fireworks tossed at officers. Bundy and her friends say they know the truth: Most protesters are peaceful people like them, who feel called to duty after a lifetime of inequality, the everyday indignities of racism, the enduring fear of police aggression.  In every crowd, like this one of thousands packed into a downtown square, there are gig workers like Bundy, who bartends, delivers groceries, and hosts a radio show; there are nurses and lawyers, pastors, a fashion designer, a model, a comedian, an employee of the mayor’s office.  Louisville police, like others, have dispersed crowds with tear gas and pelted protesters with pepper balls. Military vehicles block streets, and officers in riot gear with batons break up demonstrations at dusk. Helicopters circle overhead. Early Monday morning, a new round of fiery resistance ignited in Louisville, when David McAtee, the owner of a barbecue restaurant, was killed while police and National Guard soldiers were enforcing a curfew.  On Monday morning, Bundy, 30, and her friends packed cases of water and snacks to distribute to fellow demonstrators; they brought a first aid kit and milk to pour into the eyes of people tear gassed. Authorities keep telling everyone to go home and be safe. But Breonna Taylor was shot in her own home, Bundy said, so that doesn’t make much sense: “I could get killed at home because of the color of my skin. Where are we safe? What difference does it make, being out here or going home?”  The recent unrest is the most acrimonious confrontation between police and protesters here since the 2004 killing of Newby, who was shot in the back by Officer McKenzie Mattingly. Mattingly was fired and indicted, then acquitted by a jury. Bundy was 13, and she recalls her grandmother flipping on the news, hearing the name of the dead young man and wailing. Bundy’s grandmother’s best friend was Newby’s mother. The phone started ringing. “They killed our boy,” the callers cried. “I thought to myself, ’He’s black, I’m black, it could happen to me, too,” she said. Today, many Louisville protesters say the Newby killing turned them into activists. It was the day Bundy saw clearly how America would work against her all her life.  There are the everyday injustices: impoverished neighborhoods, lack of health care, underperforming schools. Then there’s the overzealous policing: When she was 17, she said, she was leaving a nightclub with friends, and a group of white women taunted them about their clothes, how they shouldn’t be in the neighborhood. Officers arrived, and they assumed the young black women were the aggressors. One slammed her to the ground, Bundy said. Most black people she knows have some experience like this, and it feels to her now like that anger is irrevocably boiling over.  The protests have been traumatizing, and she thinks she’ll cope with that the rest of her life. The first day, she was terrified. Her family begged her not to go: “You’re going to get killed, your name will be the next hashtag.” She didn’t even get out of her car. But she couldn’t get the sound of her grandmother screaming out of her head. She couldn’t eat, or drink, or sleep.  She went back the next day. She got tear gassed just as she stepped out of her car, she said, and a friend poured milk in her eyes. She watched officers fire nonlethal projectiles at her friends. She thought of her three children, and wondered whether one day they’d have to go through this, too, like her parents and grandparents and now her.  “That made me want to go even harder,” she said. “They’re not going to silence me. They’re not going to stop me.” The next day, she stood in the front of the crowd, holding a sign high: “George Floyd.” She led hundreds as they marched, stopping traffic. Most cars honked, and drivers thrust their fists in the air in solidarity. A group of officers met them in the city square, and some demonstrators hugged them. Bundy did not. She said she wasn’t ready yet.  As the sun set, the clock ticked toward curfew and police in riot gear lined up a block way, she headed home, with plans to return again in the daylight. NEW YORK (AP) — Many are familiar with some of the bold-faced names of people who died of COVID-19 — musician John Prine, NFL kicker Tom Dempsey, former Stanford University President Donald Kennedy  and music producer Hal Willner. Most of the pandemic’s victims aren’t known beyond family, friends and neighbors: Tomas Lopez, who sold tacos from a truck in Seattle; Long Island supermarket worker Gladys Cortes; realtor Bob Barnum of St. Petersburg, Florida; Mary Louise Brown Morgan  of New Orleans, who exercised with her friends in the “Silver Slippers” three times a week. The milestone recently reached was a number simple to emblazon in newspaper, website and television headlines — 100,000 people in the United States dead from the new coronavirus. Yet since the pandemic started, the nation’s obituary writers have tried to tell the world about Lopez, Morgan and thousands like them, to make clear there’s a life behind every number. “I think people are interested — I know I am — in the lives of people who are not public figures who are dying from this,” said Mo Rocca of CBS News, who did two pre-coronavirus seasons of his “Mobituaries” podcast exploring lives lost. He’s been too busy with his day job on “CBS Sunday Morning” to get started on a third season, but when he does, he expects to explore that interest. “There’s this cliche about somebody being ‘taken from us,’ and I don’t think it’s a cliche in this case because it does feel like these lives have been taken from us,” Rocca said. Adam Bernstein, who oversees obituaries at The Washington Post, said the workload has easily doubled since the virus began and that the significance of obituaries right now is measured not just by the loss of victims but the way so many of us have been forced to live. “Obituaries are essentially stories that allow us to make human connections with strangers,” he said. “We’re all stuck at home, yearning for human connection we really haven’t had for a long time, and obituaries provide that kind of contact.” In a typical month, The New York Times runs about 80 to 85 obituaries. In April, the paper wrote 185, said Bill McDonald, the newspaper’s obituaries editor. That doesn’t even count some that were written but didn’t run, like the obit that was quickly prepared for British Prime Minister Boris Johnson when he was critically ill with COVID-19. Just in case. The Times was well-prepared to deal with the lives of the famous and accomplished. But at the pandemic’s outset, editors were determined to chronicle a cross-section of people who died. The model was the Times’ “Portraits of Grief” about victims of the Sept. 11, 2001 attack  on the World Trade Center, only this time the paper wanted to do more than vignettes and knew the job was open-ended, McDonald said. The Times’ obit department brought in people from other parts of the operation who had seen their workload decrease because of the lockdown. The result is the paper’s “Those We’ve Lost” section  that profiles lesser-known victims. “We were interested in putting faces behind the numbers, which are so numbing,” McDonald said.  The same theory was behind the arresting cover of the Times’ edition on Sunday, May 24, which named 1,000 victims and briefly summarized what made them unique. Scale was also an issue at The Associated Press, the idea of telling a sprawling story in ways that people could relate to. “We decided to focus on families and what the impact was on individuals,” said Peter Prengaman, the AP’s news director for the western United States. With Raghu Vadarevu, a global news editor, they created the “Lives Lost” feature  that draws on the AP’s worldwide reach and staff to tell these stories and show differences in how victims are mourned. The handful of profiles produced each week have the same attention to detail as stories about famous people that are an obit writer’s usual focus. Far from being depressing, Prengaman said that “it’s a really rewarding thing to work on, to edit. It really teaches you the value of people’s lives.” The Washington Post, the Los Angeles Times and the Chicago Sun-Times are among those who have established special sections for those who have died from the coronavirus. They can’t cover everyone, however, and many newspapers are seeing a corresponding boom in paid death notices. “It’s the one area, sadly, of advertising that’s booming,” says Los Angeles Times obituaries editor Steve Marble. “On Sundays, there’s page after pages of notices, much more so than in the past.” Last week NPR began a new series that features friends and family members of frontline workers who died, talking about their loved one. Paul Saltzman, the Sun-Times’ Sunday editor, says that the goal of obituary coverage remains the “most meaningful and most interesting stories.” Interest from readers is strong, and responses can be highly personal.  “People generally are pleased that we’re telling the world about their loved ones who’ve died,” he said, citing the family of Emilia Pontarelli, a 93-year-old grandmother known on the northwest side of Chicago as the matriarch of the family behind Tony’s Italian Deli. One time the children of another couple who died hours apart from COVID-19 were worried that there might be a stigma attached to their parents dying this way, Saltzman said. “We wrote that because they were well known in the town where they lived, the word already had gotten around about what they died from, and it was just a very sad story to have two people in a family go so suddenly,” he said. Rocca said that the current crisis might mark a resurgence in interest about obituaries and finding out about people’s lives. “It sounds a little insipid to say we’re valuing life more,” he said. “But maybe we are.”SEATTLE (AP) — My 8-month-old baby has now spent 32% of his life under quarantine due to the coronavirus pandemic. Time blurs enough during infancy for both babies without long-term memory and parents deprived of sleep. But the lockdown has further stretched the elasticity of time for me as I witness my son growing rapidly, even as time feels like it’s standing still out there in the world.  Those of us lucky enough to be healthy and comfortable during the quarantine are faced with this same paradox: a blessing of time and the curse of longing. For me, the unending pandemic is intensified by the finite period of babyhood.  The first year of a child’s life is full of anticipation for the minutia — first tastes, first sights, first moves. It’s one of those few occasions in life where every day can feel monumental, measured by milestone to milestone, moment to moment. It was 80 days ago that President Donald Trump issued social distancing guidelines in the U.S. that effectively shut down our world.  My son was almost 6 months old then, a milestone I looked forward to because it meant we were done with the recovery and hibernation phase of having a new baby. Clark was at that point merely a lovable, snuggle-able meatloaf, but he was beginning to bloom. The second half of babyhood is when things get fun — when the shock of being responsible for a tiny, fragile being has worn off a bit and the kid’s personality begins to emerge. Today, Clark’s giggle fits are boisterous and his toothless smiles are utterly joyful. If you look away from him for too long, he has the confidence to grab you by the collar like you owe him money. In the past three months, he’s also started eating solid foods, babbling loudly and crawl-chasing his big brother all over the house. Watching him develop this very happy life is a welcomed distraction to the grim reality and collective suffering of the pandemic. But there are days I’m also torn by the longing that I feel for normal times. I fear the lockdown is ticking away at my baby’s babyhood.  I wish I could enjoy this time without the nagging fear of a scary virus that could hurt him. I’m sad we’re missing family visits, as he has yet to meet much of his extended family, including his grandfather. Clark’s older brother at this age was enjoying life’s pleasures simple and grand: weddings and parties, hikes and beach time, the sight of community festivals and the smells at a grocery store. But there are no special occasions for Clark — no occasions at all for the time being. Not yet. There is one unexpected upside that this quarantine time has granted us. Instead of day care, he is having unlimited face time with both of his working parents. While I enjoyed an extended maternity leave to be with each of our kids, my husband, like most working parents, could never have dreamed of having this much time to hold their own babies while they are babies.  He peacefully naps in a baby carrier against our chests while we work. On breaks from the desk, we tag in to supervise as the boys play and wrestle. Lunch is now a savored family meal time. Of course, there are plenty of challenges to working and caring for a baby at the same time. But for now, at least we don’t have to miss out on the day-to-day moments we’d long for. And I try to remember: This will all be a time of his life that he’ll forget. Still, the fear of missing out will never be as strong as when you are a parent trying to give your kids the world. ___ Virus Diary, an occasional feature, showcases the coronavirus saga through the eyes of Associated Press journalists around the world. Follow Seattle-based AP journalist Sally Ho on Twitter at http://twitter.com/_sallyhoMINNEAPOLIS (AP) — The two men stepped from the shadows as the car turned off an upscale shopping street into a residential area located on the far edge of the rioting that swept through Minneapolis. It was after midnight. A pair of metal dividers blocked the road, and the men stepped to either side of the car as it stopped. Both carried assault rifles. “Do you live here?” one of the men asked, politely, but forcefully. His hands rested casually on the rifle slung across his chest, and a pistol was strapped to his belt. “We have lots of old people here,” he continued, satisfied that the driver, an AP reporter, posed no danger. “We don’t want anyone to get hurt.” A week of civil unrest has led some Minneapolis residents near the epicenter of the violence to take steps to protect their homes and neighborhoods. They’ve stocked up on fire extinguishers and buckets, and formed scores of loose neighborhood watch groups — aided by a cluster of apps and social media — to share what they view as suspicious activity.  Preparing for nightfall in Minneapolis has meant a new routine for many: stashing garbage cans to keep them from being tossed or set on fire, turning on lights and opening blinds. In some neighborhoods near large demonstrations, witnesses say it also includes residents armed with baseball bats, crowbars and the occasional pistol barricading their streets to keep violent protesters away. Similar scenes have started to emerge across the country as the angry protests have spread, along with a heightened sense of fear and diminished confidence that police will keep the peace. In Chicago’s heavily-Mexican Little Village enclave, neighborhood residents stood watch as shops were vandalized along a busy commercial strip.  For some, it’s all a sign of community pride and rational response when policing has broken down, as it did in most destructive nights in Minneapolis last week. But others see a more troubling undercurrent in the anxiety and mobilization, particularly as it spreads to largely white neighborhoods that have seen little or no damage.  “There’s a sense of state failure and into state failure comes private actions to protect one’s family and one’s community,” said Omar Wasow, an assistant professor of politics at Princeton University who writes about race and the politics of protest movements. “You take that and you layer it on the long, deep-rooted racist mythology that says, ‘I should be scared and black people are a threat,’ and you get a kind of circle-the-wagons behavior.”’ Peter Baggenstos has felt the tension in his neighborhood, a largely white, wealthy pocket of Minneapolis about a mile from a stretch of stores that were vandalized. Baggenstos, a doctor who is African American, said he senses a lot of “passive policing” at night, as neighbors keep lights on and trade text messages about cars or people on the street after curfew. “You’ve got that feeling that eyes are on you,” he said.  As a result, his wife alerted the neighbors when Baggenstos came home late recently, driving his Tesla. It does not have a front license plate, something likely to raise suspicions these days.  “People want to take control over what they feel they’re losing control of — in this case, it’s their personal well-being and that of their family members,” Baggenstos said. “But it’s gotten to this level where it’s dangerous. It’s causing everyone to be paranoid.” He said he’s particularly worried about the surge of rumors and claims on text chains and apps, technology that has transformed old notions of a neighborhood watch.  Since protests first erupted in Minneapolis last week in response to the death of George Floyd, a handcuffed black man who died after a white police officer pressed his knee into Floyd’s neck for several minutes as he pleaded for air and eventually stopped moving, neighbors across south Minneapolis have rushed for updates on apps like Next Door, GroupMe and Citizen. By Tuesday, one GroupMe neighborhood watch group had swelled to 479 members, organized into seven smaller regions. Members, identified only by their first names and cross streets, posted a steady stream of descriptions of suspicious vehicles, loud popping sounds, worries about outsiders and objects that might be filled with accelerants used to set fires.  “I would guess those are lawn bags,” one poster said. Residents have reason to be on alert. Arson and vandalism have devastated a large stretch of a vital corridor in south Minneapolis, and have spread beyond to pockets of neighboring St. Paul and some suburbs. State law enforcement authorities have said they’ve found caches of flammable liquids all over the metropolitan area, as well as stolen vehicles without license plates that they believe have been used to move the material.  In the worst-hit neighborhoods, where store after store was sometimes burned to the ground and looting was brazen, groups of neighbors sometimes set up makeshift barricades at their street corners, standing behind them for hours with baseball bats and metal rods. But most of the tactics are far less confrontational.  Michael Grunke, a 35-year-old who lives near where Floyd died, said he and other tenants in his building gathered hoses and buckets for water. The building manager bought up fire extinguishers before they sold out at some local hardware stores. The group stayed up all night, standing watch, he said — his way to show support for the peaceful protests. “This was a good thing I could do to help the community and make sure things weren’t getting destroyed and tarnishing the memory of George Floyd,” Grunke said.  Joy Miciano, 47, lives with her husband and their two teenage children in the South Uptown area, where stores have been damaged but few buildings burned. She said she and her husband stayed up keeping watch Friday because they felt no police or firefighters would respond.  “That’s what was worrisome to us — if this was coming our way, there was no one to call for help,” she said.  __ Associated Press writers Sophia Tareen contributed from Chicago and Jeff Baenen contributed from Minneapolis.What does the United States of America mean? Perhaps it’s Storyline No. 1: Americans are part of an epic tale of equality, of optimism and trajectory, a steady path toward prosperity that includes everyone from the melting pot working together to form a more perfect union. Its best days are still ahead. Maybe it’s Storyline No. 2: The United States was brutal, unfair from the get-go, colonized by quarreling white European factions that shared little but a tendency to overrun indigenous cultures and hold human beings as property. Its best days, if there really were any, are receding. Or is it somewhere in between: countless shades of gray — infinite competing and overlapping visions of America, including many from those whose stories have been muzzled for a long time. The hard times that have befallen this nation in 2020 — a deadly pandemic, millions unemployed, political warfare, the upheaval after George Floyd’s death — have revealed an increasingly evident truth: The storylines that have long held the nation together are coming apart. “The United States is essentially a collage culture. And if you were a certain group, you had the comfort of the solidity of the great American story. It had a coherence,” says Robert Thompson, director of the Bleier Center for Television and Popular Culture at Syracuse University. “And it’s now been broken apart into a million little pieces.”  Since its inception, a nation lacking an existing shared culture instead built its identity on a series of stories. Exceptionalism. Life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. Equality. Manifest Destiny — the God-given right to expand. The American dream. “We didn’t have an ancient homeland. We had nothing. So … you needed a story. People need stories of belonging,” says Colin Woodard, author of the new book “Union: The Struggle to Forge the Story of United States Nationhood.” Such stories emerged in the generation after the founding fathers died, and they grew with the nation, becoming more powerful even as they excluded many who populated American life. It was, in fact, a clash between storylines — the fundamentally different visions the North and South had for the country — that precipitated the Civil War. It wasn’t until mass culture really emerged in the early 1900s — first movies, then radio and comic books and TV and finally grown-up advertising — that most Americans started hearing identical stories about their country, even if those stories didn’t include them. An alignment settled in — a potent national culture that was promptly upended by a 1960s “counterculture” that had a different story to tell and no intention of being silenced. Still, many 20th-century textbook notions, however outdated and broad-brush, remain the baseline for how many talk about America. But now, four decades after 24-hour cable news made Walter Cronkite’s reassuring and avuncular “That’s the way it is” a quaint memory, the media landscape has cracked apart. A fragmented society is bursting at its seams. And as this week reveals, there’s a free-for-all to determine which version of the American story wins the day. “What tales or myths about America do we cling to in the face of social upheaval? I think that’s what we’re struggling with here,” says Shilpa Davé, a media studies scholar at the University of Virginia who teaches about representations of race and gender in media and popular culture. “Who gets to pursue these ideals? That’s what’s in contention,” she says. American mythologies are powerful and persuasive — and comfortingly aspirational. After all, the world’s largest economy became that way in part by selling narratives about itself back to its people across a dizzying array of platforms. And now, social media: algorithms that sequester Americans in virtual gated communities where they reinforce existing beliefs instead of evolving the story with fellow Americans of other stripes. This landscape helps make Donald Trump, surfing the waves of TV and Twitter, so successful: A salesman at his core, he understands the mechanics behind storytelling and how to spin a tale that packs a wallop. “The best and worst leaders build themselves out of stories,” James Poniewozik writes in “Audience of One: Donald Trump, Television and the Fracturing of America,” his 2019 book. “They use their culture’s language … to express what literal language can’t.” And so you have Trump — atop the bulliest pulpit in the land — characterizing the American story Monday night: “Our country always wins. That is why I am taking immediate presidential action to stop the violence and restore security and safety in America.” And you have his challenger, Joe Biden, characterizing it this way on Tuesday: “American history isn’t a fairy tale with a guaranteed happy ending. The battle for the soul of this nation has been a constant push-and-pull for more than 240 years. A tug of war between the American ideal that we are all created equal and the harsh reality that racism has long torn us apart.” What’s happening in American cities over the past week shows, among many other things, a vision of storylines at war. Over and over, protesters speak of wanting to be heard, of having their stories shape the larger story, of needing the central myth of American life to include them. Just as vigorously, those triggered by the tumult tell an impassioned story of order, calm and the right to be safe in one’s home and one’s business — something central to the American story right back to the first settlers. For the moment, these different stories seem utterly irreconcilable. Many are not primed to hear their fellow Americans’ stories right now. Polarization was already impeding things. Then came the pandemic’s existential threat. And now, the oldest of contentious American storylines — race — has taken a lead role.  How does one forge shared a sense of purpose out of this? How do Americans reassemble the portrait from its fragments? “We can’t exist as a thousand little pieces,” Davé says. “We all want to believe in this story — that we all are created equal and have the right to pursue life, liberty, justice and happiness. Those are values that we all cling to. The journey to get there, that becomes what we’ve struggled against in history and what we’re struggling against now.” It is clear that the 20th-century edition of the American story no longer works. But in this country of stories, not having one won’t work either. Does a nation cease to exist when its foundational story breaks apart, when those who tell that story are saying different things? On the night before he was assassinated in 1968, the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. summoned the story he believed had been promised to him and his compatriots: “All we say to America is, `Be true to what you said on paper.’” Everywhere in the nation today, on the streets and in the halls of government, people are summoning their version of the American story. Shouting it. Insisting on it. Certain it is the version that must prevail. What we know now — after a crazy-quilt century of movies and TV and advertising and social media — is that the people who tell the richest, loudest, most immersive, most appealing story can in fact rule the world. What will that new American story be? ___ Ted Anthony, director of digital innovation for The Associated Press, has been writing about American culture since 1990. Follow him on Twitter at http://twitter.com/anthonytedCOLUMBIA, S.C. (AP) — Hundreds of cities have imposed curfews to keep the peace during a week of violent unrest across the U.S., employing a tactic that gives law enforcement sweeping arrest powers but is frequently flouted and criticized as being unconstitutional. From New York City to Fargo, North Dakota, cities large and small have put curfews in place — in some cases for the first time in decades — sending out emergency notices on phones and highway signs urging people to stay off the streets.  But the deadlines aren’t hard and fast — many of them have exceptions for people heading to and from work, reporters, public transportation and even people buying groceries. Many protesters and citizens have routinely disregarded the restrictions, and police have allowed peaceful demonstrations to continue after curfew while focusing their attention on violent unrest. In New York City, an 11 p.m. curfew was originally put in place this week for what appeared to be the first time in nearly 80 years. Mayor Bill de Blasio rolled it back to 8 p.m., but thousands of people defied the curfew Tuesday night, continuing to march in parts of Brooklyn and Manhattan. After initially standing by and letting protesters continue, officers began ordering people to leave and some people were taken into custody. On an overall calmer night in New York City, de Blasio said the relative quiet was due partly to the curfew. ” So far, the curfew is certainly helping, based on everything I’ve seen in Brooklyn and Manhattan over the last three hours,” de Blasio tweeted. A curfew allows police the ability without any other reason to threaten to arrest or detain crowds of protesters that linger or groups that appear to be a danger to order. And curfews can be a deterrent to get law-abiding citizens off the street and allow police to focus their efforts on the unrest and not get bogged down in run-of-the-mill violations. They have been installed in Los Angeles, Atlanta, Detroit, Denver, Philadelphia and hundreds of other cities and communities across the country. Curfews aren’t unusual in the United States but are typically used in natural disasters like hurricanes, floods and tornadoes to allow law enforcement to stop anyone on the streets and prevent stealing when many homes and empty or damaged. New York City has used curfews in specific locations like parks — sometimes with controversial results. The 1988 Tompkins Square Park riot in Manhattan had to do in part with a then-newly imposed 1 a.m. parks department curfew in a bid to rid the park of drugs and crime. In enforcing the curfew, police flooded the park with officers and were accused of rampant abuses. Former Mayor Rudy Giuliani ramped up enforcement of Central Park’s nightly closure after a string of robberies in the late 1990s. Giuliani was so strict about the curfew, he wouldn’t grant an exception for a late-night vigil to John Lennon, despite intercession from the lord mayor of Liverpool on behalf of aggrieved Beatles fans. During the unrest of the past week, police also want bystanders off the street during unrest — and the curfew solves that.  “The curfew really is to keep people from coming sort of to gawk at what’s going on and keep the looky-loos away,” said Sacramento City Councilman Steve Hansen, whose city’s 8 p.m. Monday curfew appeared to help prevent the destructive demonstrations from the night before. The curfews also come on the heels of lockdowns and stay-at-home orders imposed during the coronavirus pandemic, making for an unprecedented stretch in cities like New York. In Columbia, South Carolina, officials lifted a weekend curfew and the mayor joined an afternoon protest at the state capitol calling for police reform. But several dozen people stayed for hours after the protest ended as tensions with police grew as shadows got longer. Just before 7:30 p.m. Monday, Columbia, South Carolina , Mayor Steve Benjamin set a curfew for 7:45 p.m. for a small area of downtown and an areas of restaurants and shops. The city sent an emergency notice and protesters looked at their screens as their phones started to buzz and the curfew set in. The protesters immediately started to walk away. But some civil rights organizations think hastily issued curfews are unfair and against the First Amendment of the Constitution. “By making presence on public streets anywhere in these cities unlawful, these measures give police too much discretion over whom to arrest,” said the American Civil Liberties Union of Northern California after a number of cities issued curfews. New York City on Monday found out an unintended consequence of a curfew is keeping away law-abiding protesters. The night before, they banded together to stop vandalism and help police find lawbreakers. It also sends a subtle message, said New York City Council member Ydanis Rodriguez. “Implementing a curfew and increasing the number of police officers patrolling the streets is a tactic to effectively silence the voices raised in protest against the abuse of power and looting of black and colored bodies by members of the police,” Rodriguez said.  Curfews can cause other problems too. Charleston, South Carolina, had a curfew for three days after late night Saturday protests led to shattered windows for restaurants and businesses and stolen merchandise downtown. Monday night was quiet. And Charleston Mayor John Tecklenburg said he immediately heard from a certain group of people. “We want to give our businesses a chance to get back into business,” Tecklenburg told his City Council at a Tuesday meeting lifting the curfew. A curfew also allows police to separate people who want to protest while following the law from people who want to cause harm, said Tamara Herold, an assistant professor in the Criminal Justice Department at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas. That makes it easier for law enforcement to decide how to use force to break up unrest. “One of the things police always want to avoid is using indiscriminate force against a large crowd,” Herold said. ___ Associated Press Writers Claudia Lauer and Adam Beam contributed to this report. SAN ANTONIO (AP) — The process to remove grave headstones of German prisoners of war that display swastikas and markings related to the Nazi regime at cemeteries in Texas and Utah will begin later this month, Veterans Affairs announced.  The VA said Monday in a statement that it has decided to replace the headstones on gravesites of three German POWs. Two are located at Fort Sam Houston National Cemetery in San Antonio, Texas, and one is at Fort Douglas Post Cemetery in Salt Lake City, Utah.  “Americans must always remember the horror of the Nazi regime and why so many Americans sacrificed so much to free the world from its reign of terror,” VA Secretary Robert Wilkie said in a statement. “It is understandably upsetting to our veterans and their families to see Nazi inscriptions near those who gave their lives for this nation.” Last week, members of the Texas congressional delegation condemned the markings on the headstones in a letter sent to Wilkie. But he had initially expressed that he didn’t plan to disturb the gravesites. In a House panel testimony last week, Wilkie said he would consider the matter but not to expect a swift response, San Antonio Express-News reported.  But that took a turn Monday when the VA announced  it will begin the required legal action to replace headstones that bear symbols and text referencing the Nazis that millions of Americans fought during World War II. Wilkie didn’t explain the abrupt change in his decision but said he wanted to replace the headstones quickly. It’s not clear how long that would take.  One of the headstones shows that a prisoner was awarded the Iron Cross, a German military decoration for valor. The other two show a modified Iron Cross, which depicts a swastika within a cross. Also carved on two headstones is the inscription, “He died far from his home for the Führer, people and fatherland.” The VA said it doesn’t have unilateral authority to remove the headstones because they’re in cemeteries protected by the National Historic Preservation Act. Later this month, the agency will follow that law to seek guidance from stakeholders on how to replace the headstones with historically accurate markers that don’t show the Nazi swastika and German text.  The VA plans to preserve the headstones in its National Cemetery Administration History Collection after they’re replaced. BIRMINGHAM, Ala. (AP) — Sarah Collins Rudolph thought she’d never see what happened in her hometown: Prompted by protests, the city removed a 115-year-old Confederate monument near where her sister and three other black girls died in a racist church bombing in 1963. A wave of Confederate memorial removals that began after a white supremacist killed nine black people at a Bible study in a church in South Carolina in 2015 is again rolling, with more relics of the Old South being removed from public view after the killing of George Floyd by police in Minnesota. In Birmingham, where Rudolph lives, the graffiti-covered, pocked base of a massive Confederate monument was all that remained Tuesday after crews dismantled the towering obelisk and trucked it away in pieces overnight. Other symbols came down elsewhere, leaving an empty pedestal in Virginia and a bare flagpole in Florida. Rudolph, whose sister Addie Mae Collins died in the bombing of 16th Street Baptist Church, had to see the sight for herself. She lowered a protective face mask to take in the absence of an edifice she long considered a symbol of oppression. “I’m glad it’s been removed because it has been so long, and we know that it’s a hate monument,” said Rudolph, 69. “It didn’t represent the blacks. It just represented the hard times back there a long time ago.” Confederate symbols across the South have been targeted for vandalism during demonstrations sparked by Floyd’s death in police custody in Minneapolis. Now, even some of their longtime defenders have decided to remove them. In Alexandria, Virginia, it was the United Daughters of the Confederacy that took action early Tuesday, removing the statue of a soldier gazing south from Old Town since 1889. And outside Tampa, Florida, a Sons of Confederate Veterans chapter lowered a huge Confederate battle flag  that has long been flown in view of two interstate highways. Birmingham took down the obelisk a day after protesters tried to remove the monument themselves, during one of the many nationwide protests. Crews were preparing to finish the job by pulling up the base. The monument had been the subject of a protracted court battle between the city and state, which passed a law to protect Confederate icons after rebel monuments were challenged and removed following the killings at Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston, South Carolina. Alabama Attorney General Steve Marshall filed a lawsuit on Tuesday against the city of Birmingham, seeking to fine the city $25,000 for violating the state law. Mayor Randall Woodfin said earlier this week that the fine was more affordable than the cost of continued unrest in the city. Online fundraising drives have raised more than enough money to pay the fine. The state lawsuit does not specifically ask Birmingham to restore the monument.  Work to remove the monument began Monday, which was Alabama’s holiday honoring Confederate President Jefferson Davis, who was sworn in Montgomery. There, on the same day, someone knocked over a statue of Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee outside a mostly black high school named for him. Four people were arrested on criminal mischief charges, and the toppled statue was removed. In Alexandria, a city spokesman said the United Daughters of the Confederacy informed the city on Monday that it would remove the statue, and the city’s only role was to provide traffic support. By morning, the pedestal was all that was left. City officials were not told where the statue was taken. Titled “Appomattox,” it depicts a solitary Confederate soldier, his head bowed slightly. In 1890, a state law was passed barring local officials from ever removing it. That law was repealed earlier this year. Alexandria Mayor Justin Wilson tweeted photos of the removal on Tuesday, saying “Alexandria, like all great cities, is constantly changing and evolving.” In Birmingham, Rudolph saw the removal of the monument as unfinished business from decades ago. The more than 50-foot-tall (15-meter-tall) memorial to Confederate soldiers and sailors was located just blocks from the church where Rudolph was badly injured and her sister died when a bomb went off on a Sunday morning decades ago. “The things that we were fighting for in the ’60s aren’t solved yet,” said Rudolph, who testified against Ku Klux Klansmen convicted in the bombing. “We shouldn’t be treated the way they treat us.” ___ Associated Press writers Kim Chandler in Montgomery, Alabama; and Matthew Barakat in Falls Church, Virginia; contributed to this report.LONDON (AP) — I cannot draw. I am unable to sketch anything past the outlines of a simple flower or a house no one would want to live in. For my verbally delayed autistic 6-year-old son though, drawing is a lifeline. It’s how he processes feelings and communicates when words literally fail him.  So despite being terrible at it, I often draw to explain complex situations such as why he, a highly sensory child, will have to stop touching his face and avoid others. I sketch a menacing coronavirus, complete with spiky tops. He takes the pencil from my hands. Clusters of hearts now stand atop the spikes, turning my evil virus into a little bug who has friends. I smile, somewhat defeated, at the landscape of multiplied coronaviruses on the paper, now an army of love spreaders. Autistics, they will have you believe, exist on the margin of emotions, in a world of their own, disconnected. “They’ve been preparing for lockdown all their lives,” someone jokes on social media. My son is downstairs with his dad as I try to edit a news conference through my guilt and his explosive meltdown. It’s Week Two since lockdown began and his routine got upended. His emotions are very much not on the margin. His disquiet wraps around ours like a Venn diagram. Lack of school is in some ways a welcome respite from the sensory overload of his everyday life. But there are also no more soothing swimming lessons, no more playground trips.  Parenting a special needs child has never been a walk in the park, but now we can’t even do that without hovering even more over our little human pinball, desperate to run, touch everything, say hi to all the living souls. For autistics, lockdown is not something they have been preparing for their whole lives. It’s a hell of crushed references. For parents, it’s like being the pinball machine itself, cushioning the frustration and also reveling in the emerging victories. Homeschooling is a no-go. Attempts to turn cake-baking into a maths lesson are quickly deconstructed by a boy who sees more than he says. But he has new words and he’s asking questions.  I work. In the background I can hear him play Barry White, then the O’Jays. As I process my inability to homeschool, he processes the entire soul music catalog, drawing record covers and posing in front of the mirror. He wants to know what everyone is feeling, what they are looking at so longingly. I’m trying to breathe my way out of this pandemic and he’s having me wonder what a cigarette-holding Barry White is contemplating and where the O’Jays’ love train is going. In between, he sketches a plane, his grandparents, the beach, a blistering sun. “This is for you to take to your work town,” he says. That’s the kitchen these days, so I pin the drawings to the fridge. On Thursdays he goes outside and claps for carers, shouting louder than anyone else: “Come on, you can do it! Don’t be shy!” The neighbors across the street, people we barely know, laugh and wave; the social distancing that was there pre-pandemic is bridged by a child whose disability reveals itself in a different ability to connect.  Others will tell you autistics are locked in their own worlds, socially inept, indifferent. I will tell you about the bit where my son — not supposed to be able to read facial expressions — asks during a Zoom call if I’m OK when no one else across the screen can tell I’m not.  He taps into my anxiety, offering up hugs and drawings of where all the emotions live, where hope is stored, where coronaviruses have hearts and Barry White holds the key to the love train. Which, by the way, is headed toward the beach. ___ Virus Diary, an occasional feature, showcases the coronavirus saga through the eyes of Associated Press journalists around the world. Follow Joana Mateus, a senior video producer for the AP in London, on Twitter at http://twitter.com/jojomateusNEW YORK (AP) — Though Black Out Tuesday was originally organized by the music community, the social media world also went dark in support of the Black Lives Matter movement, joining voices around the world outraged by the killings of black people in the U.S. Instagram and Twitter accounts, from top record label to everyday people, were full of black squares posted in response to the deaths of George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery and Breonna Taylor. Most of the captions were blank, though some posted #TheShowMustBePaused, black heart emojis or encouraged people to vote Tuesday with seven states and the District of Columbia are hosting the largest slate of presidential primary elections in almost three months.  🖤🖤🖤 A post shared by  Alicia Keys (@aliciakeys) on Jun 2, 2020 at 3:06am PDT Rihanna, Alicia Keys, Radiohead, Coldplay, Kelly Rowland, Beastie Boys and were among the celebrities to join Black Out Tuesday on social media. “I won’t be posting on social media and I ask you all to do the same,” Britney Spears tweeted. “We should use the time away from our devices to focus on what we can do to make the world a better place …. for ALL of us !!!!!” Spotify blacked out the artwork for several of its popular playlists, including RapCaviar and Today’s Top Hits, simply writing “Black lives matter.” as its description. The streaming service also put its Black Lives Matter playlist on its front page, featuring songs like James Brown’s “Say It Loud — I’m Black and I’m Proud,” N.W.A.’s “(Expletive) the Police,” Sam Cooke’s “A Change Is Gonna Come” and Childish Gambino’s “This Is America.” The opening pages of Apple Music and iTunes focused on supporting Black Lives Matter, and SiriusXM said it will be silencing its music channels for three minutes at 3 p.m. EDT in tribute to “all of the countless victims of racism.” The company said it “will continue to amplify Black voices by being a space where Black artists showcase their music and talents, and by carrying the message that racism will not be tolerated.” Some on social media questioned if posting black squares would divert attention away from posts about the Black Lives Matter movement. “this is the 4th completely different flyer i’ve seen for it,” Grammy-nominated singer Kehlani tweeted about Black Out Tuesday. “”this is the only one without the saying go completely silent for a day in solidarity. the messages are mixed across the board and i really hope it doesn’t have a negative effect.” this is not helping us. bro who the hell thought of this?? ppl need to see what’s going on https://t.co/fN492qsxaa When musician Dillon Francis posted that the hashtag for Black Lives Matter was blank on Instagram because users were posting black squares, rapper Lil Nas X responded with: “this is not helping us. bro who the (expletive) thought of this?? ppl need to see what’s going on.” Emma Watson posted three white squares followed by three black squares with captions reading #blackouttuesday and #amplifyblackvoices on her Instagram account to show her support Tuesday. But she was heavily criticized, and began to trend on Twitter, for adding white borders around her black squares to match the aesthetic of her Instagram page. Others called the actress out for speaking out too late about Black Lives Matter and for not including links to guide users on where they can learn more information about the cause or donate to it. Several music releases and events were postponed as a result of Black Out Tuesday. Interscope Geffen A&M Records said it would not release music this week and pushed back releases from MGK, 6lack, Jessie Ware, Smokepurp and others. Chloe x Halle said its sophomore album will come out June 12 instead of Friday, while the group Glass Animals postponed the Tuesday release of its new single “Heat Waves.” Instead of being released Wednesday, singer Ashnikko will drop her song “Cry” and its video on June 17. A benefit for the Apollo Theater will take place Thursday instead of Tuesday, and South by Southwest postponed an event planned with Rachael Ray. “At SXSW we stand with the black community and will continue to amplify the voices and ideas that will lead us to a more equitable society,” the company said.DALLAS (AP) — Chef Chad Houser opened his downtown Dallas restaurant five years ago to help give teens coming out of juvenile detention stability, and a push toward success.  When the coronavirus pandemic threatened that mission, he found a way to not only keep the teens working -- and also give them a chance to help others. “Our kids need us to begin with,” Houser said, “but they need us even more now.” Within a week of Cafe Momentum closing to dining in March because of the pandemic, the teens who normally cycle through every job at the upscale restaurant -- from cooking to dishwashing to busing tables to serving to hosting -- had started building meal kits for needy families. Houser scrambled to raise funds so he could keep paying the teens and keep them engaged in the nonprofit’s program that offers everything from counseling to education.  De’Monica Dean, 19, said thinking about the families getting the boxes she packs with everything from cans of soup to fresh vegetables and fruits motivates her each morning. “That’s my everyday wake-up. It’s like, do you want to get up today? OK, we know a family has to eat, so let’s get up,” Dean said. Sais Daniel, the cafe’s curriculum coordinator, helps teach the teens skills ranging from restaurant work to life skills like how to create a resume. They’re also learning the joys of helping others. “Sometimes they get lost in how small their world is, but being able to sit down and pack boxes, they’re like: ‘Man, I’m able to see someone else struggling and I’m a blessing to them. I’m able to help them,’” Daniel said. Cafe Momentum has been delivering 1,550 meal kits a week to families in the area through various groups. Most of the kits, which include four meals for a family of four, are being distributed in the Richardson Independent School District. Tabitha Branum, the district’s deputy superintendent, said the partnership with Cafe Momentum is “game changing” for their community, noting that over half of the district’s students qualify for free and reduced lunches. She said that with school closed, the district is able to provide breakfasts and lunches during the week though a state program, but Cafe Momentum lets them also cover weekends. As Texas reopens, Gov. Greg Abbott is allowing restaurants to welcome a limited number of diners inside after being restricted to takeout orders. But for now, Cafe Momentum -- a restaurant that served entrees like sweet tea-brined pork chops and coffee-rubbed steak in its sleek dining area -- will stick with providing meal kits. Houser said he has raised enough money to keep making the kits through June. He’s not sure of the next move, but he said that when it’s safe and financially viable, the restaurant and catering business will resume. The teens are ready to get back to preparing meals and serving guests. “They miss all the pats on the back and hugs that they get from guests,” he said. In the meantime, 18-year-old Anthony Aleman said preparing kits feels good, as does knowing he still has a steady paycheck from Cafe Momentum. “They got my back,” Aleman said. ___ While nonstop global news about the effects of the coronavirus have become commonplace, so, too, are tales of the kindness. “One Good Thing” is a continuing series of AP stories focusing on glimmers of joy and benevolence in a dark time. Read the series here: https://apnews.com/OneGoodThingCARACAS, Venezuela (AP) — At nightfall in one corner of Venezuela’s largest and most notorious barrio, all eyes turned to the glow of a temporary movie screen set up on a hillside terrace atop stacked, red cinder block homes.  Families crawled up cramped stairwells, squeezing together on blankets and plastic chairs spread on their flat rooftops. Some leaned out of their kitchen windows, peering through tangled power lines, while others clustered at the foot of long stairways — anyplace to catch a view.  For a short time Monday, hundreds of families in the neighborhood of Petare had a front row seat for a showing of Disney’s “Aladdin,” allowing residents to escape the stress of the coronavirus quarantine and political wrangling that darkened their TV signals among Venezuela’s deepening troubles.  “We’re going to make some popcorn,” resident Adriana Carrillo said through the bars on her front door as her 5-year-old daughter, Aranza Sofía Guerrero, squirmed next to her. “It’s a great distraction, especially for the children.” The movie projected a bright spot amid the shadow the pandemic has cast around the world at a time when Venezuelans were already struggling under years of political and social crisis. U.S. sanctions bent on forcing President Nicolás Maduro from power recently forced DirecTV to cut its satellite signal, leaving most families in barrios like Petare with no way to watch movies.  The coronavirus has not hit Venezuela as hard as neighboring Brazil, Peru and Ecuador. So far, officials report just over 1,600 illnesses and 17 deaths, but some fear it could easily overwhelm Venezuela’s hospitals.  A group of neighbors who lead the movie night project called The Official Download Zone work on donations from local charities to set up the screen, a projector and speakers on the rooftop terrace, providing low-budget entertainment for families cooped up since mid-March. The group has been showing movies in the streets for about seven years, among its projects designed to help build a sense of community among Petare’s poor and working class neighborhoods, which have a reputation for violence.  Jimmy Pérez, one of the organizers, said the quarantine and lack of satellite TV made their movie night even more important to residents. They’re taking advantage of families’ rooftop terraces, which already hold an important place in Venezuelan culture, he said.  “It’s on our terraces that we dream and gather together,” Pérez said. “It’s where we bid farewell to each year, set off fireworks at Carnival and fly kites.” The group, which pushes no political agenda in a deeply divided Venezuela, picks family movies that bring hope-filled messages as they move among neighborhoods, with one planned for each night this week.  They also believe the project will create a narrative for Petare that runs contrary to one of unbridled violence that too many people see. They highlight residents born and raised there who went on to become Major League Baseball players, beauty queens and professionals.  Still, many residents watching “Aladdin” said they remain shaken by a bloody turf war among gangs last month in a nearby part of Petare. The sound of heavy gunfire lasted through several nights. One neighbor described seeing a police helicopter hover outside her front door, making her run for cover.  On Monday, however, the only sound echoing throughout this part of Petare was the Disney soundtrack to “Aladdin,” bouncing through the canyon of hillside homes. Its songs and plot tell the story of an Arabian street urchin who wins a princess’s heart despite the obstacles a villain throws his way.  Santiago Vega, 9, said he would normally be playing on his tablet at this time of night, whiling away the hours. Rather, he squeezed in between his dad and uncle to watch the movie, grateful for something different for at least one night.  “I want to be able to see my grandmother, my cousins,” he said, wondering if he’ll be able to properly celebrate his birthday coming up on July 4. “But I can’t, because of all this.”  ___ Follow Scott Smith on Twitter: @ScottSmithAP LAWRENCE, Kan. (AP) — Empty seats have been the norm the past few years at the University of Kansas, where a succession of football coaches has failed to turn around the flailing fortunes of the Jayhawks. Now, all those open seats — and short lines and quiet concourses — will be the norm in stadiums just about everywhere. The coronavirus pandemic has forced universities, leagues and franchises to evaluate how they might someday welcome back fans. While opinions vary from sport to sport, nation to nation and even state to state, one thing seems clear: Social distancing is a sure bet when fans return. So don’t expect 100,000-plus fans packed into Michigan Stadium for a football game this fall or 16,300 seated inside Kansas’ storied Allen Fieldhouse when college basketball season rolls around. “We don’t know how we’ll be coming back,” Jayhawks athletic director Jeff Long acknowledged. “We’ve modeled 15 to 16,000 in Memorial Stadium, and to be honest with you, we’ve modeled Allen Fieldhouse, and I can’t bring myself to look at it because I know how few people it will be and that’s upsetting.” Most colleges rely heavily on ticket sales, souvenirs and concessions in football and basketball to raise the bottom line to the point that non-revenue sports can be fully funded. But smaller crowds are going to be necessary to ensure proper social distancing — in pro sports around the globe, too. Forbes estimates the NFL would lose $5.5 billion in stadium revenue if all games are played without fans, and the fallout for other leagues without lucrative TV deals could be catastrophic. The virus that causes COVID-19 is most easily spread when an infected person coughs, sneezes or talks and the droplets spread to people nearby. That’s why guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and World Health Organization preach separation in public as an effective safeguard. In a stadium, though, creating that kind of buffer is no easy task. Most fans tend to file through the gates at the same time, creating a bottleneck in which thousands could be in close proximity. They gather in concourses to chat or buy food, drinks and merchandise. They stand in lines at restrooms. They surge toward the exits at the end of the game. Most teams and leagues have not publicly revealed their plans for fall sports, though some are up front about what to expect. Iowa State is looking at selling only enough tickets to fill up half of Jack Trice Stadium for football games and Notre Dame has warned of fewer fans and limits to tailgating. The Miami Dolphins released a number of ideas under consideration: using every-other turnstile, calling fans into the stadium in sections, letting them out row by row like a church service and using technology to minimize person-to-person contact. Once fans return, partitioning off seats will become crucial. And those won’t just be empty seats. Teams and leagues are investigating the use of temporary banners spread across entire sections that can then be sold for sponsorship, helping to bridge the gap caused by unsold tickets. Such banners are already used to create a more intimate settings for concerts or other events, and Bristol Motor Speedway had some of them strung up for last weekend’s NASCAR race in Tennessee. Another idea is to turn sections of 20 or more individual or bench seats into temporary suites, where a group of 10 friends and family members can be socially distant from other groups — and potentially selling them for a higher price. “There are a lot of different things you can do,” said R.J. Orr, whose Arizona-based firm Bluemedia specializes in such “seat kills” and temporary structures. They already have worked with Arizona State and other schools on similar projects. The next challenge is keeping fans socially distant when they do leave their seats. A company called WaitTime has software applications tied to security cameras that allow fans and stadium operators to know on monitors or apps just how busy certain areas might be. A motion analytics company, iinside, uses lidar sensors to detect unsafe crowding. “We’re working on tools to overlay crowd density on top of stadium maps,” iinside CEO Sam Kamel said. “These maps would then tell fans where to avoid, or when it’s ‘safe’ to get a hot dog or Coke and when the food court isn’t too crowded.” There is little dispute that the game-day experience will be vastly different. At baseball games in Taiwan, up to 1,000 spectators have been allowed into the ballpark, but they were barred from bringing food, concession stands are closed and they are told to sit three seats apart. During a recent Fubon Guardians game in New Taipei City, about 900 people showed up at its 12,500-seat stadium, leaning across empty seats to talk with friends and moving on their own to cues from cheerleaders and mascots. “There’s plenty of social distance here,” said Guardians fan Sun Ming, who works in finance in New Taipei City. It could be that way for quite a while. ___ AP Sports Writers Dave Campbell, Larry Lage and John Pye contributed to this report.LONDON (AP) — The U.K. became the second country to officially record more than 40,000 coronavirus-related deaths as more than 100 scientists wrote to the British government on Friday to urge it to reconsider lifting virus lockdown restrictions. 
 The government said another 357 people who had tested positive for the virus have died in the U.K. across all settings, including hospitals and care homes. That takes the total to 40,261, the world’s second-highest pandemic death toll behind the United States. 
 “I think that the day that the number of deaths from coronavirus has gone over 40,000 is a time of sorrow for us all,” Health Secretary Matt Hancock said at the government’s daily press briefing. 
 The U.K.’s actual COVID-19 death toll is widely considered to be higher as the total only includes those who have tested positive for the virus. 
 In an open letter, the scientists urged the government to postpone further easing of the lockdown given the still-high level of daily virus-related deaths and new infections. 
 “Despite a two-month lockdown, we are still experiencing unacceptable daily numbers of deaths, still in the hundreds, and an estimated 8,000 new infections a day in England alone,” they said. 
 Overall, Hancock said the transmission rate was heading down but that there were a couple of areas causing concern. He said the transmission rate is highest in the northwest of England, which includes the cities of Liverpool and Manchester, followed by the less densely populated southwest.  
 Hancock said the government wants to “increasingly have an approach in tackling local lockdowns where we spot a flare-up.” Such an approach could potentially see the government re-imposing restrictions locally. 
 The scientists, many of whom work in infectious disease, biology and immunology, are particularly vexed by the level of community transmission of the virus. They voiced worries that there could again be “exponential growth” in the number of cases and death. 
 Signatories include Professor Stuart Neil, the head of the department of infectious diseases at King’s College London; Professor Adrian Hayday of the Francis Crick Institute; and Professor Neil Fairweather of Imperial College London. 
 “There is a very high probability that relaxation of lockdown, coupled with a potential breakdown in public trust, will bring us back into a situation where the outbreak is once again out of control,” the scientists wrote. “This would inevitably lead to a second lockdown, which could be more damaging and harder to implement.” 
 The British government says its easing of the lockdown has been limited and careful and is backed by the science. The government has taken advice from the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, or SAGE, through the crisis, many of whose members are some of the country’s leading scientists.  
 Steps to ease the lockdown conditions in England over the past couple of weeks included the reopening of schools to some younger children and allowing groups of six people from different households in outdoor spaces, including in private gardens.  
 The other nations of the U.K. — Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland — have also relaxed some elements of the lockdown but not at the same rate as in England. 
 There are concerns that the planned reopening of all nonessential stores on June 15 could act as a catalyst for another escalation of the outbreak, especially if it leads to more use of public transportation. 
 “The level of community transmission is still far too high for lockdown to be released, and should not be attempted before we have a substantial and sustained further drop in community transmission,” the scientists said. 
 ___ 
 Follow AP pandemic coverage at http://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak. 
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) — Television. Sewing machine. Motorcycle. These are the things Edda Marchan’s children sold to keep their mother breathing. In the far stretch of northern Peru where the family lives, medicinal oxygen to treat the coronavirus has become a scarce commodity. Eventually, they could not find any. “It’s the greatest desperation in the world,” said her daughter, 39-year-old Fiorella Sorroza. “We are praying to God not to abandon us.” In the South American nation wracked by COVID-19, one of the world’s most abundant elements is now in short supply. Exasperated relatives are racing to fill overpriced tanks. Long neglected hospitals are running empty. And President Martín Vizcarra has issued an emergency decree ordering industrial plants to ramp up production or purchase oxygen from other countries. “Peru, with the Amazon, has the lungs of the planet,” said Iván Hidalgo, academic director of the Institute of Government and Public Management in Peru’s capital of Lima. “And we’re dying because of lack of oxygen.” Regional health directors say the shortage has already cost lives and is so severe that even by turning industrial plants that typically produce oxygen for mining into medicinal production, Peru will fall short of what it needs. Defense Minister Walter Martos said Thursday the country needs 173 tons of oxygen per day. The dean of the Medical College of Peru estimates the nation is producing about 20% of that. The problem is a consequence of decades of underinvestment in hospitals, corruption and poor management, several medical leaders said. The hospital in Tumbes, near the border with Ecuador, where Marchan’s family resides, has a plant that has been inoperative for years because someone stole an electronic card needed to operate it. Officials are hoping to get it back up Saturday. In the meantime, Tumbes health workers have imported oxygen from Ecuador and trucked in tanks from the nearest Peruvian plant, five hours away. The biggest public hospital usually utilizes 30 tanks a week but now needs about 200. Many also blame Peru’s governments for failing to prepare earlier. “This exposes failings throughout the country,” said Dr. Harold Burgos, regional health director for Tumbes. “It was coming and no one took it seriously.” Other countries in Latin America and the Caribbean are facing – or soon likely to encounter – oxygen shortages. In Colombia’s Amazon, doctors have had to airlift patients to Bogota because the only oxygen plant in the region is barely functioning. Haiti is heavily reliant on one oxygen plant for a population of over 11 million. About 15% of all COVID-19 patients experience severe illness that requires oxygen therapy, while another 5% need ventilation, according to the World Health Organization. By the time many patients are critical enough to seek hospital attention, they often have low blood oxygen levels that require immediate attention.  That was the case for Armando Ancajima’s uncle, who was taken Sunday to a hospital in Talara, an oil producing city near Peru’s northern coast. Struggling to breathe, his nails purple, he had just 35% oxygen saturation on arrival. The family was told the hospital had no oxygen, suggesting that they rapidly find a way to buy it themselves. Ancajima said he saw 10 people die during the night he spent with his uncle. “This is the inheritance of 30 years of inattention,” he said.  Peru was one of the earliest nations in Latin America to institute a strict lockdown, but that failed to stop infections from skyrocketing. With nearly 185,000 cases, the country has the second-highest number in the region. Peru’s large informal sector — about 70% of the economy — means many have to break quarantines to earn money and buy food. But the oxygen shortages are also symptomatic of the overall difficulties Latin America encountered in ramping up medical supplies during the pandemic. By the time the first cases were diagnosed in late February and early March, global supplies were drying up. Unable to buy from the U.S. or Europe, many turned to China for ventilators, which have been slow to arrive. “The opportunity to buy goods had already passed when the first cases were diagnosed,” said Dr. Ciro Ugarte, director of the Pan American Health Organization’s health emergencies department. Vizcarra on Thursday announced nearly $25 million to purchase oxygen and $3.2 million to develop plants and generators. “If we can meet the demand nationally, we will,” he said. “If plants and generators cannot be secured that way, we’ll go wherever necessary.” Perhaps the most severe shortages have been in Peru’s Amazon, where doctors in Iquitos were tending to 500 patients in a hospital meant for 225. With no oxygen plant, health workers were depending on outside shipments until recently. The government promised 60 tanks a day by air, though only 24 were arriving. With the help of the church and local communities, two plants have since been purchased and overall need and shortages have gone down.  But the oxygen scarcity is increasingly being felt outside the Amazon as well.  In recent days, lines of people waiting to fill oxygen tanks for loved ones with COVID-19 have been seen even in better-equipped Lima. And in northern Peru, where Marchan’s family lives, many say price gougers are taking advantage. The family was spending about $150 a day on oxygen until recently, hoping to avoid taking her to the hospital, which doctors warned was on the verge of collapse. But as she grew worse and no oxygen could be found, they decided to seek help. A day after admitting her to the hospital, Sorroza said a doctor called, saying they didn’t have oxygen and asking the family to bring some. Later that night, she said, one doctor called a cousin offering to sell them a tank for around $120. Three days later, she was dead.  The family was alerted at 6 a.m. on a Saturday that she’d passed and was told she’d be buried four hours later at a newly created cemetery. They rushed to say a hasty goodbye, enlisting a carpenter cousin to construct a simple white cross out of wood. “I didn’t get to see her,” Sorroza said. “Nothing.”BANGKOK (AP) — Factories and stores are reopening, economies are reawakening – but many jobs just aren’t coming back. 
 That’s the harsh truth facing workers laid off around the world, from restaurants in Thailand to car factories in France, whose livelihoods fell victim to a virus-driven recession that’s accelerating decline in struggling industries and upheaval across the global workforce. 
 New U.S. figures released on Friday showed a surprise drop in joblessness as some of those who were temporarily laid off returned to work. But it’s only a dent in the recent months’ surge of unemployment, which remains near Depression-era levels. In a pattern repeated across the world, high unemployment means less money spent in surviving stores, restaurants and travel businesses, with repercussions across economies rich and poor. 
 “My boss feared that since we come from Kibera (an impoverished slum), we might infect them with COVID-19, and so he let us go,” said Margaret Awino, a cleaning worker in a Nairobi charity. “I don’t know how I can go on.” 
 As the virus and now protests across the U.S. have shed new light on economic inequalities, some experts say it’s time to rethink work, wages and health benefits altogether, especially as automation escalates and traditional trades vanish. 
 THAI CHEF 
 When Wannapa Kotabin got a job as an assistant chef in the kitchen of one of Bangkok’s longest-established Italian restaurants, she thought her career was set. 
 But five years on, she’s in line with more than 100 other jobless Thais outside an unemployment office. 
 The government ordered all restaurants closed in March to combat the coronavirus, and 38-year-old Wannapa has been spending her savings on food and shelter. 
 When restaurants were allowed to re-open in May, Wannapa’s restaurant told staff its closure was permanent. 
 “I never thought this would happen,” she said. “It’s like my heart got broken twice.” 
 Around the world, new virus safety rules mean restaurants and stores can’t hold as many people as they used to, so they can’t afford as much staff. Many can’t afford to reopen at all. 
 Bangkok’s restaurants are firing, not hiring, she said. 
 “I will have to go on and keep fighting,” she declared. “If there is any job that I can do, I will do it.” 
 Wannapa’s unemployment benefit can only tide her over for so long. She said if she can’t find work, she’ll have to return to her family’s rubber plantation to start life all over again. 
 ISRAELI PROGRAMMER 
 When the coronavirus first broke out, Israeli software developer Itamar Lev was told to work from home. Then the online advertising company he worked for slashed his salary 20%. Finally, just as restrictions started to ease, he was fired. 
 Lev, 44, is among hundreds of thousands of Israelis out of a job as a result of the pandemic, more than 25% of the workforce. 
 “It was sudden. I wasn’t ready for it,” he said. 
 Tied to the American market, Lev’s company’s advertising revenue dried up and they had to make cutbacks. Lev said he was treated respectfully, and sees himself as simply a victim of the times.  
 He is already preparing for interviews and confident he will find a new position soon. In a country versed in disruptions from wars and security threats, he said Israelis have built up a certain resilience to upheaval. 
 Still, he said this time feels different. His wife, a self-employed dance instructor, has also seen her income temporarily evaporate, forcing the couple to dig into their savings. 
 “The ‘comeback’ is going to take longer,” said Lev, father of a 5-year-old girl. “It’s a difficult period. We’re just going to have to take a deep breath and get through it.” 
 KENYAN CLEANER 
 Perhaps hardest-hit by virus job losses are low-paid service workers like 54-year-old Awino, who lost her job after 15 years as a cleaner at one of Mother Teresa’s charities in Nairobi. 
 Awino shares a shack with her four daughters, including one who has epilepsy and requires costly medical care, and they share a communal toilet nearby. She hasn’t seen her husband in nine years. 
 Without her regular $150 monthly salary, she now buys raw chicken and fries it on the streets for sale. 
 “Ever since I was fired because of COVID-19, I put all my efforts into my business,” she said. 
 Some days she earns more than what she was making at her old job, but it’s hard work, and unpredictable. City council and health inspectors are known to raid informal street vendors, who are often arrested and have their goods confiscated.  
 Awino has no choice but to take the risk, and she’s not alone: Hundreds of thousands of Kenyans have also lost their jobs because of the pandemic. 
 CLOUDY SKIES 
 On a global scale, the industry perhaps most vulnerable is aviation. 
 Germany’s Lufthansa is losing a million euros an hour, and its CEO estimates that when the pandemic is over it will need 10,000 fewer workers than it does now. Emirates President Tim Clark signaled it could take the Dubai-based airline four years to return to its full network of routes. 
 The ripple effect on jobs in tourism and hospitality sectors is massive.  
 Countries like the United Arab Emirates are home to millions of foreigners who far outnumber the local population – many of whom have lost their jobs. Their families in countries like India, Pakistan, Nepal and the Philippines rely on their monthly remittances for survival. 
 Egyptian hotel chef Ramadan el-Sayed is among thousands sent home in March as the pandemic began to decimate Dubai’s tourism industry. He returned to his wife and three kids in the city of Sohag, about 500 kilometers (310 miles) south of Cairo. He has not been paid since April. 
 “There’s no work here at all,” he said. “Even tourism here is operating at 25% so who’s going to hire here?” 
 He sits idle, relying on his brother and father for support. He is hopeful the Marriott hotel where he worked will bring him back at the end of the summer when they plan to re-open.  
 “We are waiting, God willing,” el-Sayed said.  
 LONG ROAD AHEAD 
 So why aren’t all the jobs coming back, if economies are reopening? 
 Some companies that came into the recession in bad shape can no longer put off tough decisions. Meanwhile, even though reopened cities are filling anew with shoppers and commuters, many consumers remain wary about returning to old habits for fear of the virus. 
 “Some firms that were healthy before governments imposed shutdowns will go bankrupt, and it could take a long time for them to be replaced by new businesses,” Capital Economics said in a research note. “Other firms will delay or cancel investment.” 
 It estimates that a third of U.S. workers made jobless by the pandemic won’t find work within six months. And some European workers on generous government-subsidized furlough programs could get laid off when they expire, as companies like French carmaker Renault and plane maker Airbus face up to a bleaker future. 
 Holger Schmieding, economist at Berenberg Economics, warned: “The COVID-19 pandemic and the ensuing mega-recession may shape political debates and choices for a long time.” 
 ___ 
 Charlton reported from Paris. Aya Batrawy in Dubai, Khaled Kazziha in Nairobi, Aron Heller in Kfar Saba, Israel, David Biller in Rio de Janeiro and Dave McHugh in Frankfurt contributed. 
VALLEY STREAM, N.Y. (AP) — One was a nurse, another a retiree. Others had recently lost jobs with an insurance company and a country club.  
 On a humid day last week, in the parking lot of this Long Island town’s largest park, they had a common bond. Each was making their first visit to a food bank to help cope with hardships arising from the coronavirus outbreak. 
 “I’m hungry. That’s why I’m here,” said Marcia Duckley, a mother of four children ages 4 through 17 who lost her hotel job this year. “It never crossed my mind before that I’d be doing this.” 
 Duckley, who came to the United States 30 years ago from Jamaica, said she has recently been feeding her children meals of flour dumplings with butter – plus an occasional treat of water flavored with sugar. 
 “They say, ‘Mom, when are you going back to work?’” she said through an open window as she edged her car slowly forward. 
 The scene in Valley Stream, a community of 37,000 in the Nassau County suburbs just east of New York City, has been replicated nationwide during a 10-week stretch in which 42 million Americans have applied for unemployment benefits. Long lines of cars, sometimes numbering in the thousands, backed up while their occupants wait — sometimes for hours — for the chance to take home a free batch of food. 
 Island Harvest, one of the major food banks on Long Island, organized the food distribution in Valley Stream, one of many it has conducted throughout the area. 
 Randi Shubin Dresner, Island Harvest’s CEO, said the food bank has distributed 1.2 million more meals so far this year than during the same period last year. 
 In Valley Stream, she said, 1,124 boxes of food were distributed by volunteers, mostly to motorists, but also to several hundred people who came on foot. Each box contained roughly 25 pounds of milk, potatoes, apples, cheese and other produce. 
 “There are a lot of people who’ve never asked for food before -- some used to contribute to us,” she said. “It’s a very humbling experience for them.” 
 Dresner noted that some cars in the long line were new, upscale models — and that it would wrong to second-guess their occupants’ needs. 
 “Maybe a few weeks ago they had a great job,” she said. “Then the world is taken from underneath them and they have no income -- they’re struggling to pay the mortgage and the car loan.” 
 “It’s not up to us to judge the type of car that comes though the line, or the way people are dressed,” she added. “It’s up to us to respect them.” 
 The first woman waiting in the pedestrian line was indeed well dressed. She asked to be identified only as Maria G. and said she had been furloughed during the pandemic by the insurance company where she’d been an underwriter for 20 years.  
 She is a single mom living with four sons ages 15 to 20 who are “eating me out of house and home,” she said. 
 “I’ve never been through something like this,” she said. “I’ve seen it in Third World countries, and now it’s hit Valley Stream.” 
 Not far behind her was retiree Sheila Barron, 69, who said she was making her first trip to a food bank because of increasing wariness of grocery stores. They’re too crowded, she said, and often are out of items she needs.  
 The pandemic restrictions have been tough for her. She’s missed the opportunity to go to church and is asked to do medical appointments via telemedicine. 
 Barron was soon followed by Tina Grace, 29, walking alongside her bicycle, who said she was recently laid off by the country club where she worked on event planning. She’s getting unemployment compensation but worries it won’t last. 
 “I’m just taking it day by day,” she said. “It’s hard. It sucks. Everyone is in a tough situation right now.” 
 Unlike many others in line, Mary Blaize is still employed — she’s a nurse in New York City. The stress of her job is now compounded by her husband’s recent layoff, she said, making it harder to pay their mortgage and utility bills. 
 But she was upbeat about her first visit to a food bank. 
 “It feels good to know that people actually care,” she said. 
 In neighboring Connecticut, perennially ranked as one of the richest states, demand on food banks has also been intense. 
 Each weekday outside a football stadium in East Hartford, 1,000 to 2,500 cars roll through a distribution site run by the regional food bank, Foodshare. Drivers have their trunks open as volunteers load boxes of fruits and vegetables, bread, milk and even toys. 
 Among those making use of the site was Natalie Townsend, 32, a single mother from Hartford who lost her job at a call center in April. She said she has fallen two months behind on her rent, is still waiting for unemployment benefits and worries about how to care for her 9-year-old daughter. 
 “It definitely gets me down because I like to pay my bills on time,” she said. “I don’t want to be on the streets.” 
 Also at the site were Yanet Belossantos and her husband, Alex Cepeda, who lost their jobs in March, she as a medical assistant, he as a chef. The Dominican Republic immigrants live in Hartford with her mother, who has Alzheimer’s disease. 
 They have been surviving on unemployment benefits but are behind in their bills. 
 “We can’t go grocery shopping because we don’t have the money,” Belossantos said. “This is really helping us.” 
 In the mostly affluent southwest corner of Connecticut, Kate Lombardo says demand is up by about 40% in recent weeks for the Stamford-based Food Bank of Lower Fairfield County, of which she is executive director. 
 Lombardo says her own family in Brooklyn faced sudden hardship in the 1960s, including losing their house, after her father died and her mother had to care for five children. She said that experience deepens her empathy with people now facing their first-ever need for food assistance. 
 “Suddenly you feel like you’ve been transported to a different country,” Lombardo said. “You never used these resources before. You don’t know how to find them. It’s like Dorothy trying to find the Wizard of Oz.” 
 Lifelong Stamford resident Juledah Wilson -- in addition to her job as a paraeducator in the public school system – has for many years helped run one of the neighborhood food pantries supplied by the food bank. 
 But Wilson has been out of work since March; so are the two adult children who live with her, along with two grandchildren. Wilson recently designated herself and her family as recipients of aid from that very pantry in order to obtain meat, bread and fresh vegetables.  
 “I grew up with a lot of brothers and sisters,” she said. “I learned how to make do with what you have -- try to survive.” 
 Throughout her community, anxiety is high as food supplies grow tighter. 
 “A lot of people are very nervous,” Wilson said. “We don’t know where we’re headed. It’s kind of scary.” 
 ___ 
 Associated Press writer Dave Collins in East Hartford and AP video journalist Robert Bumsted in Valley Stream contributed to this report. 
BRUSSELS (AP) — Europe could have its free travel zone up and running again by the end of this month, but travelers from further afield will not be allowed in before July, a European Union commissioner said Friday after talks among the bloc’s interior ministers. 
 Panicked by Italy’s coronavirus outbreak in February, countries in the 26-nation Schengen travel zone — where people and goods move freely without border checks — imposed border restrictions without consulting their neighbors to try to keep the disease out. The moves caused massive border traffic jams and blocked medical equipment. 
 Free movement is a jewel in Europe’s crown that helps its businesses flourish and many European officials feared that the very future of the Schengen area was under threat from coronavirus travel restrictions. These added to border pressures already caused by the arrival in Europe of well over 1 million migrants in 2015. 
 “I personally believe that we will return to a full functioning of the Schengen area and freedom of movement of citizens no later than the end of the month of June,” European Union Home Affairs Commissioner Ylva Johansson said Friday after the video-conference meeting.  
 All but essential travel into Europe from the outside is restricted until June 15, but many ministers suggested Friday that they want this deadline extended until early July. 
 The meeting came as the Czech Republic was easing restrictions with some of its neighbors; Austria, Germany and Hungary. Also Friday, Switzerland said it plans to lift restrictions on travel from EU nations and Britain on June 15. Switzerland is not an EU member but is part of the Schengen travel zone. 
 Johansson said Europe’s Centre for Disease Prevention and Control believes that confinement, social distancing and other health measures are working. More than 175,000 people have died in Europe’s coronavirus outbreak, according to a tally by Johns Hopkins University, mostly in Britain, Italy, France and Spain. 
 “Physical distancing and other health-related measures are still needed, of course. But health authorities are clear that there is no longer a clear justification for either travel restrictions or border measures within the EU Schengen area,” Johansson said. 
 German Interior Minister Horst Seehofer, whose country plans to lift its remaining border checks on June 15 like many other EU countries, said “the internal border controls will be over in all of Europe at the end of June.” 
 The news should come as a relief to millions of Europeans still trying to work out their summer vacation plans — which begin for many in July once the school year is over — and who are anxious to know whether they will be allowed to head to the continent’s beaches or mountains. 
 It’s also good news for European countries whose economies have been ravaged by the spread of COVID-19 and are hoping for a much-needed boost from their decimated tourism industries.  
 But the perception that Italy is still dangerous is weighing heavily on its tourism sector, which along with related industries accounts for 13% of Italy’s gross domestic product. 
 In an apparent reference to Austria and Greece, which have not fully opened to Italian tourists, Italian Foreign Minister Luigi Di Maio denounced the “ad hoc” measures put in place by some countries as “a violation of the European spirit that has always distinguished us.” 
 Di Maio said Rome would provide regular infection data to Austria “so they can have certainty about Italy’s numbers.” Last week, he said Italy refused to be treated as a leper after Greece announced a list of 29 countries whose citizens could visit without testing or quarantine requirements, but excluded Italians, Britons and residents of other hard-hit countries. 
 Germany’s Seehofer said most of the EU’s interior ministers want to extend the current entry ban on outside travelers “by 14 days until July 1.”  
 Visitors from the United States, Russia or Brazil, for example, would only be allowed back into Europe on based on how those nations have brought the spread of the virus under control, he said. Those three nations account for 44% of the world’s confirmed infections and nearly 38% of the world’s confirmed coronavirus deaths, according to Johns Hopkins. 
 Worldwide, 6.6 million people have been confirmed infected by the virus and over 391,000 have died, according to Johns Hopkins, but experts say the tally understates the true toll of the pandemic due to limited testing, missed mild cases and deliberate government undercounts. 
 ___ 
 Janicek reported from Prague. Geir Moulson in Berlin and Nicole Winfield in Rome contributed to this report. 
 ___ 
 Follow AP pandemic coverage at http://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak  and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak 
TOKYO (AP) — Japan has kept its deaths from the new coronavirus low despite a series of missteps that beg the question of whether it can prevent future waves of infections. Authorities were criticized for bungling a cruise ship quarantine and were slow to close Japan’s borders. They have conducted only a fraction of the tests needed to find and isolate patients and let businesses operate almost as usual, even under a pandemic state of emergency. But the roughly 900 deaths, or 7 per million people, in Japan are far fewer than the 320 per million in the U.S. and more than 550 per million in Italy and Britain. Prime Minister Shinzo Abe on May 25 declared an end to a 7-week pandemic state of emergency, lauding “the power of the Japan model” and winning World Health Organization chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus’s praise as a “success.” Experts say it’s unclear exactly how Japan has managed to keep outbreaks in check, but the country needs to use the reprieve to beef up testing and healthcare systems to better find, isolate and treat patients to minimize future waves of infections. A government-commissioned panel concluded that early contact-tracing helped pinpoint outbreaks, slowing the spread of the virus until late March, when a surge of cases overwhelmed the extremely labor intensive process of investigating clusters of infections. A campaign to get the public to avoid high-risk environments, dubbed the “three Cs,” or close contact, closed settings and crowded places, also helped, it said. “At a relatively early stage, we detected signs of infections and we were aware of how the coronavirus transmits ... We were able to warn the people against the ‘3 Cs’ from early on,” said Shireru Omi, a public health expert and leading figure on the government task force. “Japan could have been like (the U.S. or Europe) if infections had overshot at the beginning,” he said. Omi and other experts say widespread use of masks to fend off allergies and prevent sharing colds; the Japanese custom of bowing instead of shaking hands or hugging; a taboo on wearing shoes inside homes and a highly accessible, affordable public health system all helped. Patients who were hospitalized benefited from Japanese doctors’ heavy reliance on CAT scans and X-rays to diagnose pneumonia cases. Researchers also suspect possible past exposure to other strains of coronavirus might provide some protection from the illness. Or, Japan may just have been lucky so far, despite many missteps, some critics say. Initially, hopes were high that Japan’s system of public health centers, or “hokenjo,” set up decades ago to track down tuberculosis and other infectious diseases, might be a powerful weapon against the pandemic. Instead, gutted by steep staff cuts and restructuring, they became bottlenecks as they were flooded with tens of thousands of phone calls and testing requests. Bureaucracy prevented commercial and university labs from helping, as some people sickened and died before their calls were even answered. “A public health perspective was prioritized, and treatment for each patient was neglected,” Michiko Sakane, a doctor in Tsukuba, near Tokyo, said in a recent article published by the Medical Research Information Center. “We had to keep asking patients with flu symptoms to wait at home. We don’t even know how many of them were positive,” she said. “We needed a system that allow us to test anyone who needed to be tested.” Infections spread in hospitals, as meanwhile emergency rooms often rejected suspected COVID-19 patients due to shortages of protective gear, ventilators and intensive care beds. The handling of the Diamond Princess cruise ship, on which 712 of the 3,711 people aboard gradually fell ill while being quarantined in the Yokohama port, triggered criticism that Japanese health officials had turned the vessel into a virus incubator. Hundreds of those patients flooded into hospitals just as the pandemic was gaining a foothold in the Tokyo-Yokohama region. Other passengers were eventually evacuated from the ship without reports of secondary infections. Officials say tests were rationed to avoid overwhelming hospitals, since health ministry policy initially required hospitalization of all positive cases. Officials later agreed to isolate asymptomatic or mild cases in hotels. Still, emergency medicine briefly collapsed, said Takeshi Shimazu, head of the Japanese Association for Acute Medicine. “If we had a bigger outbreak, we wouldn’t have been able to cope.” By early June, Japan had tested some 254,000, or only 0.2% of its 126 million people, a fraction of the numbers tested in the U.S., Germany and South Korea. Omi has acknowledged the actual number of infections could be 10 or 20 times, or more, the health ministry’s tally of nearly 17,000. So far, government appeals to businesses to let employees work remotely; limited shutdowns of some businesses and schools and voluntary compliance with calls to avoid crowds appear to have turned the tide. Numbers of new cases have dropped dramatically, though they have rebounded in recent days, a reminder of how easily the new coronavirus can spread. One priority is to better protect the nearly one-third of Japanese over 65 in this fastest aging nation, said Tatsuhiko Kodama, a Tokyo University Immunologist. As Japanese return to schools, shops and offices reconfigured to help prevent infections with ample use of plastic screens, masks and reminders to keep their distance, access to faster testing is crucial, officials say. The government has revised its testing guidelines and is setting up dozens of testing stations, introducing quick test kits for early detection. Some antibody testing has begun to assess the extent of infections and a contact-tracing app for both Apple and Google smartphones is under development. Authorities are on the lookout for further outbreaks of the virus that has cost the country hundreds of lives and trillions of yen (trillions of dollars) in lost production, consumer spending and tourism revenues — and in government spending to help salvage the economy. When Tokyo confirmed 34 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, its governor declared an “alert,” lighting the city government headquarters and the scenic Rainbow Bridge over Tokyo Bay in crimson. Shimazu fears such largely symbolic measures won’t prevent a resurgence of infections as people once again crowd onto trains and gather in cramped offices and classrooms. “How effective can masks, social distancing and hand washing be?” he said. “I’m watching the situation with great concern.” ___ Follow Mari Yamaguchi on Twitter at https://www.twitter.com/mariyamaguchiMEXICO CITY (AP) — President Andrés Manuel López Obrador urged the country to remain calm Thursday as Mexico registered the second straight day of escalating coronavirus death numbers that rivaled those coming out of Brazil or the United States.  
 The Health Department announced 816 more confirmed COVID-19 deaths, one day after officials reported a toll of 1,092 deaths, which was more than double the highest previous toll reported in a single day. Officials said an additional 1,033 suspected COVID-19 deaths were awaiting confirmation, suggesting daily tolls would remain high.  
 Newly confirmed coronavirus cases also continued to rise by record amounts, with 4,442 reported Thursday. 
 Assistant Health Secretary Hugo López-Gatell sought to allay fears over the new numbers, saying that daily deaths had peaked May 17. He said many of the COVID-19 deaths reported this week actually occurred in May but were not tallied until now because of backlogs in reporting or testing.  
 But with total deaths standing at 12,545, he acknowledged the pandemic could wind up costing as many as 35,000 lives in Mexico, local media reported. The country has recorded 105,680 cases so far. 
 Experts said the reason for this week’s sudden jump in deaths was attributable to a number of factors, including confirmation and inclusion of deaths stretching back as far as 25 days. But the country is also passing through the pandemic’s most critical moment with a dramatically increasing number of confirmed and suspected infections. 
 “Let there not be psychosis, let there not be fear,” López Obrador said Thursday from Chiapas, while also accusing the press of fanning fears. 
 The jump in reported deaths came in the first week after the federal government’s official social distancing period ended as the president continued a week-long tour trying to reactivate the economy. López Obrador said he would recommend tightened measures if there is a surge in infections. 
 Despite the drive to re-open, the governor of Oaxaca state announced he was asking residents to practice “total isolation” in the colonial capital city, also known as Oaxaca, from Friday through June 15 to stem the spread of the coronavirus. Gov. Alejandro Murat said people in Oaxaca city and surrounding areas should leave home “only for emergencies, health or food issues.”  
 Before this week, Mexico had largely seen daily death tolls of 300 to 400, after seeing the previous one-day high of 501 deaths May 26. The health ministry did not immediately respond to a request for additional information Thursday. 
 Dr. Mauricio Rodríguez, a professor at Mexico’s National Autonomous University’s medical school, said there could be a number of explanations for the sudden jump in deaths.  
 The federal government depends on reporting from the states and from different branches of the public health system and there are often delays, he said. There are also delays at the laboratories and hospitals themselves, especially as the country’s caseload increases significantly. Medical staff in hospitals are going to devote more time to treating the patients in front of them rather than submitting the data that is collected for the federal government, he said, noting that most medical records are still handwritten. 
 Significant jumps in death statistics have been seen in other countries during the pandemic. 
 But asked if Wednesday’s number was just an anomaly, Rodríguez said Mexico could see similar totals in coming days.  
 “I believe that we are in a stage of the epidemic in which we are probably going to be seeing that type of number daily during this week, maybe the next,” Rodríguez said.  
 “When there are more cases, there are going to be more deaths,” Rodríguez said. “We can’t be afraid to say that.” 
 Rodríguez and government officials say that deaths are an indication of what was happening with the epidemic days in the past, following the start of a person’s illness, their hospitalization and ultimately their death. For the current state of affairs, hospital occupancy and active cases tend to be better indications.  
 ___ 
 Associated Press writer María Verza in Mexico City contributed to this report. 
MADRID (AP) — A second round of random testing in Spain for antibodies to the new coronavirus indicates that a third of those infected do not develop symptoms, Spanish health authorities said Thursday.  
 “It is a wake-up call for public health: it is not possible to control (an outbreak) by just considering those who are symptomatic,” National Epidemiological Center Director Marina Pollán said. 
 “With this number of asymptomatic cases, we must follow the recommendations” for personal hygiene and social distancing, Pollán said. 
 Results from the latest round of the nationwide testing confirmed preliminary finding published three weeks ago showing that blood tests detected the IGG antibody against the virus in only 5% of the 63,000 participants. 
 Researchers say that means Spain is far from having developed a “herd immunity” to COVID-19 and is still vulnerable to more outbreaks. 
 Over 95% of the people tested in the first round continued in the study for the second round. There will be one more round of testing before the study concludes. 
 Spain is rolling back the rules of the country’s two-month lockdown. The country was one of the hardest-hit by the pandemic in the world with over 27,000 virus-related deaths. 
 The Health Ministry’s top virus expert, Fernando Simón, acknowledged that regional authorities are “correcting” their data and said he expects the national totals of deaths and infections to undergo revisions. 
SIOUX FALLS, S.D. (AP) — Organizers have scrapped plans to mandate social distancing during President Donald Trump’s appearance at a July 3 Mount Rushmore fireworks display and won’t limit the crowd due to coronavirus concerns, South Dakota Gov. Kristi Noem said Thursday. The Republican governor said the National Park Service is dolling out 7,500 tickets via lottery for the event, which marks the first time in a decade that fireworks will be set off at the memorial in recognition of Independence Day.  “There will be no better place to celebrate our independence,” Noem said. “We are excited that President Trump will be joining us for this event.” Event organizers did not reduce the number of tickets due to the coronavirus pandemic, and Noem said she isn’t concerned an influx of tourists would heighten the risk. Coronavirus infections are on a downward trend in the state and hospitals are prepared to handle more infections if needed, she said. People who don’t get tickets to the event will be able to gather outside the monument grounds to watch the fireworks, Noem said. Secretary of Tourism Jim Hagen said there will be fewer tickets offered than in previous years, but that was already in the works to help with crowd control. The state is actively marketing itself as a summer tourism destination, but Hagen said he expects more people are interested in road trips rather than flying. South Dakota is focused on markets within driving distance, he said.BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) — Out of work, broke and left with few good options during the pandemic, a growing number of Venezuelan migrants in Colombia have set up a makeshift camp on a tree-covered patch along a highway outside the capital of Bogota.  
 Aside from 160 tents they’ve built out of black plastic and ropes, they have no running water, bathrooms or electricity. They survive on the charity of neighbors who bring food.  
 The migrants are crowded with up to six in each tent and no way to easily wash their hands, creating the potential for the new coronavirus to spread, although residents said they haven’t yet experienced any illness. 
 “We’re living in a nightmare,” said Cecilio Zagarra, an organizer and one of hundreds in the camp. “We don’t know when it will end.” 
 In the last two weeks, Colombian authorities slowed the number of Venezuelan migrants being allowed to travel to the border city of Cucuta from 400 a day by more than a quarter. They say Venezuelan authorities are only allowing Venezuelans to cross three days each week at what’s normally a bustling border crossing.  
 This has caused a bottleneck of Venezuelans trying to go home. The new shantytown just north of Bogota has become home to hundreds of stranded Venezuelans, many children, pregnant women and the elderly.  
 The Associated Press visited the makeshift camp, observing a lack of sanitary conditions. Most of the migrants do not have masks, and keeping a safe distance from others is nearly impossible.  
 Zagarra, 30, is a leader in the community. He said that like many there, he uprooted from crisis-torn Venezuela two years ago and traveled to Colombia, where he found steady work building communication towers.  
 Then, the coronavirus swept across Latin America, bringing with it orders to stay at home and quickly leaving him penniless.  
 “It changed my life by 180 degrees,” Zagarra said. “The resources we had ran out. They kicked us out for not paying the rent.”  
 Zagarra and others said they were forced to make the camp, receiving no help from the government. While maintaining order in their community, Zagarra said they’re pressuring officials to pay for the long bus journey back to the Venezuelan border.  
 “We don’t have the necessary resources to pay for the tickets to get back,” he said.  
 They’re among a flood of an estimated 5 million Venezuelans who fled their native country in recent years, escaping a historic crisis that has left most without reliable running water, electricity, gasoline and health care. The largest number of Venezuelan migrants — 1.8 million — crossed into Colombia. Others went to Peru and Ecuador. 
 Quarantine orders in these countries have sparked a reverse flow of Venezuelans, who say they have no other choice but to return home, where at least they can live with relatives. Roughly half of the Venezuelan migrants worked informally as street vendors and clerks, having no safety net to help them survive without going to work each day.  
 Colombian migration officials report that so far, more than 72,000 displaced Venezuelans have returned to their native country, many walking up to 20 days carrying their belongings.  
 Juan Espinosa, a Colombian migration official, told the AP that border communities and bus terminals throughout Colombia are growing crowded. 
 “This is not the time to move and travel,” Espinosa said, urging them to stay put and isolate as best as they can.  
 Venezuelan nurse Rosmery Sánchez, 34, said she came to Colombia six months ago. She said she is out of work, homeless and surviving on the charity of nearby residents who bring bread, soft drinks and other food.  
 “We came to Colombia for better economic stability, but we found the coronavirus,” Sánchez said. “What we are experiencing is a horrible situation that none of us asked for.” 
CAPE TOWN, South Africa (AP) — South Africa’s worst hotspot for the coronavirus is no longer testing most people under age 55 as it tries to clear a backlog of 27,000 tests amid a shortage of kits. Western Cape province, centered on the city of Cape Town, will test people under 55 only if they have serious health conditions, have been admitted to a hospital or are a front-line health worker, Premier Alan Winde said. “If you’re younger than 55 and you have symptoms, assume you have COVID-19 ... After 14 days, you’ll be fine. There’s no purpose in getting a test,” Western Cape head of health Keith Cloete told radio station Cape Talk this week. People who are younger than 55 and generally healthy are advised to isolate themselves if they show symptoms. “We want to preserve tests for where it makes the most difference,” Cloete said. The province continues to see a worrying increase in infections that has made it the epicenter of the outbreak in Africa. The Western Cape has a population of around 6 million and more than 24,000 of South Africa’s 35,725 confirmed cases.  The province alone has more confirmed cases than any other country on the 54-nation continent except Egypt. South Africa has the most cases in Africa, where overall cases have surpassed 162,000.  The Western Cape’s testing problems are part of a countrywide issue. South Africa has a national backlog of nearly 100,000 tests,  although it has also conducted the most tests in Africa. The Western Cape, one of Africa’s most popular tourist destinations before the pandemic, is bracing for a peak in COVID-19 infections and deaths in the next few months. It already has 597 of South Africa’s 792 deaths.  Cape Town announced a “fatalities management plan” last month and said the number of people dying in the city from COVID-19 could reach around 4,000 per month. Testing materials remain in short supply across Africa, but the head of the Africa Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said a new platform to pool the continent’s purchasing powers has obtained about 15 million coronavirus testing kits for the next six months.  John Nkengasong on Thursday told reporters that the continent is still far behind the goal of conducting at least 10,000 tests per 1 million people. He said just about 1,700 tests are being carried out per million compared to about 37,000 per million in Italy and 30,000 per million in the UK.  Nkengasong said 3.4 million tests have been conducted so far across Africa, which has a population of 1.3 billion people, and testing capacity is “increasing very, very rapidly.”  Africa’s numbers are rising steadily as testing improves, with a 31% increase in new cases since last week. The continent’s cases represent less than 3% of the global total. ___ Cara Anna in Johannesburg contributed.BEIRUT (AP) — Dozens of domestic workers gathered outside the Ethiopian Consulate in Beirut on Thursday, some inquiring about flights home, others stranded after they were abandoned by employers who claimed they could no longer afford to pay their salaries.  About 180,000 domestic workers in Lebanon, most of them women from Ethiopia, are growing more desperate as a crippling economic and financial crisis sets in, coupled with coronavirus restrictions. The Labor Ministry organized buses late Wednesday that transported about 35 women left stranded outside the consulate to a hotel in Beirut after they spent the day on the street with their belongings, some of them crying. Scenes on local television prompted the ministry to take action, offering the women shelter until they could be flown out of the country. Lebanon’s airport has been shuttered since mid-March as part of measures to help step the spread of the new coronavirus.  On Thursday, there were new arrivals.  “They are dumping us like trash,” said one worker who had been in Lebanon for seven years and was now looking to go back home after her employers drove her to the consulate.  “We are human, would they accept for their children to be treated this way?” said the woman, Aster, who gave only her first name for fear of reprisal for speaking to the media.  Labor Minister Lamia Douaihy vowed on Twitter to take necessary measures against employers who commit “humanitarian violations.”  Lebanon has been hit by an unprecedented economic and financial crisis made worse by the lockdown related to the virus. The foreign currency crisis has led to many migrants not being paid for months or the value of their salaries declining by more than half. Others have lost their jobs after employers dumped them on the streets or outside their embassies. Many are unable to go home, because they cannot afford the price of a repatriation flight or because global air travel is severely restricted.  Some among Thursday’s crowd came to inquire about flights back home. “I came here because I want to travel home. ... I have a daughter and I have no work (here), I have no house, I have nothing. Where shall I stay?” said worker Birke Angello.ATHENS, Greece (AP) — For nearly four months, Capt. Andrei Kogankov and his oil tanker crew haven’t set foot on dry land. With global travel at a virtual standstill due to the coronavirus pandemic, the Russian captain was forced to extend his normal contract. He still doesn’t know when he’ll be able to go home. 
 Countries across the world have imposed lockdowns, shut borders and suspended international flights to curb the spread of the new coronavirus. The move was deemed essential to prevent rampaging contagion, but merchant ship crews have become unintended collateral damage. 
 With more than 80% of global trade by volume transported by sea, the world’s more than 2 million merchant seafarers play a vital role.  
 “In some ways, they’ve been the forgotten army of people,” said Guy Platten, secretary general of the ICS. “They’re out of sight and out of mind, and yet they’re absolutely essential for moving the fuel, the food, the medical supplies and all the other vital goods to feed world trade.”  
 About 150,000 seafarers are stranded at sea in need of crew changes, according to the International Chamber of Shipping. Roughly another 150,000 are stuck on shore, waiting to get back to work. 
 “It’s not a tenable position to keep on indefinitely. You can’t just keep extending people,” said Platten.  
 International shipping organizations, trade unions and shipping companies are urging countries to recognize merchant crews as essential workers and allow them to travel and carry out crew changes. 
 “Our challenge now is to get a very strong message to governments. You can’t expect people to move (personal protective equipment), drugs and all the issues that we need to respond to COVID, and keep cities and countries that are in lockdown fed, if you don’t move cargo on ships,” said Steve Cotton, General Secretary of the International Transport Workers’ Federation, or ITF. “They’ve got to recognize the sacrifice seafarers are making for our global society.” 
 Kogankov is seven months into a four-month contract and was supposed to be replaced in mid-March in Qatar. But a few days before he arrived, Qatar imposed a lockdown and banned international flights.  
 From there to South Korea, Japan, South Korea again and on to Singapore and Thailand, each time the same story: Lockdown. No flights. No going home. 
 The uncertainty and open-ended extension of his contract — and with it the responsibility for his 21-man crew and a ship carrying flammable cargo — is taking its toll.  
 “When you are seven months on board, you are becoming physically and mentally exhausted,” Kogankov said by satellite phone from Thailand. “We are working 24/7. We don’t have, let’s say, Friday night or Saturday night or weekends. No, the vessel is running all the time.” 
 Officers sign on for three to four months, the rest of the crew for around seven months. But they always have an end date. Take that away, and suddenly the prospect of endless workdays becomes a strain. 
 “We’re gravely worried that there could be a higher increase of incidents and accidents. But we also are seeing a high level of what I would describe as anxiety and frustration,” Cotton said. “If you don’t know when you’re going to get off a ship, that adds to a high level of anxiety that really is quite demoralizing.” 
 Unless governments facilitate crew changes, Cotton warned, “it’s difficult for us to convince the seafarers not to take more dramatic action, and ... stop working.” 
 It’s not just crew changes that are problematic during the pandemic. Getting medical help for seafarers has also become difficult, as Capt. Stephan Berger discovered when one of his crew fell ill — not with coronavirus. 
 Lockdowns in successive ports made visiting a doctor impossible. It took multiple phone calls and the combined efforts of a Dubai paramedic, Berger and the German ship-owning company to eventually get the necessary care for the crewmember, who was hospitalized for three weeks.  
 Of the 23 people aboard Berger’s Berlin Express, 18 were due for a crew change when it moored in Valencia, Spain, in late May. The officers had extended what were normally three-month contracts to four and five months, while the mostly Filipino crew had been on board for eight or nine months, instead of three or four. 
 Despite this, morale has been good, Berger said. 
 Nobody is particularly happy with the contract extensions, “but we have to take it as it is,” he said. “It feels sometimes like a prison.” 
 Ship-owning company Hapag-Lloyd was doing everything it could to arrange crew changes and managed to arrange for the seven European crew members to sign off in Barcelona on May 30, Berger said. But there are still no flights home for the Filipino crew. 
 “We are very much hidden. We are on board our vessels, and the people might see the big ships coming in and out of the ports, but very seldom they see the people who are operating the ships,” Berger said. “We hope that people would recognize it a little bit more now.” 
 On another Hapag-Lloyd container ship, apprentice Hannah Gerlach was to sign off in mid-March in Singapore. But even as her vessel headed to Asia, it was clear that wouldn’t happen. Gerlach packed her bags for an earlier departure from Sri Lanka, but by the time she arrived, so had the lockdown.  
 “I definitely miss my family very much. ... And I miss just these moments of a normal life, to have the possibility to go out for a walk, to the forest, to ride the bicycle,” Gerlach said. “You don’t know any more when your contract will end, when you have the chance to see your family again.” 
 David Hammond, founder of the Human Rights at Sea organization, said many seafarers “have really been at the end of their tether” due to contract extensions. “The reality is that until there is global cooperation among states and shipping entities .... then crew change is going to be very problematic.” 
MEXICO CITY (AP) — The coronavirus toll in Mexico soared to a new daily high Wednesday, with the health department reporting 1,092 test-confirmed deaths — more than double the previous one-day record and in line with numbers in the United States and Brazil.  
 The announcement was an embarrassment for officials, who have consistently predicted that cases in Mexico were about to start leveling off. The country began a gradual re-opening of industrial and business activity Monday. 
 Officials rushed to say that many of the new confirmed deaths had occurred days or even weeks ago and were being announced now because of delays in processing tests or other reasons.  
 But such delays have presumably been a constant reflected in every previous daily tally. Assistant Health Secretary Hugo López-Gatell did not cite any specific clearing of testing backlogs in previous days that would explain the Wednesday spike. 
 “We have had a very substantial increase in mortality,” López-Gatell said, ascribing the delay in reporting deaths to “various reasons.” 
 Mexico has largely seen daily death tolls of 300 to 400, after seeing the previous one-day high of 501 deaths May 26.  
 The number of new confirmed cases rose by 3,912, pushing Mexico’s total for the pandemic into six figures, at 101,238. But Mexico has performed very little testing — about 250,000 tests in a country 125 million people — and officials acknowledge that the actual number of cases is probably many times higher. 
A malaria drug President Donald Trump took to try to prevent COVID-19 proved ineffective for that in the first large, high-quality study to test it in people in close contact with someone with the disease.  Results published  Wednesday by the New England Journal of Medicine show that hydroxychloroquine was no better than placebo pills at preventing illness from the coronavirus. The drug did not seem to cause serious harm, though -- about 40% on it had side effects, mostly mild stomach problems. “We were disappointed. We would have liked for this to work,” said the study leader, Dr. David Boulware, an infectious disease specialist at the University of Minnesota. “But our objective was to answer the question and to conduct a high-quality study,” because the evidence on the drug so far has been inconclusive, he said. Hydroxychloroquine and a similar drug, chloroquine, have been the subject of much debate since Trump started promoting them in March. Hydroxychloroquine has long been used for malaria, lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, but no large studies have shown it or chloroquine to be safe or effective for much sicker patients with coronavirus, and some studies have suggested the drugs may do harm.  Trump took a two-week course of hydroxychloroquine, along with zinc and Vitamin D, after two staffers tested positive for COVID-19, and had no ill effects, according to results of his latest physical released by his doctor Wednesday.  Federal regulators have warned against hydroxychloroquine’s use except in hospitals and formal studies because of the risk of side effects, especially heart rhythm problems. Boulware’s study involved 821 people in the United States and Canada living with someone diagnosed with COVID-19 or at high risk of getting it because of their job -- doctors, nurses, ambulance workers who had significant exposure to a sick patient while not wearing full protective gear. They were randomly assigned to get either the nutrient folate as a placebo or hydroxychloroquine for five days, starting within four days of their exposure. Neither they nor others involved in the research knew who was getting which pills. After 14 days in the study, 12% on the drug developed COVID-19 symptoms versus 14% in the placebo group, but the difference is so small it could have occurred by chance, Boulware said. “There’s basically no effect. It does not prevent infection,” he said of the drug. Even if it were to give some slim advantage, “we’d want a much larger effect” to justify its use and risk of side effects for preventing illness, he said. Results were no different among a subgroup of participants who were taking zinc or vitamin C, which some people believe might help make hydroxychloroquine more effective or fight the coronavirus. There are some big caveats: The study enrolled people through the Internet and social media, relying on them to report their own symptoms rather than having them tracked in a formal way by doctors. Participants were not all tested for the coronavirus but were diagnosed as COVID-19 cases based on symptoms in many cases. And not all took their medicines as directed.  The results “are more provocative than definitive,” and the drug may yet have prevention benefits if tried sooner or in a different way, Dr. Myron Cohen of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill wrote in a commentary in the journal. Others were glad to see a study that had a comparison group and good scientific methods after so many weaker reports on hydroxychloroquine. “This fits with everything else we’ve seen so far which suggests that it’s not beneficial,” said Dr. Peter Bach, director of a health policy center at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York.  This study was in younger relatively healthy people, but the results “would make me very discouraged about trying to use this in older people” who are most vulnerable to serious illness from the coronavirus, Bach said. “If it does work, it doesn’t work very well.” Dr. Dan Culver, a lung specialist at the Cleveland Clinic, said there’s still a chance that giving the drug sooner than four days after someone’s exposure to the virus may help prevent illness. But the study “takes ‘home run’ off the table” as far as hopes for the drug, he said.  The study was mostly funded by David Baszucki, founder of Roblox, a California-based game software company, and other private donors and the Minnesota university.  Boulware also is leading a study testing hydroxychloroquine for treating COVID-19. The study is finished and results are being analyzed now. On Tuesday, the journal Lancet posted an “expression of concern” about a study it published earlier this month of nearly 15,000 COVID-19 patients on the malaria drugs that tied their use to a higher risk of dying in the hospital or developing a heartbeat problem.  Scientists have raised serious questions about the database used for that study, and its authors have launched an independent audit.  That work had a big impact: the World Health Organization suspended use of hydroxychloroquine in a study it is leading, and French officials stopped the drug’s use in hospitals. On Wednesday, the WHO said experts who reviewed safety information decided that its study could resume. ___ Marilynn Marchione can be followed on Twitter: @MMarchioneAP ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.At least two U.S. senators said Wednesday that China hid data from the World Health Organization that could have altered the course of the coronavirus outbreak, even as a Chinese official denied delays in sharing information and said the government acted openly and transparently. They were referring to an Associated Press investigation  published this week that found China stalled on providing critical coronavirus information to WHO, which expressed considerable frustration in private even as it praised the country in public. Politicians said the report raised key questions, and public health experts said it shed light on a story that has become highly politicized.  At a press briefing on Wednesday, Zhao Lijian, a spokesman for China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, called the AP report “seriously inconsistent with the facts.” He read off a timeline of events that did not contradict the AP’s findings and added that China had always maintained “close and good communication and cooperation with WHO.” WHO officials refused to answer repeated questions Wednesday from international journalists about the AP report, but they did not question its accuracy.  Ami Bera, chairman of the U.S. House Foreign Affairs subcommittee that focuses on Asia, acknowledged that WHO was imperfect and said the U.N. health agency should stand up more forcefully to powerful countries like China. “I do think the WHO has to be very careful in not being so conciliatory to China,” he said.  Senator Rick Scott said that instead of exposing China’s failure to share information, WHO officials praised the country’s response to the coronavirus.  The AP found significant delays by China in the early stages of the coronavirus outbreak that compromised the WHO’s understanding of how the disease was spreading, according to internal recordings of WHO meetings, documents and interviews. The AP uncovered evidence that China sat on releasing the genome of the virus for more than a week after three government labs had fully decoded it. The recordings of meetings throughout January obtained by the AP showed the WHO was kept largely in the dark, while its public commendations of China were likely aimed at trying to coax more information out of officials.  Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus praised the Chinese response in public as “very impressive, and beyond words.” Zhao said he was unfamiliar with the internal information cited by AP. But he said “the facts and data are in plain sight” and that China acted “with openness, transparency and a sense of responsibility.” He did not directly address the comments made by WHO officials in the recordings. Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said AP’s reporting raised critical issues about how the outbreak was handled.  “I think there are many questions that need to be asked about the World Health Organization, about China and other countries’ behaviors through this,” Trudeau said. “The World Health Organization remains a truly important ally...but there are many questions that need to be answered going forward.” At the White House, a senior Trump administration official maintained that China pressured the WHO to mislead the world when the virus first emerged.  “The WHO’s complicity with China to cover up the source of the virus violated the organization’s own regulations,” the White House staffer said.  The WHO declared the coronavirus outbreak to be a global emergency on January 30, its highest level of alert. Numerous Western countries, including the United States, did not make serious preparations for the virus’ arrival for months.  In recent weeks, U.S. President Donald Trump has repeatedly blasted the WHO for allegedly colluding with China  to hide the extent of the outbreak, saying the U.S. would be cutting its ties with the organization.  The new information uncovered by the AP does not support the narrative of either China or the U.S., but instead portrays an agency urgently trying to solicit more data despite limited authority.  In one internal meeting, the WHO’s top China representative acknowledged the country was only providing outbreak information with the U.N. health agency about 15 minutes before it appeared on state-owned China Central Television.  Several British Conservative politicians known for their hawkish views on China also cited the AP story. In a tweet, former Cabinet minister Owen Paterson tweeted called it a “shocking report.” Paterson noted the finding that in the week after three Chinese government labs and one commercial lab had all sequenced the virus but could not share it publicly, 600 more people were infected.  Suerie Moon, a global health academic at the Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies in Geneva, called the AP report “a huge public service in uncovering what happened in January.” “It does show the Chinese government is a powerful stakeholder in WHO,” said Moon, who sat on an independent panel evaluating the WHO’s flawed response to the 2014-16 Ebola outbreak in West Africa. “I do think Tedros’ praise was excessive,” Moon said. “But there was a clear objective behind it.”CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) — President Nicolás Maduro and Venezuela’s opposition, led by Juan Guaidó, have agreed to a measures for battling the new coronavirus to be overseen by international health workers, a first step in years toward cooperation between bitter political rivals for the benefit of the country.  
 While focused narrowly on the pandemic response, experts said Wednesday the agreement opens a window of hope for tackling Venezuela’s overarching political stalemate that has left the once-wealthy oil nation in deepening economic and social crisis. 
 Geoff Ramsey of the Washington Office on Latin America think tank said it’s the first major agreement successfully forged in recent years between Maduro and the opposition.  
 “It’s hard to overstate how important this is for Venezuela,” Ramsey said.  
 Venezuelans are increasingly losing patience with the lack of progress in finding a political solution, he said, adding that this agreement could next lead to more badly needed humanitarian assistance and create momentum for negotiations for a political solution to the crisis.  
 “If they can negotiate a humanitarian accord, the next step would be to negotiate conditions for free and fair elections,” Ramsey said. “It seems like both Maduro and the opposition are beginning to see that they can’t simply sit back with their arms folded and blame the other side.”  
 The one-page agreement signed June 1 says both sides will work in coordination to find funds for fighting the coronavirus. It is signed by Maduro’s health minister, Dr. Carlos Alvarado, and Dr. Julio Castro, who represents the Guaidó-led National Assembly.  
 It was also signed by Dr. Gerardo de Cosío, the head of the Venezuela office of the Pan American Health Organization and the World Health Organization, which will oversee the cooperation. 
 “This document is, I hope, a step to move forward to a level of collaboration of both sides,” Dr. De Cosio told The Associated Press. “This is one milestone of many more to be reached.”  
 Venezuela has been in a political crisis for years, and early last year Guaidó claimed presidential powers as head of the National Assembly, backed by the U.S. among nearly 60 nations, which say Maduro holds power illegally due to an undemocratic election.  
 The crisis had left much of Venezuela without reliable water, electricity, gasoline and health care long before the pandemic. So far, officials report 1,819 coronavirus cases and 18 deaths, but some fear it could easily overwhelm Venezuela’s hospitals.  
 This new agreement most immediately could influence a divisive debate inside the opposition over whether to participate in legislative elections expected later this year. Some sectors of the opposition have been seeking an agreement with Maduro to overhaul the electoral council and allow international observers, among other conditions. 
 While the coronavirus agreement raised hopes of more to come, Maduro’s government and the opposition have repeatedly agreed in recent years to hold negotiations, but each time they ended in failure without advances.  
 U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres welcomed the announcement of an agreement and encouraged the parties “to implement this agreement in accordance with the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence,” U.N. spokesman Stephane Dujarric said.  
 The U.N. chief also urged them “to build on this foundation to continue seeking common ground to overcome the country’s protracted crisis,” Dujarric said. 
 Guaidó’s opposition coalition said that the agreement is the result of “several months of struggle” and allows the World Health Organizations agency to receive the funds approved for humanitarian aid without it going to enrich a few in power or to be used as political blackmail.  
 Opposition lawmaker Miguel Pizarro, who represents the National Assembly’s humanitarian efforts in Washington, said this was not an agreement with the Maduro government or the beginning of political negotiations with it. Rather, it sets basic terms for a humanitarian response to reduce suffering and death among Venezuelans, he said.  
 “Without a doubt, it is an important step,” Pizarro said.  
 While Maduro jubilantly announces arrivals of medical supplies from allies such as China and Russia, he has consistently rejected U.S. offers of humanitarian aid, calling them an underhanded attempt to destabilize his rule. The opposition has been similarly reluctant to work with Maduro officials to distribute the aid that has trickled in from the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Roman Catholic Church and other sources, seeing it as a tool of coercion. 
 But over the past year, as efforts to unseat Maduro have stalled and social conditions have worsened, the opposition has quietly eased its objections to working through the socialist government in the belief that regular Venezuelans will benefit and to prepare for eventually assuming power itself one day. 
 Maduro’s vice president of communications, Jorge Rodriguez, in a Tuesday night state TV address read the agreement aloud while holding it up as a willingness by the government to work with the opposition.  
 “Let’s set politics aside and talk about fighting the coronavirus,” he said. “This is a good start to work that we can deepen to combat COVID-19 together.”  
 ___ 
 Follow Scott Smith on Twitter: @ScottSmithAP  
 ___ 
 Associated Press writer Edith M. Lederer contributed to this story from New York. 
CAIRO (AP) — The United Nations warned Wednesday its programs to fight the coronavirus and stave off starvation for hundreds of thousands of children in war-torn Yemen will be severely cut or stopped altogether by the end of the month unless donor countries provide an immediate injection of cash. The U.N. sounded the alarm a day after its appeal for countries to fund emergency aid in the Arab world’s poorest nation fell a billion dollars short of what aid agencies needed — $2.41 billion — to cover essential programs from June to December.  Already, 75% of U.N. programs in Yemen, covering essentially every sector, from food to health care and nutrition, have had to shut their doors or reduce operations amid a shortage of funds. The World Food Program had to cut rations in half and U.N.-funded health services were reduced in 189 out of 369 hospitals nationwide. Yemen has careened from one disaster to another in recent years, but aid groups warn the country of 30 million faces its darkest hour with the spread of the coronavirus. The country’s hospitals, which lack adequate electricity, protective gear for health workers, ventilators and other life-saving equipment, are simply not equipped to handle an outbreak of the virus.  Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates have been at war against Iranian-allied Houthis in Yemen since 2015. The conflict has killed more than 100,000 people and created the world’s worst humanitarian disaster, with more than 3 million people internally displaced and two-thirds of the population reliant on food assistance for survival.  Zoe Paxton, spokesperson for the U.N. humanitarian office, said if aid isn’t paid immediately, response teams working to contain the spread of the COVID-19 virus in Yemen “will likely close by the end of this month,” severely handicapping efforts to contain the coronavirus, which is spreading at an alarming rate throughout the country. The virus threatens to decimate Yemen’s health care system, already ravaged by civil war. Paxton said the U.N. will likely start winding down some of its disease outbreak and control programs next month, including efforts to contain cholera, malaria and dengue fever, among other diseases.  Tuesday’s conference raised $1.35 billion, about half of what is needed, and half of the $2.6 billion that countries pledged at the same conference last year. Saudi Arabia, which co-hosted this year’s U.N. pledging event, reiterated previous announcements made that it would pay half a billion dollars in aid for Yemen this year, $300 million of which will be funneled to the U.N. and related aid agencies. It is the largest amount pledged by any country. However, U.N. tracking figures show the kingdom has paid just $16 million of that amount to the U.N. response plan so far this year. The UAE announced no pledges of humanitarian aid for Yemen during the U.N. conference. The UAE says it has spent $37 million in overall aid for Yemen this year, and has plans to spend more.  When asked, the UAE’s Minister of State for International Cooperation, Reem Al-Hashimy, said the country has provided more than $6 billion in aid to Yemen since the start of the war. In May, the UAE sent 87 tons of medical supplies to Yemen, including 65 ventilators.  A key factor contributing to dwindling international funds is obstruction by Yemen’s Houthi rebels, who control the capital, Sanaa, and most of the country’s north. The United States decreased its aid to Yemen earlier this year, citing interference by the Houthis. A person familiar with Saudi and Emirati policy making, who was not authorized to speak to the media, told The Associated Press that while the two nations are Yemen’s largest donors of humanitarian aid, Riyadh and Abu Dhabi are considering how to ensure aid reaches Yemeni civilians and is not diverted by the Houthis. The UAE in particular is reviewing the most effective means of doing so, the person said.  Some aid workers say donors appear to have lost confidence in the U.N.’s ability to implement programs amid restrictions by Houthis, as well as the reduced presence of U.N. staff and aid workers in the country.  Jan Egeland, secretary general of the Norwegian Refugee Council, called for the money pledged on Tuesday to be “disbursed immediately”. “But money alone is not enough,” Egeland added. “These pledges are worth little if people are still fleeing from bombs and crossfire and their hospitals attacked.” Since April, authorities in areas controlled by Yemen’s internationally recognized government have reported around 400 coronavirus cases, including 87 deaths.  The Iran-backed rebel Houthis have declared only four cases of COVID-19, including one death. The group faces heavy criticism for suppressing information about the number of virus cases and fatalities in areas they control. The World Health Organization believes there is significant underestimation of the outbreak, which could further hinder efforts to get needed supplies into Yemen to contain the virus. Yemen’s civil war erupted in 2014, when the Houthi rebels captured Sanaa, forcing the internationally recognized government to flee. In March of 2015, a U.S.-backed, Saudi-led coalition began air bombings to try and dislodge the Houthis while imposing a land, sea and air embargo on Yemen. ___ Batrawy reported from Dubai, United Arab Emirates. Associated Press writer Edith M. Lederer reported from the United Nations. CANBERRA, Australia (AP) — The coronavirus pandemic pushed Australia’s economy into recession for the first time in 29 years in the first quarter of the year, and the situation is expected to get worse. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said Wednesday the current June quarter will be the second in a row in which the Australian economy has contracted.  A recession is defined as at least two straight quarters of contraction. Data released on Wednesday showed the economy shrank 0.3% in the January-March quarter due to destructive wildfires and the early stages of Australia’s coronavirus lockdown.  Weak household consumption was a major factor behind the decline, as millions have lost their jobs.  “The June quarter, the economic impact, will be severe. Far more severe than what we have seen today,” Frydenberg told reporters. The Australian government has promised more than $220 billion in stimulus spending and the central bank has cut its benchmark interest rate by a quarter of a percentage point to a record low of 0.5% to help cushion the shock from the pandemic.  Australia’s economy has been growing since mid-1991 with an occasional negative quarter including during the global financial crisis in 2008, when Chinese demand for iron ore and coal quickly reversed the decline. The slowdown in China’s economy, on top of weakening global demand and the impact of the pandemic, has pushed many countries into their worst downturns in decades. NEW YORK (AP) — New York City contact tracers hired to contain the spread of the coronavirus reached out to all of the roughly 600 people who tested positive for the virus citywide on Monday, the first day of the program, and succeeded in reaching more than half of them, officials said Tuesday. “On Day 1 of the program, seeking to reach several hundred people and have what could be an hour conversation with each of them was a tall order,” Dr. Ted Long, the head of the city’s contact tracing program, said at a briefing. Long said the fact that the contact tracers actually got through to more than half of the new cases “shows that the system we’re setting up is working.” The city has hired 1,700 people for its contact tracing effort and needs to reach 2,500 in order to meet Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s target for entering the first phase of the state’s four-step reopening process. The contact tracers are placing people infected with the virus in hotel rooms if they need to isolate themselves away from their families as well as reaching out to the close contacts of those who test positive for COVID-19. Asked if the past week’s protests over the death of George Floyd might spark a new wave of infections, Long encouraged anyone who was at a protest to get tested for the coronavirus at one of the more than 150 free testing sites around the city. Floyd, who was black, died after a white police officer pressed a knee into his neck for several minutes. “It starts with the testing piece, which is why we’re extending the invitation we are to anybody that’s been out there at the protests, come in for a free test, it’s close to where you live,” Long said. “We’d love to have you.” In other coronavirus developments: ___ SUMMER CAMPS  Summer days camps in New York state can open June 29, though no decision has been made yet on sleep-away camps, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Tuesday. Cuomo’s administration did not immediately provide details on what sort of restrictions camps would operate under. “Our young people have experienced both the trauma and the boredom of all these weeks of lockdown. They deserve to enjoy a safe summer filled with fun,” Assemblyman Simcha Eichenstein of Brooklyn said in a news release.  The green light on summer camps comes as the state continues to relax restrictions amid slow progress in taming the outbreak. COVID-19 hospitalizations are down in New York, with an average of 154 admissions a day, compared to more than 3,000 daily at the peak of the outbreak. More than 24,000 deaths statewide have been reported in the outbreak, but the daily death toll has been under 60 for several days, with 58 new deaths recorded Monday.  Buffalo and western New York on Tuesday became the latest region of the state allowed to reopen hair salons, retail shops and offices under strict guidelines. The Albany area was on track to also move to “phase two” reopenings on Wednesday. ___ SAFE TRANSIT New York City transit officials gearing up for increased subway and bus service next week plan to make face masks and hand sanitizer available to riders and to add social distance markers to stations.  In a letter to Mayor Bill de Blasio’s administration, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority detailed public health plans for when the city begins phasing in economic activity on Monday. MTA officials wrote that subways and buses will return to full, regular service, but they’re telling customers that service will be for essential workers and essential trips during “phase one” of the reopening. They’re asking that employers stagger shifts and continue to allow for remote work. The transit agency is requesting the city provide 3,000 “volunteers” to help distribute hand sanitizer and masks as well as the deployment of more New York City police officers to the subway system. Enforcement of the mask rule will consist of reminders, as opposed to arrests or tickets, according to the letter. “We will need your help to ensure riders are social distancing as much as possible, deploying staff to platforms and reminding riders to move to less crowded portions of platforms and less crowded cars,” according to the MTA letter. De Blasio had sought some of the same policies, as well as capacity limits on buses and trains to allow for social distancing.  An MTA spokesman said the agency will continue the 1 a.m.-5 a.m. subway shutdown instituted during the pandemic to disinfect the system. ___ Villeneuve and Hill reported from Albany, N.Y.RIO DE JANEIRO (AP) — Rio de Janeiro, one of the cities worst hit by COVID-19 in Brazil, slowly started to reopen on Tuesday, more than two months after non-essential businesses were forced to shut down in order to limit the spread of the new coronavirus. As of June 1, Rio had more than 30,000 confirmed cases and 3,671 deaths. In May, the city’s hospitals and intensive care units filled up, and patients infected by the virus were placed on a growing waiting list. Some people ventured onto the beach on Tuesday even though they officially remained closed, while surfers and swimmers were allowed to get into the sea for the first time in weeks. Sports activities in training centers resumed behind closed doors. In the first of the plan’s six phases, most street shops will remain closed, with a few exceptions, such as car and furniture stores. Restaurants and bars also remain shut to the public, and are only allowed to open for take-away and delivery. City officials said Monday that they will monitor the situation and, if necessary, backtrack on some measures. The plan was approved unanimously by the scientific board, they said. Many health experts have welcomed the cautious, step-by-step approach adopted by Mayor Marcelo Crivella, but some fear the opening is happening too soon.  Official data show that on June 1, the city registered 118 new deaths from COVID-19 and 1,142 confirmed new cases.  Fiocruz, Brazil’s leading, state-run health research institute, warned last week that the curve of new infections was still growing in the state of Rio de Janeiro, and that loosening containment measures in one municipality could threaten neighboring cities.  “The plan is very good,” said Celso Ramos Filho, a professor in epidemiology at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro who has been advising city officials on the pandemic response. “But I think we could have waited a little longer, at least one more week.”  Ramos said hospitalizations and deaths were going down in Rio, an encouraging sign, but waiting another week would have allowed experts to see whether the downward trend continued.Concerns are mounting about studies in two influential medical journals on drugs used in people with coronavirus, including one that led multiple countries to stop testing a malaria pill. The New England Journal of Medicine issued an “ expression of concern ” Tuesday on a study it published  May 1 that suggested widely used blood pressure medicines were not raising the risk of death for people with COVID-19.  The study relied on a database with health records from hundreds of hospitals around the world. “Substantive concerns” have been raised about the quality of the information, and the journal has asked the authors to provide evidence it’s reliable, the editors wrote. The same database by the Chicago company Surgisphere Corp., was used in an observational study of nearly 100,000 patients published in Lancet that tied the malaria drugs hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine to a higher risk of death in hospitalized patients with the virus. Lancet issued a similar expression of concern about its study on Tuesday, saying it was aware “important scientific questions” had been raised. Although it wasn’t a rigorous experiment that could give definitive answers, the Lancet study had wide influence because of its size. The World Health Organization said it would temporarily stop a study of hydroxychloroquine and France stopped allowing its use in hospitals. The drug has been mired in controversy since President Donald Trump repeatedly promoted it and even took it himself without clear evidence that it’s safe or effective for preventing or treating coronavirus infection. Dr. Mandeep Mehra of Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston led both studies, and the authors include Desai Sapan, Surgisphere’s founder. A hospital statement says the authors launched an independent audit of the data in the New England Journal paper on Monday. A second statement notes that the Lancet posted a correction Friday on a discrepancy found in that study, and that an independent review would be done of its data too. The correction did not change the overall results or conclusions. A statement on Surgisphere’s site says it stands behind the integrity of its studies, and notes that observational data like what it supplied from electronic health records are not a substitute for rigorous experiments to test a drug.  The Lancet and the authors need to do more to address the many concerns that scientists have raised, said Dr. Eric Topol, a research methods expert and director of the Scripps Research Translational Institute in San Diego. “I had accepted the Lancet paper on its face” because the journal and lead author are highly regarded, and because the results are consistent with prior research -- 13 studies have found no benefit from hydroxychloroquine for coronavirus, Topol said. With the new concerns and correction, the cloud around the database “has now been greatly amplified,” Topol said. ___ Marilynn Marchione can be followed on Twitter at http://twitter.com/MMarchioneAP The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.PARIS (AP) — France is rolling out an official coronavirus contact-tracing app aimed at containing fresh outbreaks as lockdown restrictions gradually ease, becoming the first major European country to deploy the smartphone technology amid simmering debates over data privacy. The StopCovid  app launched Tuesday just as the French government started allowing people to once again go to restaurants and cafes, parks and beaches and museums and monuments. It was available on Apple’s App store and the Google Play  store. Neighbors including the U.K., Germany, Italy, and Switzerland are developing their own apps, though they’re using different technical protocols, raising questions about compatibility across Europe’s borders. Authorities hope the app can help manage virus flare-ups as they reopen the economy in France, which has been living under some of Europe’s tightest restrictions since it became one of countries hardest hit by the pandemic, with nearly 29,000 deaths. Some Parisians were keen to adopt the technology to help bring life back to normal.  Cafe waiter Paul Hubert said he was ready to download the app because he sees “more benefits than risks.”  “To me it sounds like wearing a mask in a shop,” said Hubert, 24. “It’s easy and it can help protecting others.”  The various European apps use low-energy Bluetooth signals to anonymously log the nearby presence of other users. Under the French system, data is uploaded to government-run centralized servers. Users who test positive will be able to notify others who have been in close contact for at least 15 minutes so they can self-isolate and seek treatment. France, like Britain, rejected a new mobile software interface for tracing apps jointly developed by U.S. tech giants Google and Apple, instead choosing to build its own. The Google-Apple system uses a “decentralized” system backed by privacy experts because it keeps data on phones, but British and French officials say it doesn’t give them enough information to manage outbreaks.  Civil liberties groups worry that tracing apps are a gateway to more government surveillance but Cedric O, France’s junior minister for the digital economy, dismissed those concerns. “The problem with a centralized protocol is that you have to be confident and to trust your state but we’re in a democratic state, we have checks and balances,” O told the AP. The government says the app doesn’t track location and deletes user data after 14 days. Some French lawmakers have raised doubts over the app’s effectiveness if few people install it and because of potential technical issues. O said the app detects about 80% of surrounding phones via Bluetooth. Parisian Sami Mounir said he won’t download it because of the privacy concerns.  “We don’t know what they could do with the data or whether it could be hacked,” Mounir, 31, said. “Plus, it’s health data, it’s too sensitive.” Officials and experts say tracing apps aren’t a magic bullet against the virus but can aid time-consuming manual contact tracing efforts. Professor Arnaud Fontanet, epidemiologist at the Paris Pasteur Institute and a member of the scientific committee advising French President Emmanuel Macron, said the app is “a tool, not a revolutionary one, but a useful tool.”  France and other countries have set up teams to interview people testing positive about their contacts. But the tracers will likely miss strangers, so the app may prove useful especially “in circumstances where you’re going to stand next to someone who is infected, without knowing, for quite a long period of time,” like in public transports and restaurants, Fontanet said.  Other countries around Europe have been scrambling to build apps, often using the Google-Apple system. The reliance on the tech giants for a more private system is an ironic turn of events after the European Union called them out repeatedly in recent years for not protecting data privacy sufficiently. In the U.S., only a few states were early to launch tracing apps, which have encountered technical problems on Apple and Android phones and haven’t been widely downloaded. Other states are building apps using the Google-Apple technology.  Italy’s Immuni app, based on the Google-Apple system, was available to download starting Monday, and will undergo testing next week before being rolled out nationwide. Authorities say at least 60% of Italy’s 60 million population need to use it for it to be effective. Switzerland started a pilot test of its SwissCovid  app last week, to last until mid-June, when the government is expected to introduce legislation covering the app. Germany hired software company SAP and wireless carrier Deutsche Telekom to build its decentralized “Corona-Warn-App. ” Developers say the app’s “data will be stored locally on each device preventing access and control over data by authorities or anyone else.” Britain launched a massive countrywide “track and trace” program on Friday, including 25,000 human contact tracers, but its tracing app, which is being tested, isn’t ready and it’s unclear when it will be launched. The European apps are voluntary to encourage people to use them. If the app is mandatory, “people will definitely not use it,” said, Ingmars Pukis, a vice president at Latvian wireless carrier LMT, which helped develop the country’s tracing app, released Friday and also based on the Google-Apple standard. EPFL, the Swiss research institute that helped develop SwissCovid, said that with other European countries building apps based on the same decentralized protocol, it should enable different systems to work with each other when users travel. But that leaves out the British and French systems. The French government’s technology choice means the French app is not compatible with foreign ones. O suggested that cross-border commuters and travelers will have to work around the problem by downloading their destination country’s app. ____ Chan reported from London. Colleen Barry in Milan contributed to this report. The global race for a COVID-19 vaccine boils down to some critical questions: How much must the shots rev up someone’s immune system to really work? And could revving it the wrong way cause harm?  Even as companies recruit tens of thousands of people for larger vaccine studies this summer, behind the scenes scientists still are testing ferrets, monkeys and other animals in hopes of clues to those basic questions — steps that in a pre-pandemic era would have been finished first. “We are in essence doing a great experiment,” said Ralph Baric, a coronavirus expert at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, whose lab is testing several vaccine candidates in animals. The speed-up is necessary to try to stop a virus that has triggered a pandemic, killing more than 360,000 worldwide and shuttering economies. But “there’s no question there is more risk in the current strategy than what has ever been done before,” Baric said.  The animal testing lets scientists see how the body reacts to vaccines in ways studies in people never can, said Kate Broderick, research chief at Inovio Pharmaceuticals.  With animals, “we’re able to perform autopsies and look specifically at their lung tissue and get a really deep dive in looking at how their lungs have reacted,” Broderick said.  She’s awaiting results from mice, ferrets and monkeys that are being exposed to the coronavirus after receiving Inovio’s vaccine. Since no species perfectly mimics human infection, testing a trio broadens the look at safety. And there’s some good news on the safety front as the first animal data from various research teams starts to trickle out. So far, there are no signs of a worrisome side effect called disease enhancement, which Dr. Anthony Fauci of the U.S. National Institutes of Health calls reassuring. Enhancement is just what the name implies: Very rarely, a vaccine doesn’t stimulate the immune system in quite the right way, producing antibodies that not only can’t fully block infection but that make any resulting disease worse. That first happened in the 1960s with failure of a vaccine for respiratory syncytial virus, RSV, an infection dangerous to young children. More recently, it has complicated efforts at vaccines against mosquito-spread dengue fever.  And some attempted vaccines for SARS, a cousin of COVID-19, seemed to cause enhancement in animal testing. Fast forward to the pandemic. Three recently reported studies in monkeys tested different COVID-19 vaccine approaches, including shots made by Oxford University and China’s Sinovac. The studies were small, but none of the monkeys showed evidence of immune-enhanced disease when scientists later dripped the coronavirus directly into the animals’ noses or windpipes. Some of the best evidence so far that a vaccine might work also comes from those monkey studies. Oxford and Sinovac created very different types of COVID-19 vaccines, and in separate studies, each team recently reported that vaccinated monkeys were protected from pneumonia while monkeys given a dummy shot got sick. But protection against severe disease is just a first step. Could a vaccine also stop the virus’s spread? The Oxford study raises some doubt. Those researchers found as much virus lingering in the vaccinated monkeys’ noses as in the unvaccinated. Even though the experiment exposed moneys to high levels of the coronavirus, it raised troubling questions. The type of vaccine -- how it targets the “spike” protein that coats the coronavirus -- may make a difference. Researchers at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston designed six different vaccine prototypes. Some only partially protected monkeys -- but one fully protected eight monkeys from any sign of the virus, said Dr. Dan Barouch, who is working with Johnson & Johnson on yet another COVID-19 vaccine candidate. In monkeys, the new coronavirus lodges in the lungs but seldom makes them super sick. Ferrets — the preferred animal for flu vaccine development — may help tell if potential COVID-19 vaccines might stop the viral spread. “Ferrets develop a fever. They also cough and sneeze,” infecting each other much like people do, said vaccine researcher Alyson Kelvin of Canada’s Dalhousie University. And while COVID-19 is a huge risk to the elderly, vaccines often don’t rev up an older person’s immune system as well as a younger person’s. So Kelvin also is studying older ferrets. Some vaccine makers are reporting promising immune reactions in the first people given the experimental shots, including production of “neutralizing” antibodies, a kind that latches onto the virus and blocks it from infecting cells. But there’s a hitch. Said Inovio’s Broderick: “Let me be honest. We’re still not clear at all on what those correlates of protection are” — meaning what mix of immune reactions, and how much, are needed.  Some clues come from the blood of COVID-19 survivors, although “there’s a huge variation” in immune reactions between the severely and mildly ill, Broderick added. Still, if vaccinated animals that produce the same neutralizing antibody levels as certain COVID-19 survivors are protected — and people given test doses likewise produce the same amount — “that is great comfort that your vaccine approach actually may work,” said Kathrin Jansen, head of Pfizer Inc.’s vaccine research. But ultimately the real proof won’t come before huge studies of whether vaccinated people get sick less often than the unvaccinated. ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.MOSCOW (AP) — When nurse Maria Alexeyeva caught coronavirus at work, she isolated herself at home and followed the rules set down by Moscow authorities: She checked in with doctors regularly, didn’t leave her apartment and downloaded a smartphone app required by the city to keep tabs on quarantined patients. The Social Monitoring app tracks users via GPS and sends them random notifications demanding a selfie to prove they’re still at home. If it detects they’ve left home or they fail to provide a photo, they face a fine of about $56 each time. But soon the app became a nightmare for Alexeyeva. It crashed when she tried to take a photo. Weak with illness, she struggled with the software for days, sometimes on hold for hours with technical support. And when her quarantine ended, she discovered she had accumulated 11 fines totaling $620. “That’s more than my monthly wage,” Alexeyeva told The Associated Press. “This quarantine has been hard on me. And now I have to deal with this on top of it.” Thousands of Muscovites also complain they have been wrongfully fined by the quarantine app. In slightly over a month, authorities issued some 54,000 fines, totaling $3 million among its nearly 70,000 registered users. Authorities insist the fines were justified, issued to those who repeatedly violated quarantine. But the app’s users say it has glitches and flaws, sometimes demanding selfies in the middle of the night, adding that the fines were dished out arbitrarily. Moscow has been Russia’s biggest hot spot during the pandemic, recording nearly half of the country’s more than 414,000 cases. As the city of 12 million struggled to contain the outbreak, it used technology that later drew widespread criticism. After two virus cases were reported in February, Mayor Sergei Sobyanin authorized facial recognition software to track Chinese citizens in the capital, drawing complaints from rights groups. When the city introduced digital passes for commuters in April, tightly packed crowds formed at Metro stations as police checked smartphones individually. But the biggest complaints focus on the Social Monitoring app, which was rolled out in early April and was mandatory for those infected with the virus or suspected of having it. Patients had to sign a form requiring them to install the app as part of their quarantine notifications, although they said they were not told how to use the app or what actions would lead to fines. Grigory Sakharov, who self-isolated after a week in the hospital with coronavirus-induced pneumonia, was given six fines, totaling about $336. Two dated back to when he was still hospitalized, even though he didn’t install the app until after his discharge. “I don’t mind paying a fine for something I did wrong, but I don’t understand what I’m paying for here,” Sakharov told the AP.  Svetlana Bystrova, quarantined at home with flu-like symptoms, didn’t install the app. She said her doctors didn’t tell her she had to, and she didn’t notice a clause obligating her to use the app in the quarantine order she signed. After two weeks of strict self-isolation, Bystrova found she had been fined four times, totaling $224. One was for not installing the app, two said it detected her outside her apartment, and one was for not giving details of her wrongdoing. “The one for not installing the app I get, fair enough,” Bystrova said. “But how can the app I never installed track my movements?” Vladimir Perevalov, who installed the app and diligently took selfies, was fined three times for $168. The app never sent him any notifications, he said. The outrage has mounted as tales of arbitrary fines mushroomed on social media. By the end of May, authorities got over 2,500 complaints contesting the fines, and more than 200 lawsuits were filed. Three online petitions demanding to abolish the app got over 94,000 signatures.  Tanya Lokshina, associate director for Human Rights Watch’s Europe and Central Asia division, said while many countries use mobile tracking apps, she hasn’t seen one getting so many complaints. “The situation is absurd. It’s insane,” Lokshina said. “Instead of serving to contain the epidemic, it in fact serves ... to punish law-abiding citizens who actually attempt to play by the rules.” On May 21, Human Rights Watch urged Moscow authorities to drop the app, noting that on top of the arbitrary fines, Social Monitoring violated users’ privacy by accessing their location, calls, camera, network information and other data. Russia’s Presidential Human Rights Council echoed HRW’s stance, urging officials to cancel all fines. But Alexei Nemeryuk, the mayor’s deputy chief of staff, said there will be no amnesty, noting: “There’s a system for contesting the fines.” That has proved unsuccessful, said Leonid Solovyov of the Apologia Protesta legal aid group, which is working with over 100 people were fined. He said those who are fined must provide proof they did nothing wrong, which is difficult, while authorities are basing the punishment on data from the app.  “Some fines are indeed being overruled,” Solovyov told AP, but only the “most egregious cases.” City Hall has said it was canceling 468 fines for failing to take a selfie because the app made those requests in the middle of the night. Another high-profile case involved Irina Karabulatova, a bed-ridden professor who hasn’t left her apartment in a year and got two fines for not installing the app. After her story made national headlines, the fines were canceled and officials apologized. “They canceled my (fines) because journalists stood up for me,” Karabulatova told AP. “But what is going to happen to the others is a big question.”  On Thursday, Sakharov started receiving messages saying his fines were canceled. Alexeyeva, the nurse, also was contacted by officials who promised to lift all her fines. Then, Alexeyeva’s mother was notified she was being fined: Social Monitoring detected her leaving the apartment.  “My mother was quarantined with me. She didn’t sign (a document) that had a clause on using Social Monitoring and she doesn’t have the app,” Alexeyeva said. “Looks like we got excited too soon.” —- Alexander Roslyakov, Anatoly Kozlov and Pavel Golovkin contributed. ___ Follow AP pandemic coverage at http://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak  and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreakCANCUN, Mexico (AP) — Amid a pandemic and a brewing tropical storm, Mexico President Andrés Manuel López Obrador kicked off Mexico’s return to a “new normal” Monday with his first road trip in two months as the nation began to gradually ease some virus-inspired restrictions. López Obrador said he’s taking all necessary precautions — he drove the 1,000 miles from Mexico City over the weekend rather than flying — on a trip to promote construction of one of his signature infrastructure projects the Mayan Train. While the federal government’s nationwide social distancing rule formally ended Monday, it is urging people in so-called “red” zones to maintain most of those measures — and so many people are falling ill and dying each day that those zones cover nearly the whole country. Mexico is nearing 100,000 confirmed infections and has topped 10,000 deaths, but those official tallies are considered to be undercounts. Mexican officials said last week that more than 5,000 companies had implemented protocols that would allow them to reopen this week. The federal government had cleared businesses in the mining, construction and auto manufacturing sectors to resume operations. While in Cancun, the president was also talking up what local officials hope is the quick return of tourists. Mexico’s most popular beach destination officially plans to reopen next week — albeit with social distancing restrictions such as a ban on buffets. Quintana Roo Gov. Carlos Manuel Joaquín Gonzalez said they’ve already started receiving reservations. But around Cancun, nothing appeared normal yet. The beaches were empty, bars and restaurants remained closed. Locals walked around wearing masks and traffic was light. The dramatic drop of international air travel and April 1 closure of Cancun’s beaches left thousands unemployed. Cancun resident Andres Jose Conrado said maybe his city could reopen in a few months, but it was more important to continue with the health precautions. “I say it’s very early (to reopen),” Conrado said, a cloth mask over his nose and mouth. “For now I say it’s not necessary.” But Sergio Ortega Jara, another resident who is out of work, said they need to get jobs back. He conceded that the virus was a real danger, but insisted people need income. “It’s kind of bad, there’s no work,” Ortega said. In Mexico City, traffic has increased significantly in the past week. In some neighborhoods foot traffic had hardly ever diminished. Mexico City Mayor Claudia Sheinbaum urged residents via Twitter on Monday to stay at home if it wasn’t absolutely necessary to go out. Still, public spaces vacant of people during the past two months were bustling on Monday. There were protests by police and unemployed musicians in the principal plaza. People strolled in the historic center and along a main boulevard. Cleaning seemed to be happening everywhere as still-closed offices and restaurants prepared to open.  A long line of people seeking construction permits stretched in front of a city office building. While the city has had some success imposing orderly lines at its subway stations, a commuter bus line station was chaos. Most people at least were wearing masks. Renato Rivera stood outside a construction site wearing a red mask Monday. He had heard they were getting back to work, but when he arrived there wasn’t a job for him.  “It’s not that you’re not scared,” he said of returning to work. “We’re all scared. But we have need. There’s no help from the government.” On Monday, López Obrador highlighted a couple of hot spots, including the Pacific Coast beach destination Acapulco and his home state of Tabasco. “We’re going to carefully return to productive activities,” he said. Later in the day during a visit to a military base on Isla Mujeres, López Obrador warned that if there were new outbreaks and a surge in infections, restrictions would be tightened again. For the most part Mexico’s restrictions have been recommendations. López Obrador repeated Monday that he preferred reasoning with people to “authoritarian impositions.” The Pacific resorts of Los Cabos had initially set June 1 to reopen, but have now pushed that deeper into the month.  López Obrador planned to spend the week promoting the start of construction for the Mayan Train, which will whisk tourists from resort destinations like Cancun into the interior of the Yucatan Peninsula. It has been criticized as an environmental threat and faces opposition from indigenous communities, but he says it will create 80,000 jobs. The president has faced criticism for his handling of the pandemic. He continued to travel the country a month after Mexico’s first confirmed case and has continually mixed messages of a need to take precautions with the country’s need to reactivate its economy. The Mexican government has estimated about 1 million jobs have been lost during the epidemic. Mexico’s central bank projected last week that the economy would shrink as much as 8.8% this year. On his way to Cancun, López Obrador stopped at his ranch in Chiapas state and recorded a video he shared on social networks. He tried to highlight positive economic signs, noting the peso has regained a bit of value against the dollar and the price of oil has risen slightly. “I wanted to give you good news,” López Obrador said. “There is economic recovery. The model we are using is showing us results.” The remnants of Tropical Storm Amanda which left at least 17 dead over the weekend in Central America reformed into a tropical depression in the Bay of Campeche and was forecast to become a tropical storm. It was expected to dump 10 to 15 inches of rain on the Yucatan Peninsula and gulf coast states in coming days. __ Verza reported from Mexico City. AP photojournalist Fernando Llano and videojournalist Gerardo Carrillo in Mexico City and AP writer Ignacio Martínez in San José de Los Cabos contributed to this report.RIO DE JANEIRO (AP) — South American countries on Monday began easing COVID-19 restrictions even as the region hurtles toward its viral peak, disregarding the example set by European nations that were battered earlier by the virus. Some of Brazil’s hardest hit cities, including the jungle metropolis Manaus and coastal Rio de Janeiro, are starting to allow more activity. Bolivia’s government authorized reopening most of the country and the government of Venezuela’s Nicolás Maduro unwound restrictions. Ecuador’s airports were resuming flights and shoppers returning to some of Colombia’s malls. Rolling back measures runs counter to Europe’s approach of waiting for the worst to pass before resuming activity, and South America trails much further behind on its viral curve. Even European nations that lifted restrictions earliest in their respective outbreaks – the U.K. and Russia - did so only after clearing their initial peaks.  The executive director of the World Health Organization’s emergencies program, Mike Ryan, expressed concern over South America’s climbing contagion, telling reporters Monday that the region had become an “intense zone of transmission for this virus,” which had not yet reached its peak. “Clearly the situation in many South American countries is far from stable. There is a rapid increase in cases and those systems are coming under increasing pressure,” he said. Data from the WHO’s Pan American Health Organization shows the region’s seven-day rolling average of new cases continues rising, due in large part to Brazil, which accounts for more than half the total. Manaus, the Amazon rainforest’s largest city, was the first Brazilian metropolis whose health care system collapsed. For weeks, overwhelmed intensive-care units were unable to admit patients, deaths at home surged and a city cemetery buried bodies in mass graves.  Such burials continue, yet the capital of Amazonas state on Monday began loosening its clamp on non-essential businesses. Amazonas registered 818 new COVID-19 cases Sunday, bringing the total number of cases above 40,000. There are more than 500,000 confirmed cases in Brazil, the second most in the world, and experts believe the true toll to be much higher due to insufficient testing. Rio de Janeiro, the Brazilian city with the second-most cases after Sao Paulo, on Monday announced it would begin gradually relaxing restrictions the following day. Already a city in its metropolitan region, Sao Joao de Meriti, started allowing salons, auto mechanics, and hotels to operate on Monday. “Brazil tends to look at Europe, and the problem is that there they did one or two months of strict quarantine and are now reopening,” said Renato Mendes Coutinho, a specialist in mathematical biology at COVID-19 BR Observatory, an independent group of more than 50 Brazilian researchers. “The difference is that the lockdown they implemented and the restriction measures were much more efficient and thorough.” Ecuador was one of the first South American nations slammed, with grim scenes of people leaving corpses outside their doorsteps in Guayaquil through March and April. The nation’s caseload continues to surge, yet its airport will resume international flights on June 3, according to Nicolás Romero, the airport’s spokesperson, though he said arriving passengers must spend 15 days in quarantine, without specifying how such quarantine will be enforced. The airport in capital, Quito, recorded its first flight in 80 days on Monday, and flights to Miami and Houston will take off on June 4.  “It has just been one flight so far, but the important thing is the message it gives, of flying safely,” Luis Galárraga, the airport’s spokesperson, told The Associated Press.  Across Ecuador’s border, Colombia has shut the international airport in its capital, Bogotá, until September and locked down an entire working-class district home to 1.5 million people. But in the nation’s second city, Medellin, malls cautiously began opening their doors on Monday, though checking customers’ temperatures upon entry.  Medellin’s Mayor Daniel Quintero highlighted that the city registered no COVID-19 deaths in the prior 30 days. The national death toll, however, continues rising.  Marcos Espinal, director of PAHO’s communicable diseases department, said by phone that reopening too soon could cause harm in certain places that aren’t yet ready.  “If you’re in the middle of the epicenter, we don’t recommend to open,” Espinal said from Washington. “People’s lives are precious, and there shouldn’t be any negotiations of that.” Venezuela on Monday allowed barbershops, beauty salons, auto shops, construction sites and banks to begin operations, along with other sectors. The nation is dialing down restrictions because it has reported relatively low COVID-19 impact: 1,510 cases and 14 deaths. Experts have roundly criticized Venezuela’s data as suspicious. Bolivia on Monday instituted a so-called “dynamic quarantine” in most of the country, keeping parks and shows shuttered while resuming work, commerce and public transport, even as contagion continues rising.  The government’s public works minister, Iván Arias, suggested Monday that men shave their beards and mustaches to prevent infection. The Health Ministry’s epidemiological director, Virgílio Prieto, offered less optimism about recalibrating the nation’s quarantine, admitting it “could bring about an explosion of the new coronavirus.” Across the ocean, in Europe, nations have debated reopening even after passing their contagion peaks. Britain only began easing lockdown once new deaths, hospitalizations and infections had clearly topped out. Still, some public health experts believe the government has acted too soon and there will likely be a new rise in infections. Russian officials say that the nation is now past its peak, making it safe to gradually ease restrictions, even though some experts warn that the significant daily increase of about 9,000 cases makes it dangerous to do so quickly. On Monday, non-food retail stores, dry cleaners and repair shops reopened in the Russian capital that accounted for about half of the nation’s caseload. Having seen first-hand the worst of the virus’ damage in Europe, Jesús Gómez-Gardeñes, an associate professor in physics and computational epidemiology at the University of Zaragoza, in Spain, looks on South America’s rush to reopen with concern. “Opening their doors when we have recent growth in the number of daily cases is something that could be, or is, a catastrophe,” he said. ___ AP journalists Mayra Pertossi contributed from Buenos Aires, Argentina; Marcelo de Sousa from Rio de Janeiro; Scott Smith from Caracas, Venezuela; Carlos Valdez from La Paz, Bolivia; Gonzalo Solano from Quito, Ecuador, and Christine Armario from Bogota, Colombia. ALBANY, N.Y. (AP) — Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Monday he was concerned that mass protests over George Floyd’s death like those in New York City could imperil the long, hard fight to contain the coronavirus pandemic in a worldwide hotspot. “You turn on the TV and you see these mass gatherings that could potentially be infecting hundreds and hundreds of people after everything that we have done,” Cuomo said in the city at his daily briefing. “We have to take a minute and ask ourselves: ‘What are we doing here?’” The Democratic governor said he agreed with demonstrators fighting racism and societal inequality. But he expressed frustration about possibly compromising more than two months of social and economic sacrifices. New York City is set to begin phasing in economic activity June 8. “New York City opens next week. It took us 93 days to get here. Is this smart?” he asked.  Although many demonstrators are young, they could be spreading the virus to their mothers, fathers and grandparents, Cuomo said. New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio expressed similar concerns at a separate briefing, saying: “For those who have made their presence felt, made their voices heard, the safest thing from this point is to stay home, obviously.” Statewide hospitalization rates have been ticking down for weeks and the daily death toll has gone from almost 800 in early April to 54 on Sunday. Almost 24,000 people in New York have died from the outbreak, according to state figures.  Areas of the state outside of New York City have already begun phasing in economic activity. Western New York, including Buffalo, was expected to be able to reopen hair salons, retail shops and offices on Tuesday under strict guidelines. Albany and the surrounding region could follow Buffalo into “phase two” on Wednesday, Cuomo said. The Albany and Buffalo areas are currently in the first phase of reopening, which allows manufacturers to bring employees back and lets retailers operate with only curbside pickup. Some other upstate regions started phase two on Friday.NEW YORK (AP) — Protests erupting across the nation over the past week — and law enforcement’s response to them — are threatening to upend efforts by health officials to track and contain the spread of coronavirus  just as those efforts were finally getting underway.  Health experts need newly infected people to remember and recount everyone they’ve interacted with over several days in order to alert others who may have been exposed, and prevent them from spreading the disease further. But that process, known as contact tracing, relies on people knowing who they’ve been in contact with — a daunting task if they’ve been to a mass gathering.  And the process relies on something that may suddenly be in especially short supply: Trust in government.  “These events that are happening now are further threats to the trust we need,” said Dr. Sandro Galea, dean of the Boston University School of Public Health. “If we do not have that, I worry our capacity to control new outbreaks becomes more limited,” he said. Government officials have been hoping to continue reopening businesses, churches and other organizations after months of stay-at-home orders and other infection-prevention measures. But health experts also hoped that any reopening would be accompanied by widespread testing, contact tracing and isolation to prevent new waves of illness from beginning. Over the past week, protests sparked by the death of George Floyd, a black man who died after a white Minneapolis police officer pinned a knee to his neck, have involved thousands of people gathered tightly together in large crowds in more than 20 cities nationwide.  It’s unclear if the protests themselves will trigger large new outbreaks. The protests were outside, where infections don’t spread as readily as indoors. Also, many of the protesters were wearing masks, and much of the contact was likely less-hazardous “transient” moments of people moving around, passing each other, said Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious diseases expert at Vanderbilt University. But, still, experts worry that public efforts to contain the disease in the future could be undermined.  In Los Angeles, the city’s mayor announced Saturday that COVID-19 testing centers were being closed because of safety concerns related to violent protests. Testing in Minneapolis will be affected because some of the clinics that provide the service have been damaged in the protests, according to a city government spokesperson.  Reduced testing could “be giving the virus another head start,” Schaffner said. And contact tracing, which is only just getting going in several states, is an even bigger concern. It involves people who work for or with health departments asking intimate questions about where a person has been and who they’ve been talking to — and getting full, truthful answers in return.  “In this current environment which has enhanced or brought forth a mistrust of governmental authority, it might make them disinclined to speak with anyone in government,” Schaffner said. That is especially true in black communities trying to cope with episodes of police violence and longstanding frustrations with how they have been marginalized and mistreated by people who work for government agencies. And those are the communities that have been hardest hit by the coronavirus in the U.S. and most in need of public health measures to help control it.  Protests in Salt Lake City that drew several thousand people are a setback for contact tracers already struggling to contain the spread of the coronavirus, said Tair Kiphibane, infectious disease bureau manager for the Salt Lake County Health Department.  She became concerned as she watched hundreds of protesters go by her downtown Salt Lake City office Saturday afternoon where she and her staff were working another weekend day after seeing increases in COVID-19 cases last week.  She sent contact tracers home three hours early Saturday as protests grew violent near the office. She expects further increases in cases because so many people were close to one another during the protest. Tracing the web of infected people that may have been exposed will be daunting since protesters likely won’t have names and phone numbers for many of the people they were around.  “It is going to make it so much harder,” Kiphibane said. “It could be anybody. They don’t know most of those people ... It is just too many people.” In a press conference Saturday, Minnesota Public Safety Commissioner John Harrington used the term “contact tracing” when describing an investigation into arrested protesters there. He said the goal is to “see if there are crime or white supremacy organizations that have played a role” and “to understand how do we go after them, legally,” Harrington said. But Harrington’s use of “contact tracing” by law enforcement may complicate the job of health workers as they try to track the virus’s spread, some experts said. “That was an abuse of the word ‘contact tracing.’ That is not what contact tracing is,” said Dr. Tom Frieden, former director of the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Contact tracing is a service to patients and their contacts to provide services for patients and warning for contacts. It has nothing to do with police activity. Nothing,” said Frieden, who is now president of Resolve to Save Lives, a nonprofit that works to prevent epidemics. Galea said he hopes many people will separate in their minds the contact tracing done by public health workers from crime investigations by the police. But, he added, “I do think sometimes it’s difficult to make a distinction when you feel marginalized by, and targeted by, the entire government.” ___ Associated Press writer Brady McCombs contributed to this report in Salt Lake City.  ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content. LONDON (AP) — The U.K. eased more lockdown restrictions Monday despite warnings from some health officials of another spike in coronavirus infections, especially if Britons persisted in flouting the new guidelines. Most of the changes were in England, where a number of schools reopened to some — but not all — younger children for the first time since they closed in mid-March.  The easing of the lockdown, particularly in England, has raised concerns that it is taking place too soon for economic rather than health reasons, given a still-high level of coronavirus infections and a lack of evidence showing that the recently rolled out track and trace system is working properly.  Even in Scotland, there are worries over another spike in infections. Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon warned that her government may reverse course if people contravened the rules as they did over another sunny weekend. She said police in Scotland dispersed 797 groups on Saturday alone for not abiding by the guidelines, five times higher than the previous Saturday. She also said road use on Sunday was up 70% on the week before.  Sturgeon said the rules will be tightened “if there is continued evidence of even a minority not abiding by these guidelines and travelling unnecessarily, if people meet up in larger groups or if they’re making journeys which risk spreading this virus.” Over the weekend, as the U.K. basked in warm sunshine, beaches and parks were packed, with many people clearly not observing social distancing guidelines to stay 2 meters (6 1/2 feet) apart. The four nations that make up the U.K. — England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland — are moving at different speeds out of the lockdown that began March 23.  England has gone furthest. As well as reopening primary schools, groups of six people are now able to meet up outdoors, including in gardens, provided social distancing guidelines are observed. Those people considered vulnerable, who have been asked to remain indoors and stay away from other people since March, are now also able to go for a walk. British Health Secretary Matt Hancock, who legislates on the changes in England, sought to counter concerns while saying the government would tighten restrictions on a local level in the event of a flare-up. “The data show that we’re winning the battle against coronavirus,” he said. “Today, we’re therefore able to make some cautious changes to the lockdown rules carefully and safely.” Hancock pointed to the fact that the confirmed number of new daily infections was 1,570, the lowest since March 27.  He also said the U.K. recorded 111 new coronavirus-related deaths, the lowest daily total since the lockdown was put in place on March 23. However, figures released on Mondays have throughout the pandemic been artificially low because of a lag in reporting deaths during the weekend. Still, that increase took the U.K.’s official coronavirus death up to 39,045, which is 556 higher than the equivalent total announced yesterday. That raised questions over where these extra 445 deaths came from. The government said they were linked to cases identified through testing by commercial partners. Whatever the merits of the easing, parents across England had difficult decisions to make Monday. And the early evidence suggests that a lot opted against sending their children to school.  Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said the picture was “very mixed,” with head teachers reporting that the attendance ranges between 40% and 70% of the eligible pupils. “Schools have remained open to vulnerable and key worker children throughout the lockdown period, and as the lockdown eases, it is likely this will lead to greater demand for places,” he said. Emma Corps, 39, was one parent who decided to allow her five-year-old daughter Isla to attend school. “I was a bit anxious, but she was excited and I think they need to go back to school as there needs to be some sort of normality back in their lives,” she said at the gates of Queen’s Hill Primary and Nursery School near Norwich. “For the 10 weeks, she was saying ‘When am I going back? When am I going back?’ Corps said. “Then at 6.30 a.m. this morning, it was ‘Mummy, quick!”’ __ Follow AP pandemic coverage at http://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak.MADRID (AP) — Spain on Monday reported no official deaths from the new coronavirus in a 24-hour period for the first time since March. The development is “very, very encouraging,” emergency health response chief Fernando Simón said. Also, Spain recorded only 71 new COVID-19 infections over the past 24 hours, he told a news conference. “We are in a very good place in the evolution of the pandemic,” Simón said. “The statistics are following a trend. They are going in the right direction.” Spain reported its first two deaths on March 3. Another was reported two days later. Spain’s number of infections and death jumped exponentially. On April 2, it recorded 950 deaths in 24 hours — the peak death toll. The official death toll now stands at 27,127, with 240,000 confirmed cases. Spain was the second European country after Italy to be forcefully hit by the pandemic before it also spread death in France and Britain. One of the world’s strictest lockdowns was put into place in mid-March and managed to eventually reduce the pressure on hospitals after some were overwhelmed with patients suffering from the virus. The lockdown is gradually being relaxed as the medical situation improves.  The Spanish government has warned, however, that the threat is not over and that the loosening of restrictions could be reversed.  Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez said last weekend he will be asking parliament for an extension of the government’s special emergency powers for another two weeks. That enables authorities to order people to stay home. Simon said recent hot spots caused by people holding unauthorized “fiestas” can potentially bring a major new resurgence. “We are still at risk. Any of these outbreaks can mean a new wave of infections,” he said. “We must remain cautious.” ___ Follow AP pandemic coverage at http://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreakMany states have yet to spend the federal funding they received more than a month ago to help with soaring costs related to the coronavirus crisis, complicating governors’ arguments that they need hundreds of billions more from U.S. taxpayers. The Associated Press reviewed plans from governors or lawmakers on how they plan to use the money from the coronavirus relief bill and found that at least a dozen states have started distributing the money. But far more have not. The reasons vary. Some governors want permission to use the federal aid to plug budget holes after business closures and stay-at-home orders eroded the tax revenue that pays for government operations. Others are holding back because they fear a resurgence of the virus could mean another wave of expenses. And in other states, governors and lawmakers are wrestling over who controls the spending decisions “If I knew today that another billion dollars was coming to Rhode Island to help solve our budget deficit, I’d spend the $1.25 billion now,” Democratic Gov. Gina Raimondo said about the state’s portion of the money. Of other states that have started spending the aid, she said: “They’re taking a gamble, and I’m just not ready to do that yet.” Congress approved $150 billion for state and local governments in late March as part of a $2.2 trillion response to the virus outbreak, and the money was distributed within a month.  In May, the House approved an additional $3 trillion aid package, with nearly a third of that dedicated to state and local governments. Republicans say it’s too much and want to move slowly in the Senate, preferring to see how states spend the first batch of money. “We need to slow down a little bit here, see what works best in the CARES Act, see what mistakes were made, weigh the consequences of having debt this size in terms of the future of our country and then cautiously make a decision about whether there should be another bill,” Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said this past week at a news conference in his home state of Kentucky.  On a call with governors, Vice President Mike Pence said a majority of states had not yet sent money to cities and counties, some of which had to furlough staff as tax revenue dropped sharply. He encouraged them “with great respect” to get money out the door. The AP survey found that at least 32 states are considering sharing a portion of the federal aid with local governments. Governors say more federal help is important because they need to approve balanced budgets before the start of the fiscal year, which for most is July 1. Several states — including California, the most populous — are projecting deficits equal to about 20% of the budgets they proposed before the virus took hold. They’re warning about deep cuts to K-12 education and other core services, as well as layoffs, furloughs or pay cuts for state workers. Congress intended for the money to primarily address governments’ rising costs to respond to the virus outbreak. U.S. Treasury Department guidance says states must use most of it for that purpose, not to make up for lost tax revenue. The limits were one reason Alabama lawmakers scrapped a proposal to use some of their funding to build a new Capitol building.  “The number one priority is to use the money for revenue replacement,” said Tennessee Finance and Administration Commissioner Butch Eley, who was appointed by Republican Gov. Bill Lee. ”But that’s not permitted at this time.” In Arizona, Gov. Doug Ducey said he’s giving local governments leeway on how they spend their allocations. “I don’t like it when the federal government makes governors stand in line and beg, ‘Mother may I?’” the Republican said during a discussion with mayors this week. “And I don’t want to do that to our local leaders, either.” Some states are using part of their federal aid as reimbursement for the costs of coronavirus testing, contact tracing and other health-related costs of the pandemic. Others have plans to replenish fast-depleting unemployment insurance funds, buy more laptops so government employees can work remotely and help schools cover the costs of holding classes online. Arkansas and North Dakota have considered using the federal money for hazard pay for front-line workers. North Carolina and Wyoming are using it to start grant or loan programs for businesses. Other states, including New Jersey and Colorado, plan to use it for rental, mortgage or utility assistance. In some states, such as Texas and Florida, spending decisions aren’t being made quickly because the legislatures are out of session. Idaho is holding on to $800 million, or nearly two-thirds of its $1.2 billion allocation, in case of a future wave of coronavirus cases. Elsewhere, how the money is being spent — or even who gets to decide — has created a rift. The Connecticut Conference of Municipalities blasted Gov. Ned Lamont for using $2 million to pay a consultant for reopening plans while taking longer to send money to cities and counties. Lamont, a Democrat, said help is on the way. Lawmakers and governors in several states are arguing over who controls the money. In New Hampshire, the disagreement led to a lawsuit. Mississippi Gov. Tate Reeves, a Republican, said he had the authority to spend the $1.2 billion under a 40-year-old state law. Lawmakers, including the GOP leaders, said the state Constitution gives them spending power. They eventually agreed to cooperate. Since then, Reeves signed a bill adopted by lawmakers that will allocate $300 million to small businesses. ___ Associated Press statehouse reporters across the U.S. contributed to this article. ___ Follow Mulvihill at http://www.twitter.com/geoffmulvihill.Officials across the U.S. South are still scrambling to adjust their hurricane plans to the coronavirus. The big unknown: Where will people fleeing storms go? The Associated Press surveyed more than 70 counties and states from Texas to Virginia, with more than 60% of coastal counties saying as of late May that they’re still solidifying plans for public hurricane shelters. They’re also altering preparations for dealing with the sick and elderly, protective equipment and cleanup costs. In Georgia’s McIntosh County, south of Savannah, Emergency Management Agency Director Ty Poppell said evacuations during the pandemic would be a “nightmare.” He worried about social distancing at shelters and on buses used to get people out.  “I’d love to be able to tell you we’ve got that answered right now,” Poppell said. “It’s a work in progress.” Hurricane season officially starts Monday, though Tropical Storms Arthur and Bertha arrived early. Forecasters are expecting a busier-than-normal season. “Everything that we do will be affected in one way or another, big and/or small, by COVID-19,” Florida Emergency Management Director Jared Moskowitz said. Many counties are taking federal advice and hope to use hotels as smaller-scale shelters, while others plan to use more parts of schools besides large gymnasiums. Still others, especially in Louisiana, plan for big shelters with more social distancing. Officials emphasize that shelters are last resorts, urging people to stay with friends or in hotels. But massive unemployment is making the expense of hotels less feasible. “Our biggest change to our hurricane plan is sheltering. How are we going to shelter those that have to evacuate? How are going to shelter those that are positive COVID patients? There are multiple ideas that we are considering right now,” Mississippi Emergency Management Agency Director Greg Michel said.  During tornadoes in April, the state used hotels as shelters, which was good practice for hurricane season, he said. Most counties surveyed said they’re still figuring out shelters.  While that may sound worrisome, it could be beneficial because emergency managers need to update plans as the pandemic changes, University of South Carolina disaster expert Susan Cutter said.  “Disasters are not going to stop for COVID-19,” Brad Kieserman, an American Red Cross executive, told reporters in May. “Hope is not a plan. And we’ve got to plan for tens of thousands of people to evacuate in the face of hurricanes and wildfires and other disasters.”  Some officials acknowledged they aren’t as ready for storm season as they were a year ago because of the virus. Others were more confident.  “We feel the current rating of preparedness for Craven County (North Carolina) is 50% or lower as we still have not finalized shelter options,” said Stanley Kite, emergency services director of the county hit by 2018′s Hurricane Florence. “Before COVID-19, would have estimated 90%.” Shelters were the most mentioned worry, but comfort levels with other aspects of hurricane preparations varied, reflecting the difference in how states plan for disasters. Having enough staff for shelters is a persistent problem locally and nationally, said Walton County, Florida, emergency management chief Jeff Goldberg.  Protective equipment is the biggest shortfall in several North Carolina counties. Money is always an issue, with counties often waiting for federal reimbursement. Handling nursing homes, hospitals and COVID-19 patients “is one of the most difficult challenges and would require a larger state response,” said Jeffrey Johnson, fire chief in Newport News, Virginia. Other places downplayed concerns. Orleans Parish, where 2005′s Hurricane Katrina ravaged New Orleans, has added social distancing and protective equipment to a 10-year-old plan that’s otherwise “essentially unchanged. It’s a good plan,” said Collin Arnold, head of the city’s emergency preparedness office. A year ago, officials in North Carolina’s Beaufort County would have rated their readiness going into hurricane season at a 95 on a 0-to-100 scale. With the virus, that’s down to 75. Brad Baker, emergency management director of Florida’s Santa Rosa County, gave the same numbers “because there’s a lot of unknowns with COVID.” In Nueces County, Texas, which was swamped by 2017’s Hurricane Harvey, officials said they were at a 95 going into hurricane season last year. Now, it’s below 80, emergency management coordinator Melissa Munguia said. If another Harvey brings 50 inches (127 centimeters) of rain, she said the same reinforcements won’t arrive because “everybody’s been working their personnel for many hours for over 100 days.” Florida officials were far more upbeat. “While COVID-19 complicates things and you have to plan around COVID-19, I think Florida is as prepared as ever before in response to a hurricane,” said Moskowitz, the state emergency management chief. In Louisiana, disaster officials said they’re used to “overlapping emergencies, and you just have to plow through.” They anticipate making adjustments, “but it’s hard to pin down what those changes will be,” said Mike Steele, spokesman for the state’s emergency preparedness office. By August and September, typically the height of Louisiana’s hurricane season, the number of infections and social distancing requirements may have changed, he said. Coping with a hurricane is hard, and the coronavirus “is going to make it a little bit more difficult,” Federal Emergency Management Agency Director Pete Gaynor told reporters in May. But he said FEMA has hired 500 people since March and has a record of nearly $80 billion in its disaster fund.  Vice President Mike Pence told President Donald Trump on Thursday that the federal government would ensure state and local authorities can handle hurricanes. “Bottom line, Mr. President, we’re ready.” Academics who study disasters aren’t so sure. “I don’t think they (federal officials) are doing the job they should be doing. I worry about their ability to handle a very large hurricane in addition to COVID-19,” University of South Carolina’s Cutter said.  She and others said mixed messages on the coronavirus means some people aren’t believing what they’re hearing from Washington in an emergency. “I think our lives are in danger now because we don’t trust the federal government,” Cutter said. Between the pandemic, a crashing economy and patchy federal responses to three 2017 hurricanes, people should prepare for little help from the government, Virginia Commonwealth University emergency preparedness professor Hans-Louis Charles said. Experts also worry that it could take longer to return to normal after a hurricane. Search and rescue teams, utility workers who restore power lines and volunteers who help clean up may be slowed or not respond at all because of concerns over virus exposure, experts said. That and other issues may mean a storm that in the past caused $12 billion in insured damage, like 2018’s Hurricane Michael, may cost 20% more, catastrophic risk modeler Karen Clark said. While many officials are still trying to figure out shelters, they said if people are told to evacuate in a hurricane, residents must go. Storm surge is more dangerous than the virus, officials said. “In hurricane season, we can’t have mixed messages. If you live in an evacuation zone, your plan is to evacuate if ordered to do so by local officials,” former FEMA director Craig Fugate said. “This message will not change, COVID or no COVID.” ___ Contributing are: Jonathan Drew, Ben Finley, Alan Suderman, Meg Kinnard, Sudhin Thanawala, Brendan Farrington, Tamara Lush, Curt Anderson, Michael Schneider, Terry Spencer, Kelli Kennedy, Freida Frisaro, Adriana Gomez Licon, David Fischer, Kimberly Chandler, Emily Wagster Pettus, Janet McConnaughey, Paul Weber and Kevin Freking.DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) — As if trips to the grocery store weren’t nerve-wracking enough, U.S. shoppers lately have seen the costs of meat, eggs and even potatoes soar as the coronavirus has disrupted processing plants and distribution networks. Overall, the cost of food bought to eat at home skyrocketed by the most in 46 years, and analysts caution that meat prices in particular could remain high as slaughterhouses struggle to maintain production levels while implementing procedures intended to keep workers healthy.  While price spikes for staples such as eggs and flour have eased as consumer demand has leveled off, prices remain volatile for carrots, potatoes and other produce because of transportation issues and the health of workers who pick crops and work in processing plants. In short, supermarket customers and restaurant owners shouldn’t expect prices to drop anytime soon. “Our biggest concern is long-term food costs. I believe they will continue to go up,” said Julie Kalambokidis, co-owner of Adriano’s Brick Oven, a restaurant in Glenwood, Iowa.  Tamra Kennedy, who owns nine Mexican-inspired fast food franchises in Iowa and Minnesota, joined Kalambokidis on a call set up by Iowa U.S. Rep. Cindy Axne and said sometimes even getting essential ingredients is difficult. “You can pick an ingredient and I can tell you there are shortages,” she said.  Big fluctuations in food prices began in March, when the coronavirus pandemic began to sink in for U.S. consumers. The Labor Department reports that the 2.6% jump in April food prices was the largest monthly increase in 46 years. Prices for meats, poultry, fish and eggs increased the most, rising 4.3%. Although the 2.9% jump in cereals and bakery products wasn’t as steep, it was still the largest increase the agency has recorded. Dairy and related products, and fruits and vegetables increased by 1.5 percent in April. Egg prices also reached an all-time record of more than $3 a dozen in late March, but they have since fallen to less than $1 a dozen. The situation has been worse for meat prices, largely because of illnesses among slaughterhouse workers. The outbreaks struck pork processing plants the hardest, but beef and chicken processors also saw some impact as thousands of workers tested positive for the virus and the United Food and Commercial Workers union said at least 44 workers had died of COVID-19 as of Friday. April retail prices for boneless pork chops and ham were nearly 6% higher than in March and retail prices for hamburger and sirloin steak were about 4% higher, the U.S. Department of Agriculture reported. The price of whole fresh chickens rose by more than 12%. After numerous closures, most pork plants have reopened but often not at full capacity, forcing pig farmers to euthanize animals that couldn’t be processed. “There are biological constraints to this and that’s why I would anticipate prices to stay high at least for some period of time,” said Trey Malone, an agriculture economist and professor at Michigan State University. “If you’re going to euthanize thousands of animals and it takes six months to raise a new one, obviously there’s going to be some type of delay or buffer in the supply chain.” By mid-May, beef and pork slaughterhouses were operating at about 60% capacity, though that figure has since climbed to nearly 90%, said Jayson Lusk, an economist at Purdue University. Although Lusk was optimistic that the worst of the meat supply crunch is over, he said it’s always possible that a second wave of illness could cause the situation to worsen. Some grocery price jumps were because of people stocking up when the coronavirus first arrived. But even as some prices have dropped, the cost of produce such as potatoes, onions and carrots has remained above last year’s prices. Much of the increase appears to be because more people are cooking at home. For garlic, most of which is imported from China, a 278% price increase from a year ago is largely due to a sluggish supply chain in China.  Jeff Dunn, CEO of Bolthouse Farms, a major provider of carrots and distributor of salad dressings and fruit and vegetable-based beverages, said he doesn’t anticipate new supply problems. But he noted that some of his company’s workers in distribution and field work have become sick, and that there is an additional cost to implement and maintain procedures intended to keep workers safe. Someone has to pick up those costs, he said. “There is real cost being built across every supply chain. Not just with us but with the retailer in terms of incremental cost associated with COVID,” Dunn said. “At some point, if you want any chance to hold up any kind of margin, those costs are going to have to be passed on or somehow recognized by the government with some help.” Given that the percentage of Americans’ paychecks that go toward food has declined over the past 50 years, many people likely can handle the recent price increases. But the coronavirus also has pushed roughly 41 million Americans out of work, and for them, even a small price hike can be troubling. “We’ve obviously seen this record increase in unemployment filings, and so there are more people who are at risk in that sense that they literally don’t have any employment to secure the money that they would need to buy the food that they traditionally purchase,” Malone said. “For the people who are already operating on the margins, these price increases are nontrivial.” It’s also a tough time for livestock farmers, who had hoped that after some down years, they would benefit from new trade deals and a strong domestic economy. “Farmers thought they saw the light at the end of tunnel,” Lusk said. “It turns out that it was the headlight of a train.” ___ Check out more of the AP’s coronavirus coverage at https://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreakATLANTA (AP) — It was during the Great Recession when Catoosa County first shortened its school year, from 180 to 175 instructional days, as it began years of furloughs due to budget cuts. As a result of the coronavirus pandemic, the next school year will be shorter still, with only 170 classroom days.  The 10,000-student system in northern Georgia will also be sending its 1,700 employees home for 10 unpaid days to help make up a projected $12.6 million budget gap.  “It was a great day when we didn’t have furloughs anymore,” Catoosa County Superintendent Denia Reese said. “It’s disheartening right now because I see it happening again.” The financial crisis wrought by COVID-19 has left America’s more than 13,000 school systems wrestling with the likelihood of big budget cuts. In some, it already has spoiled dreams of expanded funding and teacher pay raises. Advocates are pushing for more federal aid to schools as researchers warn budget woes could lead to massive teacher layoffs — and less learning.  The cuts will add to the strain on districts like Catoosa County that never recovered fully from the 2008 recession, which led to sharp staffing declines at American public schools over a period of rising student enrollment.  With cuts expected to a budget that relies on the state for over half its funding, Reese and school board Chairman Don Dycus said the shortened year and accompanying 5.5% reduction in teacher pay were the best of bad options. Dycus said board members didn’t want to raise property taxes because of residents’ economic troubles. And Reese said it was important to avoid laying off employees because she wants a full workforce when students return to help them overcome this year’s lost instructional time. “Right now we need every teacher and every paraprofessional we can afford to be ready when the kids get here because there are going to be gaps,” Reese said. Educators bracing for cuts include those who pushed for better wages and more school resources in a national groundswell of activism that began with a 2018 teacher walkout in West Virginia, a movement that had roots in some states in austerity measures imposed during the last recession.  In Nevada, which was among the states that saw teacher rallies, lawmakers last year approved a significant increase in education spending and 3% raises for teachers. Now they’re talking about a 4% budget cut before the current year is over, and another cut of 6% to 14% in the year beginning July 1. That could mean giving up last year’s hard-won gains and then some. The National Education Association and the American Federation of Teachers are advocating for additional federal aid for state budgets and education. Both backed the House Democrats’ $3 trillion relief proposal, an effort Senate Republicans and President Donald Trump dismissed as bloated when it passed on May 15.  AFT President Randi Weingarten said schools will need more money, not less, to protect students and teachers from COVID-19 and help students. “If you don’t have this, states are going to be doing huge budget cuts for schools, which would necessarily mean more layoffs and fewer services,” Weingarten said. “At the same time, this is a bridge year when kids have more instructional needs and need more services.” If spending drops 15% this year, public schools could employ 319,000 fewer teachers nationwide, according to Michael Griffith, a senior fellow with the Learning Policy Institute in California who says that number accounts for federal relief already appropriated to schools. That would mirror the experience of the Great Recession, which saw public school employment fall by almost 300,000 from 2008 through 2012, according to a study  published last year. Pew Charitable Trusts researcher Barb Rosewicz said that state spending per student still hasn’t reached pre-recession levels in 24 states after adjusting for inflation, according to the most recent data. Reduced funding has consequences. Financial pressure has led more than 550 districts nationwide to squeeze instruction into four-day weeks. And a study  last year found spending cuts during the recession were associated with lower academic achievement, especially in poorer districts. A quarter of expected learning was wiped in out in the hardest-hit districts, compared to districts where spending fell the least. In Arizona, which had some of the lowest-paid teachers in the country, lawmakers promised 20% raises after teachers went on a five-day strike in 2018. State Sen. David Livingston, a Republican, said the raises are not in jeopardy but other education-related expenses like maintenance and new school construction could be on the chopping block.  Kelly Wendland Fisher, a kindergarten teacher and organizer of Arizona Educators United that led the strike, still has a whopping 25 kindergartners in her suburban north Phoenix classroom and spends nearly $3,000 out of her own pocket each year for supplies. She fears difficult years ahead.  “In Arizona, the first thing that they bring up in the Legislature when we have a budget shortfall is to cut education and balance it on the backs of our kids,” Fisher said. ___ Associated Press writers Bob Christie in Phoenix and Scott Sonner in Reno, Nevada, contributed. ___ Follow Jeff Amy on Twitter at http://twitter.com/jeffamy.NEW YORK (AP) — U.S. health officials removed some coronavirus reopening tips for religious organizations only hours after posting them late last week, deleting guidance that discouraged choir gatherings and the use of shared communion cups. A federal health official on Friday said the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention posted a version of the guidance on May 22 that had not been cleared by White House officials. It was replaced the next day, said the official, who was not authorized to discuss the matter and spoke to The Associated Press on condition of anonymity. The initial guidance posted last week contained most of the same advice that was in a draft drawn up by the CDC more than a month ago and then shelved for weeks by administration officials. The guidance suggested people in churches use face coverings, stay 6 feet apart, avoid use of shared cups and dishes, and cut down singing to reduce the chance of spreading the virus. Earlier this month, the CDC published a report that concluded a choir practice in Washington state was a “superspreader” event that infected 52 people, including two who died. Skagit County Public Health investigators believe the act of singing itself may have spread the coronavirus in the air and onto surfaces.  The CDC’s removal of guidance on choirs and shared cups comes as more houses of worship prepare to slowly reopen their buildings — with some acting on their own to restrict both singing and communal worship aids. The Catholic Archdiocese of New York, in its phased reopening plan, advises against large choirs while allowing that “a small group of singers may be spaced out very well apart from each other.” The archdiocese recommended that any singer standing near other people wear a mask. It is also forgoing the distribution of wine during Communion. Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told the Catholic magazine America this week that Communion and singing during religious services should be avoided while the virus is spreading. Fauci, a member of the White House’s coronavirus task force, described the potential for singing to spread aerosolized droplets as “in some respects, scary.” The suggestion to constrain communal singing — a central part of many services — nevertheless raised questions of government overreach for some religious leaders. Tony Suarez, a Tennessee-based pastor who served on Trump’s evangelical advisory board in 2016, warned that official recommendations for specific worship behaviors risked violating the separation of church and state. “We’re getting into dangerous territory when the government is opining on sacraments, ceremonies and styles of worship,” Suarez said. This is at least the second time this month that CDC-posted coronavirus guidance was taken down and changed, because of what health officials have called a mistake. On May 3, the agency posted guidelines that said minorities without symptoms should be among those prioritized for coronavirus testing, along with health-care workers and people with COVID-19 symptoms.  The testing guidelines were revised three days later to remove minorities from the prioritized group. The removal was first reported by Eye on Ohio, a non-profit investigative journalism organization. Black Americans and other minorities have been a disproportionately large percentage of U.S. coronavirus cases. Blacks have been hospitalized at a rate of 142 per 100,000, or more than 4 1/2 times the rate for whites, according to data released Friday by the CDC. In a statement earlier in the month, CDC officials said the position of the U.S. government response is that people can be tested regardless of race or ethnicity. The government guidance should allow doctors “maximum flexibility for deciding who should be tested for COVID-19,” said the the statement, which was sent in response to questions about the removed language. A second federal official told the AP this week that the initial posting was a mistake. The testing guidelines came from another office within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, but were sent to CDC to be posted. A CDC employee added the language about prioritization of minorities. Those edits were not authorized by HHS or White House officials and were taken down after they were discovered, said the official, who also was not authorized to discuss it and spoke on condition of anonymity.PARRIS ISLAND, S.C. (AP) — The booming shouts of the rain-soaked Marine recruits echo across Leatherneck Square training field, barely muffled by their masks. And as they jog by, belting out responses to drill instructors in a rhythmic cadence, the white fabric across their faces is the only telltale sign of the coronavirus’ effects on their quest to become Marines. But in ways big and small, the virus is impacting training at the Marine Corps’ Parris Island Recruit Depot and across the military. And defense leaders say some of the adjustments are proving beneficial and could become permanent. Maj. Gen. James Glynn, commander of Parris Island, said requiring recruits to spend two weeks in quarantine before their training has had unexpected benefits. “They are singularly focused on two weeks of mental and emotional prep for what you guys are seeing today,” he said during a visit Wednesday by Defense Secretary Mark Esper. “I think it’s pretty evident it’s making a difference. They’re mentally focused and have reconciled why they’re here.” Until this week, recruits spent the two-week quarantine in a complex of large white tents and bathroom and shower trailers that was quickly built on the base to allow health monitoring and keep them isolated. But now recruits are spending the two weeks in dorms at The Citadel, the Military College of South Carolina, in Charleston, about a two-hour drive north. Esper, who toured the tent area with Glynn, said the new precautions — including masks, social distancing and the quarantine — have greatly lowered the amount of other respiratory illnesses recruits traditionally get. “They’ve seen a much lower sick call right across the board when it comes to infection, so they’re going to keep that. And we’re going to keep some other practices,” said Esper, adding that by breaking the recruits into smaller groups, “they’ve seen a higher level of unity and esprit. And they bonded much more quickly.” As Esper walked around the soggy field, recruits were going through what Marines call the “confidence course.” They were clambering over large log obstacles, climbing towers, shimmying across rope lines strung over a net, and swinging over streams of water. In other sections, recruits were paired off to battle with pugil sticks, which replicates rifle and bayonet combat. Staff Sgt. Katheryn Hunter, a drill instructor for three years at Parris Island, said the main difference she sees due to the virus is that the number of female recruits she has in 4th Battalion, Oscar Company, has dropped to 70. And she has 35 recruits in squad bays that usually hold up to 64.  During the initial portion of training, women, who have their own battalion, are largely separated from men. Marine Corps leaders staunchly defend the segregation, saying it helps build confidence, but some members of Congress have demanded change.  On the confidence course, female recruits were together on the various obstacles, while the male recruits were doing other tests.  The course, Hunter said, is critical.  “We have a lot of recruits that are scared of heights, recruits that are scared of water or are scared of different obstacles,” she said, adding that the course ”actually tests recruits’ fears, also builds their confidence that they can accomplish stuff as long as they set their minds to it.” In the larger formations, the recruits wore masks, but during some physical tests — even those where teamwork was required and social distancing impossible — the masks came off. Most of the drill instructors wore theirs at all times, as did Esper and his entourage. Commanders noted that the recruits had finished their two-week quarantine and were on day 14 of their actual training — so they had been largely isolated for about a month. Marine recruits go to either Parris Island or to Camp Pendleton in southern California, for 13 weeks of training.  Another change, Esper said, is that military recruits often get to go home for two weeks after graduation. That leave has been suspended because of the virus. Instead, the Marines are getting three or four days of little or no duty before reporting to their next schooling or station.  “They’re showing up at the next phase of training in much better shape,” said Esper, noting that they haven’t been able to go out drinking and partying. He said Marine leaders are “seeing a better product entering the next phase of training, so they’re starting to think maybe we won’t go back to the 10 days off.” Glynn said the plan to use the Citadel for quarantine was inspired by his mother-in-law, who sent him an article about how colleges and the military worked together during the Spanish flu pandemic. But while the college, with its two-person rooms, is working out well, Glynn said he’ll need another solution when classes resume. He said they are reviewing several options, including some nearer Parris Island, but have not made a decision. The Army has made similar changes in its recruit training, which is a longer, 22-week course for infantry and armor soldiers. But instead of separating the incoming recruits at a distant location for the two-week quarantine, Army leaders changed the course schedule. The new plan shifted classroom learning to the first two weeks, with many classes done virtually or outside, with little physical interaction, spaced chairs and social distancing. The recruits then move into what Army officials described as a training bubble, where they begin their more traditional physical and combat instruction. Both the Marine Corps and the Army screen recruits for the virus when they arrive at processing stations, and again when they get to the training base. Army recruits go to one of the four training centers at Fort Benning, Georgia; Fort Jackson, South Carolina; Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri; and Fort Sill, Oklahoma. Defense leaders said they have been intrigued to see some good come from the virus precautions. “I mean, it’s funny,” said Esper, as he flew home from Parris Island, “Even once coronavirus fades or we have a vaccine, you may come out with a boot camp that produces a better product because of things learned.”DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) — Meatpacking plants that had to briefly close due to coronavirus outbreaks have been back up and running for weeks, but production backlogs are forcing farmers to euthanize thousands of hogs that can’t be processed, drawing complaints from animal welfare advocates. In Iowa, where nearly one-third of the nation’s hogs are raised, the temporary closure of slaughterhouses led to a backup of about 600,000 pigs, state Agriculture Secretary Mike Naig said. Those plants now are operating at about 80% capacity, but that’s not enough to clear the backlog, and efforts to sell directly to consumers or process hogs at small slaughterhouses for donation to food banks aren’t enough to avoid euthanizing some animals. Adding to the problem was the temporary closure Thursday of another hog processing plant in Storm Lake, Iowa, because of a coronavirus outbreak. “That backlog is larger than those solutions can address, so producers are already having to and will continue to have to look at the very difficult and emotional decision to euthanize their animals to prevent animal welfare issues,” Naig said. Farmers say they’re left with no choice but to euthanize hogs because they haven’t been able to ship out some animals for more than a month, and as they become larger and young pigs grow, there isn’t enough space in the buildings that house them. Slaughterhouses also aren’t designed to efficiently process hogs once they get too large, so farmers have few options. The preferred methods of euthanizing hogs include gunshots, bolt guns or electrocution, but when thousands of animals must be destroyed en masse, one option is to shut off ventilation causing heat to build up and kill them, said Chris Rademacher, a veterinarian and associate director of Iowa State University’s Iowa Pork Industry Center. Farmers must consider the physical and emotional toll it would take on employees to have to shoot or electrocute thousands of hogs individually, Rademacher said. “There’s a mental strain to have to individually repeat this potentially thousands of times,” he said. “We’re sailing in uncharted waters in the truest sense here.” Last week, the animal welfare group Direct Action Everyone placed cameras in a hog operation in Grundy County, Iowa, and recorded the killing of hogs using heat. In the video, pigs can be heard squealing and workers are later shown walking among carcasses and using bolt guns to kill animals that remain alive. The organization filed a criminal livestock neglect complaint with the Grundy County Sheriff’s Office and on Friday released excerpts of the video. “An element of good that has emerged from the ravages of COVID-19, and of this investigation, is that the longstanding systemic abuses of animal agriculture have been openly exposed for the world to see,” Matt Johnson, the group’s leader, said. Ingrid Newkirk, president of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, also blasted the practice of using heat to kill hogs. “Steaming pigs alive and roasting them to death show that cruelty to animals is a part of pig farmers’ way of life, and the only way to stop this — given that pig farmers have made themselves above the law — is for people to run from buying pork, screaming as loudly as the pigs scream in the barns.,” Newkirk said in a statement. The sheriff’s office declined to charge the operation, owned by Iowa Select Farms, and on Friday Sheriff Rick Penning confirmed he charged Johnson and a woman from Indiana with trespass, a simple misdemeanor. Court dates were set for August. Iowa Select Farms owner Jeff Hansen said his company worked with animal welfare experts, veterinarians and technicians to oversee the process after making “the painful decision to euthanize some of our herd.” “It is no surprise that, at this most difficult moment, an animal activist group is attempting to use this to promote their own agenda,” he said. “We are in tremendous pain knowing that this awful decision had to be made. Recording and releasing video of the euthanasia process only reinforces the hurt our team feels.” Iowa Select Farms markets more than 4 million hogs a year on 800 farms in 50 counties in Iowa. Naig also criticized the video. “I think that our producers are experiencing an unprecedented disruption in their business and their way of life and we’ve got folks with a clear agenda and they’re kicking our farmers when they’re down,” Naig said. An estimated 2.5 million hogs nationwide have not been sent to slaughterhouses because of the pandemic, and about 100,000 per week are added to the backlog, Neil Dierks, CEO of the National Pork Producers Council, said during a news conference Thursday. “We haven’t gotten to the point of stasis on this where the current market-ready hogs can get processed,” he said. Chad Leman, a hog farmer in Eureka, Illinois, said he had 4,000 pigs backed up on his farm and that the packers he sells to are operating at 75% capacity. “Unless they can somehow figure out to miraculously harvest about 130% of their usual capacity we will continue to back up pigs albeit at a slightly slower pace,” he said. “What’s important to understand is you can’t just shut the spigot off and turn it back on with pork production.”MOSCOW (AP) — The Russian government on Friday presented more detailed mortality figures for last month that include more deaths linked with the coronavirus, in a bid to dispel suspicions from some Russian and Western experts that authorities were trying to lower the toll for political reasons. But officials also defended the way they register deaths, which only includes people confirmed to have died of COVID-19, and not those who succumbed to other causes — even if they also tested positive for the virus. Deputy Prime Minister Tatyana Golikova said that 1,675 people died of COVID-19 in April. Of that number, 1,136 deaths were directly caused by confirmed COVID-19, while the remaining 539 tested negative but most likely died of the virus. In addition to that, she said, 1,038 others tested positive for the virus but died of other causes. If all three categories are counted as COVID-19 deaths, the nation’s total toll for April would stand at 2,713 or nearly 60% more than the previously announced number. The country’s current total is 4,374 deaths, about 1% of registered infections. Those are deaths directly resulting from the virus, and some experts questioned the government’s figures, pointing at a significant increase in April mortality in Moscow and St. Petersburg compared to a year earlier. Moscow health officials also released broader coronavirus statistics on Thursday that showed more deaths of those who tested positive but died of other reasons. Even with those extra deaths, Russia’s coronavirus mortality rate still looks markedly lower than in many European countries and the United States. Experts point to a combination of reasons, including the nation’s vast, sparsely populated territory, less frequent travel and lower social mobility. Alexei Raksha, an independent demographer who analyzes government statistics, said Russians have a much lower average life expectancy compared to people in the West, so the older generation that the virus hit hardest in Europe simply isn’t there. Russians also have lower incomes and don’t have a habit of socializing in public places – such as co-working spaces, widespread in New York, and restaurants. Russia has the world’s third-largest coronavirus caseload of more than 387,000 cases, following the U.S. and Brazil, and the strikingly low mortality rate has drawn suspicions that officials could have manipulated numbers to paint a more positive picture for political ends. Russian officials have angrily denied that, and attributed the low death toll to sweeping preventative measures, broad testing and efficient hospital treatment.  Golikova defended the Russian approach to counting coronavirus deaths, saying that it’s more precise than in other countries and based squarely on the World Health Organization’s guidance. She emphasized that autopsies are conducted for practically all of those who died after testing positive for the virus or were suspected of having the infection, to determine the primary cause of death. In cases when COVID-19 isn’t considered the main cause, it’s always mentioned as the underlying illness. Golikova noted that the nationwide lockdown has slowed down that work and in some of the April cases autopsies are yet to be conducted to determine the primary cause of death with full certainty.  Earlier this month, Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered the lifting of the nationwide economic shutdown that was put in place in late March and encouraged regional governors to gradually lift restrictions. He announced this week that a postponed Victory Day parade in Red Square that was set for May 9 to mark the 75th anniversary of Germany’s surrender in World War II will take place on June 24. ___ Daria Litvinova in Moscow contributed. ___ Follow AP coverage of the pandemic at https://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak.HAYNEVILLE, Ala. (AP) — Sparsely populated Lowndes County, deep in Alabama’s old plantation country, has the sad distinction of having both the state’s highest rate of COVID-19 cases and its worst unemployment rate.  Initially spared as the disease ravaged cities, the county and other rural areas in the state are now facing a “perfect storm:” a lack of access to medical care combined with poverty and the attendant health problems, including hypertension, heart disease, lung disease, kidney disease and diabetes, that can worsen the outcomes for those who become sick with the coronavirus, said Dr. Ellen Eaton. “I think a lot of people fell into this idea that we were immune because we’re not in tight spaces like in New York and New Jersey, and we’re in wide-open areas,” said Eaton, who specializes in infectious diseases at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. But no longer. Lowndes and nearby poor, mostly black counties in rural Alabama are facing an increase in confirmed infections. Their outbreaks are also affecting urban areas, since many of the sick need to be transferred to city hospitals.  Less than 30 miles (50 kilometers) from the white-domed Capitol in Montgomery, Lowndes lies along the highway where the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. led voting rights marchers from Selma to Montgomery in 1965. Today, it has a population of 9,700, and 220 have now tested positive for the virus. The surge in Lowndes and neighboring counties may be inextricably linked to their demographics — and thus their history as home to plantations where slaves grew the cotton that fueled the Confederacy. About 75% of Lowndes’ population is African American, and nearly 30% live in poverty. Its jobless rate has surged to 26% as area manufacturing plants closed during the pandemic. The problem can also be seen elsewhere in the rural Deep South, where a tally by John Hopkins University  shows a heavy concentration of cases. Black people have suffered disproportionately in the pandemic. An Associated Press analysis in April of available state and local data shows that nearly one-third of those who have died are African American, with black people representing about 14% of the population in the areas covered in the analysis.  As can be seen in Lowndes, some health conditions that exist at higher rates in the black community make African Americans more susceptible to the virus, and they also are more likely to be uninsured. Alabama’s figures reflect that national picture. About 27% of the state’s 4.9 million residents are black, but African Americans represent 44% of the 590 who have died. For most people, the coronavirus causes mild or moderate symptoms. For some, especially older adults and people with existing health problems, it can cause more severe illness and lead to death. County administrator Jacquelyn Thomas used her fingers this week to count off five elderly Lowndes residents who’ve died of the disease recently. She fears what will happen as the state loosens restrictions even further, and the weather gets warmer. “I worry about Lowndes County,” said Thomas. “I worry about what’s going to happen everywhere.” Nearly a third of the state’s total cases came in the last two weeks as Gov. Kay Ivey loosened regulations meant to stop the spread of the coronavirus in order to revive the economy. The days since have included high school graduation ceremonies that drew thousands; packed beaches; reopened bars and churches; and plenty of bare faces unprotected by masks. Dr. Scott Harris, the state health officer, said the state saw its highest number of new cases since the pandemic began in recent days. “We know a little bit of that has to do with increased testing, but I don’t think that explains all of it,” said Harris. With caseloads increasing in areas including Lowndes County, which doesn’t have a hospital, patients are seeking health care in cities like Montgomery, which Harris said appears to be having “widespread” community transmission of coronavirus on its own.  Montgomery Mayor Steven Reed announced last week announced that intensive care units in the city’s hospitals were filled or nearly filled. While Harris said hospitals have the ability to increase ICU capacity if needed, city officials said it should be considered a warning sign of the virus’s spread and urged people to be vigilant. Reed said he raised the alarm at the request of local health officials. “It has not subsided. It hasn’t plateaued,” Reed said. “It’s not over. We haven’t won the battle with COVID-19 yet,” Reed said. The Alabama National Guard has been sent into state nursing homes, which have been hit hard by COVID-19, to help with cleaning and training. Through an ongoing military partnership, a 15-member medical team from Romania arrived Thursday to help the state with COVID-19 support and share lessons learned from Europe, military officials announced. While many in the area Lowndes aren’t taking recommended steps to ward off disease, others are. Wearing a protective face mask at a convenience store gas pump, Marvin Johnson jumped in his car as soon as a masked stranger approached. “I don’t want to get sick,” he said through a cracked window. Shenae Harris also wore a mask, but she is worried that a lot of other county residents aren’t covering their faces and aren’t making any attempt to stay 6 feet (about 2 meters) away from others, as recommended. “People are still having parties and get togethers,” she said. Dr. Karen Landers, the district medical officer for the state, said health officials aren’t aware of any single place, like a nursing home, that is driving an increase in cases in the county.  But Thomas, the county administrator, sees other worrying signs in the poor communities around her.  Like other places with high numbers of lower income residents, multiple generations of families often live in small homes in the county, she said. Young people who tend to take fewer precautions against the virus go home despite the risk of infecting parents and grandparents whose lives are more fragile, Thomas said. “Once it does, it’s too late,” she said. “It’s too late.” ___ Chandler reported from Montgomery, Alabama. ___ Follow AP pandemic coverage at https://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak  and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak.PARIS (AP) —  France’s national health agency reported a sudden jump in new virus infections -- just an hour after the prime minister announced a sweeping national reopening plan. The agency clarified Friday that the surprising new figures were the result of a new accounting method, and not linked to a much-feared second wave of the virus. But they highlighted concerns about the French government’s handling of the crisis, and served as a reminder that infections are continuing in one of the countries hit hardest by the pandemic. “We are where we had hoped to be at the end of May, and maybe a little better,” Prime Minister Edouard Philippe said Thursday, as he announced that r estaurants, museums and parks could reopen next week for the first time since March. “It’s good news, but not good enough for everything to return to normal.” Statistics released Friday showed 96 virus clusters have emerged around France since the government started easing confinement measures May 11. They are primarily in medical facilities, businesses and shelters. And the virus remains a serious risk in two overseas French regions, where health care is weaker and poverty higher than on the mainland: the Indian Ocean island of Mayotte and French Guiana on South America’s Caribbean coast. Overall COVID-19 is receding in France, with the number of virus patients in intensive care dropping every day since April 8 and now at 1,429. But the public health agency DGS quietly released figures Thursday night showing a rise of more than 3,000 new infections from the day before – the biggest such jump in more than three weeks. That puzzled epidemiologists like Dr. Laurent Toubiana, who has been closely following the curve of the virus in European countries, and thinks the epidemic is petering out in France. “It’s incomprehensible,” he said. The DGS then said Friday the new cases included positive tests registered under a “better, more exhaustive” counting system put in place May 13, and did not correspond to a single-day rise. It insisted there are “no signs in favor of a return of the epidemic.” France has confirmed 149,071 cases so far, though the government acknowledges the real number of infections is much higher because of limited testing. The French government came under criticism for not testing widely enough earlier in the pandemic. It is now testing more than 200,000 people a week, according to the health agency. Death figures are also difficult to pin down. France has reported 28,662 deaths overall in hospitals and nursing homes, and the state statistics agency Insee on Friday reported a 26% rise in overall deaths in March and April from all causes compared to the same period in 2019. In May, it said the number of overall deaths in France is down 6% so far, though finalized death figures usually lag by a few weeks, so the number could still rise. “During this whole epidemic, we have had intense problems of viability of data,” Toubiana said. As scientists try to determine why the pandemic is taking longer than expected to end, he said, “We are all trying with the means we have to understand this phenomenon.” ___ Follow AP pandemic coverage at http://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreakJOHANNESBURG (AP) — South Africa says it has a backlog of nearly 100,000 unprocessed tests for the coronavirus, a striking example of the painful shortage of testing kits and reagents across Africa as cases steadily rise. “This challenge is caused by the limited availability of test kits globally,” the health ministry said in a statement overnight, putting the backlog at 96,480 as of Monday. Priority is given to processing tests from patients admitted to hospitals and health workers, it said.  South Africa has conducted more tests for the virus than any other country in Africa — more than 655,000 — and has the most confirmed cases with 27,403. One of the latest to die of COVID-19 in South Africa was a National Health Laboratory Services employee. “We understand this tragedy will certainly test you,” the ministry said in a message to her colleagues, adding that the government is committed to providing proper protective gear.  That, too, faces shortages across Africa. More than 3,400 health workers on the continent had been infected as of a week ago, according to the World Health Organization. The shortages, especially in testing materials, have jolted African authorities into facing uncomfortable truths: Richer countries are elbowing them out in the race to obtain crucial supplies, and the continent relies almost entirely on imports for drugs and other medical items.  “We have to have Made in Africa products,” the director of the Africa Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, John Nkengasong, told reporters Thursday. “We cannot keep importing basic things.” He and others, including the WHO’s Ethiopian director-general, have raised the cry for fair access, including for any vaccine or treatment that emerges.  “Dozens of countries have imposed export controls on medical supplies and equipment,” scores of South African and other health and activist groups said in an open letter to Group of 20 leaders last month. Complicating matters are global powers like the United States and China promoting aid to African countries during the pandemic as part of efforts to win support on the continent. But that aid doesn’t always show up. President Donald Trump on May 21 said “we just sent 1,000” ventilators to Nigeria, but the country’s information minister, Lai Mohammed, told reporters Thursday that “to the best of my knowledge they have not arrived. When they do arrive, it will be made public.” But the testing shortages are especially frustrating for African health officials, who have been praised for swiftly expanding testing capability for the virus continent-wide, from just two countries in February.  “Low levels of testing might be artificially lowering apparent infection rates,” The Lancet said in a new editorial noting Africa’s quick response but also the challenges that lie ahead. Across Africa slightly under 2 million tests for the virus have been conducted, Nkengasong said, far below the target of testing 13 million people — or 1% of the continent’s population of 1.3 billion. Nigeria, Africa’s most populous country with some 200 million people, has one of the lowest coronavirus testing rates in the world with 286 tests per million people. More than 58,000 tests for the virus have been conducted, according to the country’s Center for Disease Control. Nearly 9,000 cases have been confirmed while worries grow about undetected spread of the virus in the north. In Ethiopia, Africa’s second most populous country with some 110 million people, the health ministry says more than 96,000 tests have been conducted. More than 830 cases have been confirmed. As of mid-May, Chad had carried out 105 tests per million people and Mali had tested just 173 per million, compared to some 38,000 tests per million in the United States, the International Rescue Committee said last week.  By the end of this week 2.5 million tests will have been distributed to Africa’s 54 countries, the Africa CDC’s Nkengasong said.  Despite the shortages, “I’m optimistic that in the next two to three weeks it will be very different,” he said, without giving details.  So far African nations have relied on tests donated by the Jack Ma Foundation, sourced via partners including the WHO and procured via a newly created platform that pools African countries’ purchasing efforts on the international market. Meanwhile, efforts at domestic production of testing materials have begun in South Africa, Morocco, Senegal and Kenya, the Africa CDC has said, with plans to have those countries aid each other in evaluating the products. “Africa is a continent that needs its own internal capacity to produce diagnostic kits,” South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize told reporters on Thursday. “We need several millions of these kits.” ___ Sam Olukoya in Lagos, Nigeria and Krista Larson in Dakar, Senegal contributed. ___ Follow AP coverage of the pandemic at https://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak.WASHINGTON (AP) — Threatening to shut down Twitter for flagging false content. Claiming he can “override” governors who dare to keep churches closed to congregants. Asserting the “absolute authority” to force states to reopen, even when local leaders say it’s too soon. As he battles the coronavirus pandemic, President Donald Trump has been claiming extraordinarily sweeping powers that legal scholars say the president simply doesn’t have. And he has repeatedly refused to spell out the legal basis for those powers. “It’s not that the president doesn’t have a remarkable amount of power to respond to a public health crisis. It’s that these are not the powers he has,” said Stephen Vladeck, a University of Texas School of Law professor who specializes in constitutional and national security law. First it was Trump’s assertion that he could force governors to reopen their economies before they felt ready. “When somebody’s the president of the United States, the authority is total,” he claimed. Trump soon dropped the threat, saying he would instead leave such decisions to the states. But he has revived the idea in recent days as he has tried to pressure governors to allow churches and other places of worship to hold in-person services, even where stay-at-home orders and other limits on large gatherings remain in effect. Asked Tuesday what authority he had to enforce such a mandate, Trump was cagey. “I can absolutely do it if I want to,” he said. “We have many different ways where I can override them and if I have to, I’ll do that.” The White House declined to spell out any specific statute, but White House spokesman Judd Deere said in a statement that “every decision the president has made throughout this pandemic has been to protect the health and safety of the American people.” Trump “certainly does not have the power under any reasonable reading of the Constitution or federalism to order places of worship to open,” said Matthew Dallek, a historian at George Washington University’s Graduate School of Political Management who specializes in the use of presidential power. But Dallek said that just because Trump doesn’t have the authority to do what he’s threatened, doesn’t mean he won’t, for instance, try to sign executive orders taking such action anyway — even if they are later struck down by the courts. “What has limited Trump previously? Not very much. So I think he will do whatever seems to be in his best interest at any particular moment,” Dallek said. Trump, he said, also could try to abuse his powers to leverage other instruments of government, from the Department of Justice to the IRS, to push for investigations or launch regulatory crackdowns to punish states, cities or companies. Trump also has showed he’s willing to exercise powers that modern presidents have largely avoided, including his recent purging of inspectors general. When the president declared the pandemic a national emergency back in March, he activated more than 100 different statutory authorities. Yet Trump, said Vladeck, has failed to exercise many of them. “I think one of the real ironies of this entire moment is that the president actually has a remarkable array of powers that he hasn’t brought to bear. All the while he continues to claim stunning powers that he doesn’t have,” he said. That includes the Defense Production Act, which Trump could have used far more aggressively to force companies to mass produce supplies including masks and ventilators. Instead, he used it in more limited ways. And while the Justice Department has threatened to join lawsuits against states that move too slowly, a statement of interest filed by the department in Illinois last week didn’t raise any federal constitutional claims. Even if he doesn’t follow through on threats, Trump’s statements still can have consequences as he uses his bully pulpit. “He’s still trying to wield his often outrageous interpretations of the law as a cudgel to bludgeon others,” said Joshua Geltzer, founding executive director of the Institute for Constitutional Advocacy and Protection at Georgetown University Law Center. Trump is now on a tear against Twitter after the social media platform, which he uses to speak directly to his more than 80 million followers, slapped fact-check alerts on two of his tweets claiming that mail-in voting is fraudulent. On Thursday, Trump signed an executive order challenging the liability protections that have served as a bedrock for unfettered speech on the internet. But the order — which directs executive branch agencies to ask independent rule-making agencies, including the Federal Communications Commission and the Federal Trade Commission, to study whether they can place new regulations on social media companies — appeared to be more about politics than substance.  Experts express doubts much can be done without an act of Congress and the order was far less dramatic than Trump’s tweet warning social media platforms that he had the power to “strongly regulate” or “close them down.’ While Congress could pass legislation further regulating social media platforms, Trump “has no such authority,” said former federal judge Michael McConnell, who now directs Stanford Law School’s Constitutional Law Center. “He is just venting.” “There is absolutely no First Amendment issue with Twitter adding a label to the president’s tweets,” added Jameel Jaffer, executive director at the Knight First Amendment Institute at Columbia University, who won the case that prevents Trump from banning his critics from his Twitter feed. “The only First Amendment issue here arises from the president’s threat to punish Twitter in some way for fact-checking his statements.” But Jack Balkin, a Yale University law professor and First Amendment expert, said that’s not Trump’s point. “This is an attempt by the president to, as we used to say in basketball, work the refs,” he said. “He’s threatening and cajoling with the idea that these folks in their corporate board rooms will think twice about what they’re doing, so they won’t touch him.” For Rutgers University media professor John Pavlik, who studies online misinformation, Trump is simply trying to fire up his political base. “For Trump,” he said, “this is about politics.” ___ Associated Press writer David Klepper contributed to the report from New York.Leaders of a large study in the United Kingdom that is rigorously testing the malaria drug hydroxychloroquine and other medicines for hospitalized COVID-19 patients say they will stop putting people on the drug because it’s clear it isn’t helping.  
 Results released Friday from 1,542 patients showed the drug did not reduce deaths, time in the hospital or other factors. After 28 days, 25.7% on hydroxychloroquine had died versus 23.5% given usual care -- a difference so small it could have occurred by chance. 
 The results “convincingly rule out any meaningful mortality benefit,” study leaders at the University of Oxford said in a statement.  
 The results have not been published; the statement said full details will be provided soon. No information on safety was given. 
 Hydroxychloroquine has long been used for malaria, lupus and rheumatoid arthritis but is not known to be safe or effective for preventing or treating coronavirus infection. It has been heavily promoted by President Donald Trump and can cause potentially serious side effects, including heart rhythm problems. 
 Many recent studies have suggested it does not help treat COVID-19, but they are mostly weak and observational. A very large one suggesting the drug was unsafe was retracted by the journal Lancet on Thursday amid questions about the truthfulness of the data. 
 The Oxford study  is the largest study so far to put hydroxychloroquine to a strict test.  
 More than 11,000 patients in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland were randomly assigned to get either standard of care or that plus one of these treatments: hydroxychloroquine, the HIV combo drug lopinavir-ritonavir, the antibiotic azithromycin, the steroid dexamethasone, the anti-inflammatory drug tocilizumab, or plasma from people who have recovered from COVID-19 that contains antibodies to fight the virus. 
 Independent monitors met Thursday night to review results so far and recommended ending the hydroxychloroquine part of the study because results from 80% of participants suggested continuing was futile. 
 “Although it is disappointing that this treatment has been shown to be ineffective, it does allow us to focus care and research on more promising drugs,” study leader and Oxford professor Peter Horby said in a statement. 
 The research is funded by government health agencies in the United Kingdom and private donors including the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. 
 The World Health Organization is leading a similar study testing hydroxychloroquine and several other therapies versus standard of care. More than 3,500 patients in 35 countries have enrolled.  
 WHO chief scientist Dr. Soumya Swaminathan said researchers would consider the full Oxford results once they’re available but for now will continue its own study as is. 
 ___ 
 Marilynn Marchione can be followed on Twitter: @MMarchioneAP 
 ___ 
 AP Medical Writer Maria Cheng contributed to this report.  
 ___ 
 The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content. 
Several authors of a large study that raised safety concerns about malaria drugs for coronavirus patients have retracted the report, saying independent reviewers were not able to verify information that’s been widely questioned by other scientists. 
 Thursday’s retraction in the journal Lancet involved a May 22 report on hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine, drugs long used for preventing or treating malaria but whose safety and effectiveness for COVID-19 are unknown. 
 The study leaders also retracted an earlier report  using the same company’s database on blood pressure drugs published by the New England Journal of Medicine. That study suggested that widely used blood pressure medicines were safe for coronavirus patients, a conclusion some other studies and heart doctor groups also have reached. 
 Even though the Lancet report was not a rigorous test, the observational study had huge impact because of its size, reportedly involving more than 96,000 patients and 671 hospitals on six continents.  
 Its conclusion that the drugs were tied to a higher risk of death and heart problems in people hospitalized with COVID-19 led the World Health Organization to temporarily stop use of hydroxychloroquine in a study it is leading, and for French officials to stop allowing its use in hospitals there. Earlier this week, WHO said experts who reviewed safety information decided that its study could resume. 
 “Not only is there no benefit, but we saw a very consistent signal of harm,” study leader Dr. Mandeep Mehra of Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston told The Associated Press when the work was published. 
 The drugs have been controversial because President Donald Trump repeatedly promoted their use and took hydroxychloroquine himself to try to prevent infection after some White House staffers tested positive for the virus. The drugs are known to have potential side effects, especially heart rhythm problems. 
 The Lancet study relied on a database from a Chicago company, Surgisphere. Its founder, Dr. Sapan Desai, is one of the authors.  
 Dozens of scientists questioned irregularities and improbable findings in the numbers, and the other authors besides Desai said earlier this week that an independent audit would be done. In the retraction notice, those authors say Surgisphere would not give the reviewers the full data, citing confidentiality and client agreements. 
 “Based on this development, we can no longer vouch for the veracity of the primary data sources” and must retract the report, they wrote.  
 “I no longer have confidence in the origination and veracity of the data, nor the findings they have led to,” Mehra said in a separate statement Thursday.  
 The Lancet’s notice said “there are many outstanding questions about Surgisphere and the data that were allegedly included in this study,” and “institutional reviews of Surgisphere’s research collaborations are urgently needed.” 
 Desai and Surgisphere did not immediately respond to request for comments sent to phone numbers and email address listed on the company’s materials. 
 All the authors of the study should have had access to the data, said Dr. Steve Nissen of the Cleveland Clinic. 
 “You really don’t know what a study showed unless you have the actual data,” Nissen said. “This is unfortunate. Clearly this is a very important topic and we need good answers.” 
 The retraction shows “the system works,” said Dr. Ashish Jha, director of Harvard’s Global Health Institute. The pace of publishing scientific research has sped up in reaction to the pandemic, Jha said, leading to errors. 
 As long as errors are acknowledged, the pace seems justifiable because waiting a year or two for results to be published “is way too slow for this pandemic.” 
 “Part of the problem is people are so anxious. They want a definite answer yes or no,” Jha said. “We’re moving as fast as we can in science, but we can’t overreact to any single study.” 
 ___ 
 Associated Press writers Carla K. Johnson and Candice Choi contributed to this report.  
 ___ 
 The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content. 
A malaria drug President Donald Trump took to try to prevent COVID-19 proved ineffective for that in the first large, high-quality study to test it in people in close contact with someone with the disease.  Results published  Wednesday by the New England Journal of Medicine show that hydroxychloroquine was no better than placebo pills at preventing illness from the coronavirus. The drug did not seem to cause serious harm, though -- about 40% on it had side effects, mostly mild stomach problems. “We were disappointed. We would have liked for this to work,” said the study leader, Dr. David Boulware, an infectious disease specialist at the University of Minnesota. “But our objective was to answer the question and to conduct a high-quality study,” because the evidence on the drug so far has been inconclusive, he said. Hydroxychloroquine and a similar drug, chloroquine, have been the subject of much debate since Trump started promoting them in March. Hydroxychloroquine has long been used for malaria, lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, but no large studies have shown it or chloroquine to be safe or effective for much sicker patients with coronavirus, and some studies have suggested the drugs may do harm.  Trump took a two-week course of hydroxychloroquine, along with zinc and Vitamin D, after two staffers tested positive for COVID-19, and had no ill effects, according to results of his latest physical released by his doctor Wednesday.  Federal regulators have warned against hydroxychloroquine’s use except in hospitals and formal studies because of the risk of side effects, especially heart rhythm problems. Boulware’s study involved 821 people in the United States and Canada living with someone diagnosed with COVID-19 or at high risk of getting it because of their job -- doctors, nurses, ambulance workers who had significant exposure to a sick patient while not wearing full protective gear. They were randomly assigned to get either the nutrient folate as a placebo or hydroxychloroquine for five days, starting within four days of their exposure. Neither they nor others involved in the research knew who was getting which pills. After 14 days in the study, 12% on the drug developed COVID-19 symptoms versus 14% in the placebo group, but the difference is so small it could have occurred by chance, Boulware said. “There’s basically no effect. It does not prevent infection,” he said of the drug. Even if it were to give some slim advantage, “we’d want a much larger effect” to justify its use and risk of side effects for preventing illness, he said. Results were no different among a subgroup of participants who were taking zinc or vitamin C, which some people believe might help make hydroxychloroquine more effective or fight the coronavirus. There are some big caveats: The study enrolled people through the Internet and social media, relying on them to report their own symptoms rather than having them tracked in a formal way by doctors. Participants were not all tested for the coronavirus but were diagnosed as COVID-19 cases based on symptoms in many cases. And not all took their medicines as directed.  The results “are more provocative than definitive,” and the drug may yet have prevention benefits if tried sooner or in a different way, Dr. Myron Cohen of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill wrote in a commentary in the journal. Others were glad to see a study that had a comparison group and good scientific methods after so many weaker reports on hydroxychloroquine. “This fits with everything else we’ve seen so far which suggests that it’s not beneficial,” said Dr. Peter Bach, director of a health policy center at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York.  This study was in younger relatively healthy people, but the results “would make me very discouraged about trying to use this in older people” who are most vulnerable to serious illness from the coronavirus, Bach said. “If it does work, it doesn’t work very well.” Dr. Dan Culver, a lung specialist at the Cleveland Clinic, said there’s still a chance that giving the drug sooner than four days after someone’s exposure to the virus may help prevent illness. But the study “takes ‘home run’ off the table” as far as hopes for the drug, he said.  The study was mostly funded by David Baszucki, founder of Roblox, a California-based game software company, and other private donors and the Minnesota university.  Boulware also is leading a study testing hydroxychloroquine for treating COVID-19. The study is finished and results are being analyzed now. On Tuesday, the journal Lancet posted an “expression of concern” about a study it published earlier this month of nearly 15,000 COVID-19 patients on the malaria drugs that tied their use to a higher risk of dying in the hospital or developing a heartbeat problem.  Scientists have raised serious questions about the database used for that study, and its authors have launched an independent audit.  That work had a big impact: the World Health Organization suspended use of hydroxychloroquine in a study it is leading, and French officials stopped the drug’s use in hospitals. On Wednesday, the WHO said experts who reviewed safety information decided that its study could resume. ___ Marilynn Marchione can be followed on Twitter: @MMarchioneAP ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.Concerns are mounting about studies in two influential medical journals on drugs used in people with coronavirus, including one that led multiple countries to stop testing a malaria pill. The New England Journal of Medicine issued an “ expression of concern ” Tuesday on a study it published  May 1 that suggested widely used blood pressure medicines were not raising the risk of death for people with COVID-19.  The study relied on a database with health records from hundreds of hospitals around the world. “Substantive concerns” have been raised about the quality of the information, and the journal has asked the authors to provide evidence it’s reliable, the editors wrote. The same database by the Chicago company Surgisphere Corp., was used in an observational study of nearly 100,000 patients published in Lancet that tied the malaria drugs hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine to a higher risk of death in hospitalized patients with the virus. Lancet issued a similar expression of concern about its study on Tuesday, saying it was aware “important scientific questions” had been raised. Although it wasn’t a rigorous experiment that could give definitive answers, the Lancet study had wide influence because of its size. The World Health Organization said it would temporarily stop a study of hydroxychloroquine and France stopped allowing its use in hospitals. The drug has been mired in controversy since President Donald Trump repeatedly promoted it and even took it himself without clear evidence that it’s safe or effective for preventing or treating coronavirus infection. Dr. Mandeep Mehra of Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston led both studies, and the authors include Desai Sapan, Surgisphere’s founder. A hospital statement says the authors launched an independent audit of the data in the New England Journal paper on Monday. A second statement notes that the Lancet posted a correction Friday on a discrepancy found in that study, and that an independent review would be done of its data too. The correction did not change the overall results or conclusions. A statement on Surgisphere’s site says it stands behind the integrity of its studies, and notes that observational data like what it supplied from electronic health records are not a substitute for rigorous experiments to test a drug.  The Lancet and the authors need to do more to address the many concerns that scientists have raised, said Dr. Eric Topol, a research methods expert and director of the Scripps Research Translational Institute in San Diego. “I had accepted the Lancet paper on its face” because the journal and lead author are highly regarded, and because the results are consistent with prior research -- 13 studies have found no benefit from hydroxychloroquine for coronavirus, Topol said. With the new concerns and correction, the cloud around the database “has now been greatly amplified,” Topol said. ___ Marilynn Marchione can be followed on Twitter at http://twitter.com/MMarchioneAP The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.The global race for a COVID-19 vaccine boils down to some critical questions: How much must the shots rev up someone’s immune system to really work? And could revving it the wrong way cause harm?  Even as companies recruit tens of thousands of people for larger vaccine studies this summer, behind the scenes scientists still are testing ferrets, monkeys and other animals in hopes of clues to those basic questions — steps that in a pre-pandemic era would have been finished first. “We are in essence doing a great experiment,” said Ralph Baric, a coronavirus expert at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, whose lab is testing several vaccine candidates in animals. The speed-up is necessary to try to stop a virus that has triggered a pandemic, killing more than 360,000 worldwide and shuttering economies. But “there’s no question there is more risk in the current strategy than what has ever been done before,” Baric said.  The animal testing lets scientists see how the body reacts to vaccines in ways studies in people never can, said Kate Broderick, research chief at Inovio Pharmaceuticals.  With animals, “we’re able to perform autopsies and look specifically at their lung tissue and get a really deep dive in looking at how their lungs have reacted,” Broderick said.  She’s awaiting results from mice, ferrets and monkeys that are being exposed to the coronavirus after receiving Inovio’s vaccine. Since no species perfectly mimics human infection, testing a trio broadens the look at safety. And there’s some good news on the safety front as the first animal data from various research teams starts to trickle out. So far, there are no signs of a worrisome side effect called disease enhancement, which Dr. Anthony Fauci of the U.S. National Institutes of Health calls reassuring. Enhancement is just what the name implies: Very rarely, a vaccine doesn’t stimulate the immune system in quite the right way, producing antibodies that not only can’t fully block infection but that make any resulting disease worse. That first happened in the 1960s with failure of a vaccine for respiratory syncytial virus, RSV, an infection dangerous to young children. More recently, it has complicated efforts at vaccines against mosquito-spread dengue fever.  And some attempted vaccines for SARS, a cousin of COVID-19, seemed to cause enhancement in animal testing. Fast forward to the pandemic. Three recently reported studies in monkeys tested different COVID-19 vaccine approaches, including shots made by Oxford University and China’s Sinovac. The studies were small, but none of the monkeys showed evidence of immune-enhanced disease when scientists later dripped the coronavirus directly into the animals’ noses or windpipes. Some of the best evidence so far that a vaccine might work also comes from those monkey studies. Oxford and Sinovac created very different types of COVID-19 vaccines, and in separate studies, each team recently reported that vaccinated monkeys were protected from pneumonia while monkeys given a dummy shot got sick. But protection against severe disease is just a first step. Could a vaccine also stop the virus’s spread? The Oxford study raises some doubt. Those researchers found as much virus lingering in the vaccinated monkeys’ noses as in the unvaccinated. Even though the experiment exposed moneys to high levels of the coronavirus, it raised troubling questions. The type of vaccine -- how it targets the “spike” protein that coats the coronavirus -- may make a difference. Researchers at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston designed six different vaccine prototypes. Some only partially protected monkeys -- but one fully protected eight monkeys from any sign of the virus, said Dr. Dan Barouch, who is working with Johnson & Johnson on yet another COVID-19 vaccine candidate. In monkeys, the new coronavirus lodges in the lungs but seldom makes them super sick. Ferrets — the preferred animal for flu vaccine development — may help tell if potential COVID-19 vaccines might stop the viral spread. “Ferrets develop a fever. They also cough and sneeze,” infecting each other much like people do, said vaccine researcher Alyson Kelvin of Canada’s Dalhousie University. And while COVID-19 is a huge risk to the elderly, vaccines often don’t rev up an older person’s immune system as well as a younger person’s. So Kelvin also is studying older ferrets. Some vaccine makers are reporting promising immune reactions in the first people given the experimental shots, including production of “neutralizing” antibodies, a kind that latches onto the virus and blocks it from infecting cells. But there’s a hitch. Said Inovio’s Broderick: “Let me be honest. We’re still not clear at all on what those correlates of protection are” — meaning what mix of immune reactions, and how much, are needed.  Some clues come from the blood of COVID-19 survivors, although “there’s a huge variation” in immune reactions between the severely and mildly ill, Broderick added. Still, if vaccinated animals that produce the same neutralizing antibody levels as certain COVID-19 survivors are protected — and people given test doses likewise produce the same amount — “that is great comfort that your vaccine approach actually may work,” said Kathrin Jansen, head of Pfizer Inc.’s vaccine research. But ultimately the real proof won’t come before huge studies of whether vaccinated people get sick less often than the unvaccinated. ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.A California biotech company says its experimental drug remdesivir improved symptoms when given for five days to moderately ill, hospitalized patients with COVID-19. Gilead Sciences gave few details on Monday but said full results would soon be published in a medical journal.  Remdesivir is the only treatment that’s been shown in a rigorous experiment to help fight the coronavirus. A large study led by the National Institutes of Health recently found it could shorten average recovery time from 15 days to 11 days in hospitalized patients with severe disease.  The drug is given through an IV and is designed to interfere with an enzyme the virus uses to copy its genetic material. It’s approved for treating COVID-19 in Japan and is authorized for emergency use in the United States for certain patients.  The company-led study involved nearly 600 patients who had moderate pneumonia but did not need oxygen support. All were randomly assigned to get five or 10 days of the drug plus standard care, or standard care alone. Patients and their doctors knew who was getting what, which limits the objectivity of the results. By the 11th day in the study, those on five days of remdesivir were 65% more likely to improve by at least one on a seven-point scale that included measures such as needing treatment with a breathing machine, Gilead said. Ten days of treatment did not prove better than standard care alone.  There were no deaths among patients on five days of the drug, two among those on 10 days, and four among patients getting standard care alone. Nausea and headache were a little more common among those on the drug. The study has some limitations, but “there was a control group which does help verify that remdesivir has some benefits,” said Dr. Radha Rajasingham, an infectious disease specialist at the University of Minnesota Medical Center in Minneapolis who had no role in the work.  Since there are limited supplies of the experimental drug, finding benefit from five versus 10 days means more people can be treated, she added. In a note to investors, Evercore ISI analyst Umer Raffat noted that the study’s main goal was changed partway through, from the percentage of patients discharged within two weeks to the scale of improvement after 11 days.  “A fair amount of critical data,” such as hospital discharge information, has not been disclosed, he wrote.  ___ Marilynn Marchione can be followed on Twitter at  http://twitter.com/MMarchioneAP ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.WASHINGTON (AP) — Veterans Affairs Secretary Robert Wilkie said Thursday that his department has all but stopped use of an unproven malaria drug on veterans with COVID-19. At a House hearing, he defended initial use of hydroxychloroquine on coronavirus patients as justified “to give them hope,” given few treatment options at the time. But Wilkie said that government-run VA hospitals have “ratcheted it down” — to just three prescriptions in the last week — as studies pointed to possible dangers and other possible treatments were brought online. “I expect that trend to continue in the future,” he added. President Donald Trump has heavily pitched the drug — even saying in recent days he had been taking it to prevent coronavirus infection — without scientific evidence of its effectiveness. “We are all learning as we go in this crisis,” Wilkie told a House appropriations subcommittee. “Our mission is to preserve and protect life.”  The department, which is the nation’s largest hospital system, has recently been turning to remdesivir. Preliminary results from a major study found reduced recovery time, as well as convalescent plasma. According to the VA’s website, 13,657 veterans have been infected with the coronavirus, and 1,200 have died.  Major veterans organizations had called on the VA to explain its use of hydroxychloroquine after an analysis of VA hospital data was published month showing hundreds of veterans who took the drug saw no benefit for COVID-19. About 28% of veterans who were given hydroxychloroquine plus usual care died, versus 11% of those getting routine care alone.  VA data provided Thursday to Congress show that weekly prescriptions for hydroxychloroquine surged from about two in mid-March to a peak of 404 about two weeks later as Trump began promoting its use. They remained at higher levels before tapering off in late April amid backlash over results of the VA hospital analysis and as remdesivir emerged as a form of treatment. In all, 1,370 veterans were prescribed hydroxychloroquine for COVID-19. Wilkie said Thursday that he expected the VA to continue using the drug in limited forms such as clinical trials, based in part on the guidance of Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nation’s top infectious-diseases expert and a member of the White House coronavirus task force.  That answer drew a rebuke from Rep. Nita Lowey, D-N.Y., chair of the appropriations committee, who said the VA should have been listening to Fauci’s counsel urging caution on the drug from the start. “I hope VA will respond to the science that is clearly coming from Dr. Fauci, rather than some wishful thinking coming from the president,” Lowey said. No large, rigorous studies have found hydroxychloroquine safe or effective for COVID-19, and it can cause heart rhythm problems and other serious side effects. The Food and Drug Administration has warned against the drug and said hydroxychloroquine should only be used for the coronavirus in formal studies. The VA has said it prescribed the drug only when medically appropriate, after full discussion between doctor and patient about the risks.When could a COVID-19 vaccine be ready?  Top health officials say the end of this year would be a best case scenario. But scientists have never created a vaccine so quickly, and there’s no guarantee any under development will ultimately work. Worldwide, testing recently started or is about to start for about a dozen potential vaccines. The most promising vaccine candidates are expected to move into larger tests this summer.  How quickly those studies can determine whether the vaccines are safe and effective depends in part on how widely the coronavirus is still spreading. The studies will need to enroll 20,000 people or more for each vaccine candidate, with half of them getting the real vaccine and the rest getting a dummy shot. Then it’s a matter of waiting to see how many in each group become infected with the virus. Answers will come faster if volunteers are recruited in places where outbreaks are worsening, a trend that can be hard to predict. One way to speed up distribution is to start manufacturing doses before test results are in. But it’s a gamble that could mean throwing away tons of vaccines that fail.  ___  The AP is answering your questions about the coronavirus in this series. Submit them at: FactCheck@AP.org. Only about half of Americans say they would get a COVID-19 vaccine if the scientists working furiously to create one succeed, a number that’s surprisingly low considering the effort going into the global race for a vaccine. But more people might eventually roll up their sleeves: The new poll from The Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research found 31% simply weren’t sure if they’d get vaccinated. Another 1 in 5 said they’d refuse. Health experts already worry about the whiplash if vaccine promises like President Donald Trump’s goal of a 300 million-dose stockpile by January fail. Only time and science will tell -- and the new poll shows the public is indeed skeptical. “It’s always better to under-promise and over-deliver,” said Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease specialist at Vanderbilt University Medical Center.  “The unexpected looms large and that’s why I think for any of these vaccines, we’re going to need a large safety database to provide the reassurance,” he added. Among Americans who say they wouldn’t get vaccinated, 7 in 10 worry about safety. “I am not an anti-vaxxer,” said Melanie Dries, 56, of Colorado Springs, Colorado. But, “to get a COVID-19 vaccine within a year or two ... causes me to fear that it won’t be widely tested as to side effects.” Dr. Francis Collins, who directs the National Institutes of Health, insists safety is the top priority. The NIH is creating a master plan for testing the leading COVID-19 vaccine candidates in tens of thousands of people, to prove if they really work and also if they’re safe. “I would not want people to think that we’re cutting corners because that would be a big mistake. I think this is an effort to try to achieve efficiencies, but not to sacrifice rigor,” Collins told the AP earlier this month.  “Definitely the worst thing that could happen is if we rush through a vaccine that turns out to have significant side effects,” Collins added. Among those who want a vaccine, the AP-NORC poll found protecting themselves, their family and the community are the top reasons. “I’m definitely going to get it,” said Brandon Grimes, 35, of Austin, Texas. “As a father who takes care of his family, I think ... it’s important for me to get vaccinated as soon as it’s available to better protect my family.”  And about 7 in 10 of those who would get vaccinated say life won’t go back to normal without a vaccine. A site foreman for his family’s construction business, Grimes travels from house to house interacting with different crews, and said some of his coworkers also are looking forward to vaccination to minimize on-the-job risk.  The new coronavirus is most dangerous to older adults and people of any age who have chronic health problems such as diabetes or heart disease. The poll found 67% of people 60 and older say they’d get vaccinated, compared with 40% who are younger. And death counts suggest black and Hispanic Americans are more vulnerable to COVID-19, because of unequal access to health care and other factors. Yet the poll found just 25% of African Americans and 37% of Hispanics would get a vaccine compared to 56% of whites. Among people who don’t want a vaccine, about 4 in 10 say they’re concerned about catching COVID-19 from the shot. But most of the leading vaccine candidates don’t contain the coronavirus itself, meaning they can’t cause infection. And 3 in 10 who don’t want a vaccine don’t fear getting seriously ill from the coronavirus. Over 5.5 million people worldwide have been confirmed infected by the virus, and more than 340,000 deaths have been recorded, including nearly 100,000 in the U.S., according to a tally kept by Johns Hopkins University. Experts believe the true toll is significantly higher. And while most people who get COVID-19 have mild cases and recover, doctors still are discovering the coronavirus attacks in far sneakier ways than just causing pneumonia — from blood clots to heart and kidney damage to the latest scare, a life-threatening inflammatory reaction in children.  Whatever the final statistics show about how often it kills, health specialists agree the new coronavirus appears deadlier than the typical flu. Yet the survey suggests a vaccine would be no more popular than the yearly flu shot. Worldwide, about a dozen COVID-19 vaccine candidates are in early stages of testing or poised to begin. British researchers are opening one of the biggest studies so far, to test an Oxford University-created shot in 10,000 people.  For all the promises of the Trump administration’s “ Operation Warp Speed,” only 20% of Americans expect any vaccine to be available to the public by year’s end, the poll found. Most think sometime next year is more likely. Political divisions seen over how the country reopens the economy are reflected in desire for a vaccine, too. More than half of Democrats call a vaccine necessary for reopening, compared to about a third of Republicans. While 62% of Democrats would get the vaccine, only 43% of Republicans say the same. “There’s still a large amount of uncertainty around taking the vaccine,” said Caitlin Oppenheimer, who leads NORC’s public health research. “There is a lot of opportunity to communicate with Americans about the value and the safety of a vaccine.” ___ AP video journalist Federica Narancio contributed to this report.  ___ The AP-NORC poll of 1,056 adults was conducted May 14-18 using a sample drawn from NORC’s probability-based AmeriSpeak Panel, which is designed to be representative of the U.S. population. The margin of sampling error for all respondents is plus or minus 4.2 percentage points.CANBERRA, Australia (AP) — A U.S. biotechnology company began injecting a coronavirus vaccine candidate into people in Australia on Tuesday with hopes of releasing a proven vaccine this year. Novavax will inject 131 volunteers in the first phase of the trial testing the safety of the vaccine and looking for signs of its effectiveness, the company’s research chief Dr. Gregory Glenn said. About a dozen experimental vaccines against the coronavirus are in early stages of testing or poised to start, mostly in China, the U.S. and Europe. It’s not clear that any will prove safe and effective. But many work in different ways, and are made with different technologies, increasing the odds that at least one approach might succeed. “We are in parallel making doses, making vaccine in anticipation that we’ll be able to show it’s working and be able to start deploying it by the end of this year,” Glenn told a virtual news conference in Melbourne from Novavax’ headquarters in Maryland. Animal testing suggested the vaccine is effective in low doses. Novavax could manufacture at least 100 million doses this year and 1.5 billion in 2021, he said. Manufacture of the vaccine, named NVX-CoV2373, was being scaled up with $388 million invested by Norway-based Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations since March, Glenn said. The results of the first phase of clinical trials in Melbourne and Brisbane are expected to be known in July, Novavax said. Thousands of candidates in several countries would then become involved in a second phase. The trial began with six volunteers being injected with the potential vaccine in Melbourne on Tuesday, said Paul Griffin, infectious disease expert with Australian collaborator Nucleus Network. Most of the experimental vaccines in progress aim to train the immune system to recognize the “spike” protein that studs the coronavirus’ outer surface, priming the body to react if it was exposed to the real virus. Some candidates are made using just the genetic code for that protein, and others use a harmless virus to deliver the protein-producing information. Still other vaccine candidates are more old-fashioned, made with dead, whole virus. Novavax adds another new kind to that list, what’s called a recombinant vaccine. Novavax used genetic engineering to grow harmless copies of the coronavirus spike protein in giant vats of insect cells in a laboratory. Scientists extracted and purified the protein, and packaged it into virus-sized nanoparticles.  “The way we make a vaccine is we never touch the virus,” Novavax told The Associated Press last month. But ultimately, “it looks just like a virus to the immune system.” It’s the same process that Novavax used to create a nanoparticle flu vaccine that recently passed late-stage testing.Malaria drugs pushed by President Donald Trump as treatments for the coronavirus did not help and were tied to a greater risk of death and heart rhythm problems in a new study of nearly 100,000 patients around the world. Friday’s  report in the journal Lancet is not a rigorous test of hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine, but it is by far the largest look at their use in real world settings, spanning 671 hospitals on six continents. “Not only is there no benefit, but we saw a very consistent signal of harm,” said one study leader, Dr. Mandeep Mehra, a heart specialist at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston. Researchers estimate that the death rate attributable to use of the drugs, with or without an antibiotic such as azithromycin, is roughly 13% versus 9% for patients not taking them. The risk of developing a serious heart rhythm problem is more than five times greater.  Separately on Friday, the New England Journal of Medicine published preliminary results of a study sponsored by the National Institutes of Health of remdesivir, a Gilead Sciences drug that is the first to show any evidence of benefit against the coronavirus in a large, rigorous experiment.  As previously announced, in a study of 1,063 patients sick enough to be hospitalized, the drug shortened the time to recovery by 31% — 11 days on average versus 15 days for those just given usual care. After two weeks, about 7.1% of those on the drug had died vs. 11.9% of a comparison group given a placebo, but the difference was too small to say it could not have been due to chance. Researchers will track the patients for another two weeks to see if death rates change over time.  A statement from the NIH says the results support making the drug standard therapy for patients hospitalized with severe disease and needing supplemental oxygen — the group that seemed to benefit most. The drug is not yet approved, but its use is being allowed on an emergency basis. The study of the malaria drugs was less rigorous and observational, but its size and scope gives it a lot of impact, said Dr. David Aronoff, infectious diseases chief at Vanderbilt University Medical Center. “It really does give us some degree of confidence that we are unlikely to see major benefits from these drugs in the treatment of COVID-19 and possibly harm,” said Aronoff, who was not involved in the research. Trump repeatedly has pushed the malaria drugs, and has said he is taking hydroxychloroquine to try to prevent infection or minimize symptoms from the coronavirus. The drugs are approved for treating lupus and rheumatoid arthritis and for preventing and treating malaria, but no large rigorous tests have found them safe or effective for preventing or treating COVID-19. People sick enough to be hospitalized with the coronavirus are not the same as healthy people taking the drugs in other situations, so safety cannot be assumed from prior use, Mehra said. These drugs also have potentially serious side effects. The Food and Drug Administration has warned against taking hydroxychloroquine with antibiotics and has said the malaria drug should only be used for coronavirus in formal studies. Lacking results from stricter tests, “one needs to look at real-world evidence” to gauge safety or effectiveness, Mehra said. The results on these patients, from a long-established global research database, are “as real world as a database can get,” he said. His study looked at nearly 15,000 people with COVID-19 getting one of the malaria drugs with or without one of the suggested antibiotics and more than 81,000 patients getting none of those medications. In all, 1,868 took chloroquine alone, 3,783 took that plus an antibiotic, 3,016 took hydroxychloroquine alone and 6,221 took that plus an antibiotic. About 9% of patients taking none of the drugs died in the hospital, versus 16% on chloroquine, 18% on hydroxychloroquine, 22% on chloroquine plus an antibiotic, and 24% on hydroxychloroquine plus an antibiotic. After taking into account age, smoking, various health conditions and other factors that affect survival, researchers estimate that use of the drugs may have contributed to 34% to 45% of the excess risk of death they observed. About 8% of those taking hydroxychloroquine and an antibiotic developed a heart rhythm problem vs. 0.3% of the patients not taking any of the drugs in the study. More of these problems were seen with the other drugs, too. The results suggest these drugs are “not useful and may be harmful” in people hospitalized with COVID-19, professor Christian Funck-Brentano, of the Sorbonne University in Paris, wrote in a commentary published by the journal. He had no role in the study. Experiments underway now to test these drugs in a strict manner “need to be completed and should not be stopped prematurely,” Aronoff said.  Even though the Lancet study was large, observational look-backs like this “cannot control for every possible factor that may be responsible for observed results,” he said. ___ Marilynn Marchione can be followed on Twitter at http://twitter.com/MMarchioneAP ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives  support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.LONDON (AP) — British researchers testing an experimental vaccine against the new coronavirus are moving into advanced studies and aim to immunize more than 10,000 people to determine if the shot works. Friday’s announcement came as Chinese scientists who are developing a similar vaccine reported promising results from their own first-step testing, seeing hoped-for immune reactions and no serious side effects in 108 vaccinated people. Last month, Oxford University researchers began vaccinating more than 1,000 volunteers in a preliminary study designed to test the shot’s safety. Those results aren’t in yet but the Oxford team announced they’re expanding to 10,260 people across Britain, including older people and children.  If all goes smoothly, “it’s possible as early as the autumn or toward the end of the year, you could have results that allowed use of the vaccine on a wider scale,” predicted Andrew Pollard, head of the Oxford Vaccine Group. But Pollard acknowledged there were still many challenges ahead, including how long it will take to prove the vaccine works — particularly since transmission has dropped significantly in Britain — and any potential manufacturing complications.  The Oxford shot is one of about a dozen experimental COVID-19 vaccines in early stages of human testing or poised to start, mostly in China, the U.S. and Europe. Scientists have never created vaccines from scratch this fast and it’s far from clear that any will ultimately prove safe and effective. Moving on to such a huge late-scale test doesn’t guarantee Oxford will reach the finish line, either. Pollard couldn’t provide any data from the first tests, but said an oversight board hasn’t seen any indications of worrisome side effects.  A small study in monkeys offers a note of caution: Teams from Oxford and the U.S. National Institutes of Health found the vaccine protected against pneumonia but didn’t eliminate the coronavirus in the nose. Pollard said it was still an open question whether the shot could make a dent in how the disease spreads. Likewise, Friday’s report about a similar vaccine being developed by China’s CanSino Biologics couldn’t address how protective the shot might be. All 108 test participants were quarantined in a hotel for 14 days after vaccination, to ensure they weren’t exposed to the coronavirus during a study meant to track safety. Most volunteers reported at least one reaction typical for vaccines such as pain at the injection site, fever or fatigue. But there were no serious side effects, researchers reported in the journal Lancet. A month after vaccination, researchers spotted important immune responses including antibodies needed to block infection. But those responses were lower in the small number of volunteers ages 45 to 60, the oldest tested. “The ability to trigger these immune responses does not necessarily indicate that the vaccine will protect humans from COVID-19,” lead researcher Wei Chen from the Beijing Institute of Biotechnology said in a statement provided by Lancet.  “This result shows a promising vision for the development of COVID-19 vaccines, but we are still a long way from this vaccine being available to all,” Chen said.  Both the CanSino and Oxford vaccines are made in a similar way: They use a harmless virus to carry genes for the “spike” protein that coats the coronavirus into the body, priming the immune system to react if the real infection comes along.  CanSino uses a weakened common cold virus called an adenovirus — and Friday’s study showed people whose bodies recognized that cold virus didn’t get as much of the presumed COVID-19 benefit. To avoid that problem, the Oxford vaccine uses an adenovirus that normally infects chimpanzees. CanSino is awaiting results from 500 volunteers injected in a next-step study. In Britain’s soon-to-begin larger tests, researchers will address how Oxford’s shot will affect older adults, who are at high risk from COVID-19. Pollard noted that people over 70 often don’t get as much protection from vaccines as younger people. Earlier this week, drugmaker AstraZeneca said it had secured its first agreements to produce 400 million doses of the Oxford-developed vaccine, bolstered by a $1 billion investment from a U.S. government agency.  The AstraZeneca investment hopefully will make the vaccine available globally, including in developing countries, said Lawrence Young of the University of Warwick. But he cautioned the shot’s effectiveness still is unclear, citing the monkey research. “This raises serious questions about the ability of this vaccine to protect against infection in humans and to prevent virus transmission,” he said in a statement. “We need to be urgently exploring other vaccine candidates.”  Often, possible vaccines that look promising early fail after testing expands to thousands of people — one reason the crowded field is important. Many of the candidates work in different ways, and are made with different technologies, increasing the odds that at least one approach might succeed.  Other leading candidates — including one from the NIH and Moderna Inc., and another by Inovio Pharmaceuticals — simply inject a piece of the coronavirus genetic code that instructs the body itself to produce spike protein that primes the immune system. Meanwhile, companies and governments are beginning to scale up production now, aiming for hundreds of millions of doses of the candidates they think might win the vaccine race.  It’s a huge gamble that could waste a lot of money if their choices fail and must be thrown away. But if they get lucky and a stockpiled vaccine pans out, it could help mass vaccinations start a few months faster. ___ Neergaard reported from Alexandria, Virginia.  ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.LONDON (AP) — Drug maker AstraZeneca said Thursday it had secured its first agreements for 400 million doses of a COVID-19 vaccine it is testing, bolstered by an investment from the U.S. vaccine agency. The Anglo-Swedish company reported it had received more than $1 billion from the U.S. Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority for the development, production and delivery of the vaccine, starting this fall. The investment will accelerate the development and production of the vaccine, AstraZeneca Chief Executive Pascal Soriot said. It had already joined forces with the British government and is in discussions with the Serum Institute of India and other potential partners to increase production and distribution. “We will do everything in our power to make this vaccine quickly and widely available,” Soriot said. Pharmaceutical companies including also Moderna and Sanofi are racing to develop and produce a vaccine against the new coronavirus as experts say it will be crucial to allowing countries to ease their lockdowns and restrictions on public life. In a statement as markets opened, AstraZeneca said it has now secured manufacturing capacity for 1 billion doses and aims to secure further agreements to expand capacity further over the next months “to ensure the delivery of a globally accessible vaccine.″ The company also finalized its licence agreement with Oxford University for the vaccine, now known as AZD1222.  The vaccine was developed by Oxford University’s Jenner Institute, working with the Oxford Vaccine Group. Testing of the experimental COVID-19 vaccine began in healthy volunteers in Britain in April with over 1,000 people aged 18 to 55. Data from the trial is expected soon and if results are positive, further trials will take place in other countries.. “AstraZeneca recognizes that the vaccine may not work,″ the statement said, “but is committed to progressing the clinical program with speed and scaling up manufacturing at risk.″ Experts like Lawrence Young, a professor of molecular oncology at the University of Warwick, said the development was important in planning for the equitable supply of the vaccine throughout the world. But he urged caution and said other vaccine candidates should be explored. “It is ...jumping the gun as we don’t know that this vaccine will work,″ he said. “Early studies using the Oxford vaccine in monkeys showed that while vaccination reduced the severity of disease preventing pneumonia it failed to stop the animals from becoming infected,″ with the virus that causes COVID-19. Margarida Jorge, the campaign director of the pressure group, Lower Drug Prices Now, challenged the decision of U.S. authorities to hand over money for the vaccine development. Jorge said the U.S. Congress should insist that any drugs developed with taxpayer investments be provided at no additional cost.  “Beating COVID depends on ensuring these medicines will be affordable,″ Jorge said in a statement. “Instead, the Trump Administration continues to give drug corporations monopoly control over prices to profiteer off the pandemic.″ ___ Associated Press Writer Linda Johnson contributedAn experimental vaccine against the coronavirus showed encouraging results in very early testing, triggering hoped-for immune responses in eight healthy, middle-aged volunteers, its maker announced Monday.  Study volunteers given either a low or medium dose of the vaccine by Cambridge, Massachusetts-based Moderna Inc. had antibodies similar to those seen in people who have recovered from COVID-19. In the next phase of the study, led by the U.S. National Institutes of Health, researchers will try to determine which dose is best for a definitive experiment that they aim to start in July.  In all, 45 people have received one or two shots of the vaccine, which was being tested at three different doses. The kind of detailed antibody results needed to assess responses are only available on eight volunteers so far.  The vaccine seems safe, the company said, but much more extensive testing is needed to see if it remains so. A high dose version is being dropped after spurring some short-term side effects.  The results have not been published and are only from the first of three stages of testing that vaccines and drugs normally undergo. U.S. government officials have launched a project called “Operation Warp Speed” to develop a vaccine and hopefully have 300 million doses by January. Worldwide, about a dozen vaccine candidates are in the first stages of testing or nearing it. Health officials have said that if all goes well, studies of a potential vaccine might wrap up by very late this year or early next year. More than 4.7 million infections and 315,000 deaths from the coronavirus have been confirmed worldwide since it emerged in China late last year. There are no specific approved treatments, although several are being used on an emergency basis after showing some promise in preliminary testing.  ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content. WASHINGTON (AP) — Federal health officials are alerting doctors to a potential accuracy problem with a rapid test for COVID-19 used at thousands of hospitals, clinics and testing sites across the U.S., including the White House. The Food and Drug Administration said late Thursday it is investigating preliminary data suggesting Abbott Laboratories’ 15-minute test can miss COVID-19 cases, falsely clearing patients of infection. The test is used daily at the White House to test President Donald Trump and key members of his staff, including the coronavirus task force. The warning came one day after researchers at New York University reported results suggesting Abbott’s test can miss up to half the infections caught by a rival test made by Cepheid. The research has not been peer-reviewed or published in a medical journal and was based on about 100 patients.  The researchers found that Abbott’s test, run on the company’s portable ID NOW system, missed one-third of the infections caught by Cepheid’s test when swabs were stored in liquid used to transport laboratory samples. When the samples were kept dry the test missed 48% of the cases flagged by Cepheid’s test.  The researchers called the test’s performance “unacceptable,” due to the risk of falsely clearing patients who could spread the infection to others. They acknowledged shortcomings of the study, including the time needed to transport patient samples to the device for processing. Abbott rejected the findings, saying the researchers used the test “in ways that it was not designed to be used.” “ID NOW is intended to be used near the patient with a direct swab test method,” the company said in a statement. The company pointed to other independent study results that found the test accurately detected 90% or more infections. Last month Abbott changed the instructions for its test to explicitly warn against putting patient samples in transport chemicals. The update came after researchers at the Cleveland Clinic reported a 15% false negative rate for samples stored in the chemicals. The FDA said in a statement it is reviewing the data with Abbott and working on a letter to health care providers about potential accuracy issues. The agency said physicians may need to confirm the results of a negative Abbott test if patients have signs and symptoms of the virus. Regulators said they are requiring Abbott to conduct follow-up studies on the test’s accuracy. “This test can still be used and can correctly identify many positive cases in minutes,” said Dr. Tim Stenzel, FDA’s diagnostics director. The FDA first cleared Abbott’s test in late March under emergency powers used to quickly accelerate the review of tests and treatments during a public health crisis. The agency has authorized more than 90 tests, effectively flooding the market with testing options amid persistent problems ramping up testing levels. For weeks, Trump has promoted Abbott’s test as a “game changer.” On Monday, the company’s ID NOW system and test cartridges were displayed prominently at a Rose Garden press conference meant to highlight the nation’s progress on testing.  “These tests are highly sophisticated — very quick, very good,” Trump told reporters. The administration has shipped more than 235,000 of the tests to state public health laboratories. And Abbott has separately said it has distributed 1.8 million tests to health care facilities in all 50 states.  A White House spokesperson did not immediately respond to a request for comment Thursday night. ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.PARIS (AP) — French pharmaceutical group Sanofi promised Thursday that it would make its COVID-19 vaccine, when ready, available in all countries, hours after the company’s CEO said the United States will get first access. Sanofi CEO Paul Hudson’s comments that a vaccine would go first to the U.S. prompted an angry reaction from the French government. “Equal access for all to the vaccine is not negotiable,” French Prime Minister Edouard Philippe said in a tweet. French President Emmanuel Macron was described by his office as also being “upset” by Hudson’s comments. Macron is pushing for vaccines to be considered a “common good” for humanity that must not be subject to market pressures. Philippe said he spoke to Serge Weinberg, chairman of the Sanofi board, about the vaccine and received “all the necessary assurances” that it would be distributed in France. There will be a follow-up meeting with Sanofi officials at Macron’s office next week. Hudson told the Bloomberg news agency that the U.S. government has the right to the largest pre-order of an eventual COVID-19 vaccine “because it’s invested in taking the risk.” But Sanofi then walked back from that position in a statement Thursday that said “we have always been committed in these unprecedented circumstances to make our vaccine accessible to everyone.” At the same time, Sanofi also appealed for the European Union to make it easier to get a vaccine to market. The president of Sanofi France, Olivier Bogillot, told broadcaster France Info that the U.S. is accelerating regulatory requirements to develop and produce a vaccine. “Europe needs to do the same thing,” he said. Commission health spokesman Stefan De Keersmaecker said the EU’s executive arm is “fully engaged to (...) advance research on promising vaccines.”  “The vaccine against COVID-19 should be a global public good,” he said. “And its access should be equitable and universal.” Sanofi said its cooperation with U.S. agency BARDA allows the company “to initiate production as early as possible.” The Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority has funded the development of the vaccine. Sanofi pushed for “similar measures” from the EU. “We are having very constructive conversations with the EU institutions and the French and German government among others,” it said.  Dozens of vaccine candidates in earlier stages of development are being pursued around the world, yet a vaccine is likely to be a year or more away.  ___ AP reporters John Leicester and Samuel Petrequin contributed.  ___ Follow AP news coverage of the coronavirus pandemic at https://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak.LONDON (AP) — The European Medicines Agency predicted that there could be licensed drugs to treat the new coronavirus in the next few months and that a vaccine might even be approved in early 2021, in a “best-case scenario.” Dr. Marco Cavaleri, who heads the European regulator’s vaccines department, told a media briefing on Thursday that approving medicines to treat COVID-19 might be possible “before the summer,” citing ongoing clinical trials. Recent early results for the drug remdesivir suggested it could help patients recover from the coronavirus faster, although longer-term data is still needed to confirm any benefit.  Although it typically takes years to develop a vaccine, Cavaleri said that if some of the shots already being tested prove to be effective, they could be licensed as early as the beginning of next year.  Cavaleri cautioned, however, that many experimental vaccines never make it to the end and that there are often delays.  “But we can see the possibility that if everything goes as planned, vaccines could be approved a year from now,” he said.  More than 140 heads of states and health experts, including South African President Cyril Ramaphosa, Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan and Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz issued an appeal Thursday calling on all countries to unite behind a “people’s vaccine” against COVID-19, to ensure any effective treatments and vaccines be available globally to anyone who needs them, for free. At the moment, there are about a dozen vaccine candidates being tested in China, Britain, Germany and the U.S. The World Health Organization has estimated it could take about 12 to 18 months for an effective vaccine to be found.  While some experts have proposed dropping the requirement for large-scale advanced clinical trials altogether, Cavaleri said that wasn’t currently being considered.  “Our current thinking is all vaccines under development should undergo large phase 3 trials to establish what is the level of protection,” he said.  But he acknowledged that could change if the situation worsened.  “Things may evolve as the pandemic will evolve and we will see if we need to do something else,” Cavaleri said. Some officials have warned that a vaccine might never be found; previous attempts to develop a vaccine against related coronaviruses like SARS and MERS have all failed. But Cavleri was optimistic an immunization against COVID-19 would eventually be discovered, as there are various technologies being tried globally.  “I think it’s a bit early to say, but we have good reason to be sufficiently optimistic that at the end of the day, some vaccines will make it,” he said. ___ Follow AP pandemic coverage at http://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreakA new study finds no evidence of benefit from a malaria drug widely promoted as a treatment for coronavirus infection. Hydroxychloroquine did not lower the risk of dying or needing a breathing tube in a comparison that involved nearly 1,400 patients treated at Columbia University in New York, researchers reported Thursday in the New England Journal of Medicine. Although the study is observational rather than a rigorous experiment, it gives valuable information for a decision that hundreds of thousands of COVID-19 patients have already had to make without clear evidence about the drug’s risks and benefits, some journal editors and other doctors wrote in an editorial. “It is disappointing that several months into the pandemic, we do not yet have results” from any strict tests of the drug, they wrote. Still, the new study “suggests that this treatment is not a panacea.” President Donald Trump repeatedly urged the use of hydroxychloroquine, which is used now for lupus and rheumatoid arthritis. It has potentially serious side effects, including altering the heartbeat in a way that could lead to sudden death. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has warned against its use for coronavirus infections except in formal studies. Doctors at Columbia tracked how 565 patients who did not get the drug fared compared to 811 others who received hydroxychloroquine with or without the antibiotic azithromycin, a combo Trump also has touted.  In all, 180 patients required breathing tubes and 232 died, and the drug did not seem to affect the odds of either.  Patients given hydroxychloroquine were generally sicker than the others, but widely accepted methods were used to take that into account and still no benefit was seen for the drug.  Its use started within two days of admission for nearly all who received it. Some critics of earlier studies have said treatment may have started too late to do any good. The study was funded by the National Institutes of Health, which has launched two of its own trials comparing hydroxychloroquine to placebo -- the gold standard for establishing safety and effectiveness.  One study involves COVID-19 patients, and the other aims to see whether the drug can help prevent infections in health care workers exposed to the virus. Both got started in April.  ___ Marilynn Marchione can be followed on Twitter: @MMarchioneAP ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.WASHINGTON (AP) — Hundreds of people are rolling up their sleeves in countries across the world to be injected with experimental vaccines that might stop COVID-19, spurring hope — maybe unrealistic — that an end to the pandemic may arrive sooner than anticipated.  About 100 research groups are pursuing vaccines with nearly a dozen in early stages of human trials or poised to start. It’s a crowded field, but researchers say that only increases the odds that a few might overcome the many obstacles that remain. “We’re not really in a competition against each other. We’re in a race against a pandemic virus, and we really need as many players in that race as possible,” Dr. Andrew Pollard, who is leading the University of Oxford’s vaccine study, told The Associated Press. The hard truth: There’s no way to predict which — if any — vaccine will work safely, or even to name a front-runner.  As Dr. Anthony Fauci, the U.S. government’s top expert, put it: “You need more shots on goal for a chance at getting a safe and effective vaccine.” The first cautious tests of March, when small numbers of volunteers got injections to check for side effects, have turned into larger studies in China, the U.S. and Europe to look for hints that different vaccine candidates really protect. Next: Finding out for sure if any of the vaccines work in the real world by testing large groups of people in areas where the virus is circulating — a tricky prospect when study participants may be in places where the virus is fading or they are told to stay home — and finding a way to quickly distribute lots of doses of any successful candidates.  Policymakers are devising plans to try to overcome both obstacles in an attempt to compress the years it usually takes to develop a vaccine. Asked if a vaccine by January was possible, Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus task force coordinator, told Fox News Sunday “on paper, it’s possible. It’s whether we can execute,” she said. Fauci has cautioned that even if everything goes perfectly, 12 to 18 months to develop a vaccine would set a speed record — and January will mark a year since the National Institutes of Health began creating its own COVID-19 vaccine, now in trials with Moderna Inc.  MULTIPLE SHOTS WORK IN MULTIPLE WAYS Depending how you count, there are between eight and 11 vaccine candidates in early stages of testing in China, the U.S., Britain and Germany — a collaboration between Pfizer Inc. and BioNTech last week began a study in Germany that’s simultaneously testing four somewhat different shots. More study sites are about to open in still other countries — and between May and July another handful of different vaccines is set to begin first-in-human testing. There’s no shortage of volunteers.  “This allows me to play a small role in fighting this thing,” said Anthony Campisi, 33, of Philadelphia, who received his first test dose of Inovio Pharmaceuticals’ DNA-based vaccine at the University of Pennsylvania last month. “I can be a guinea pig.”  The initial vaccine candidates work in a variety of ways. That’s important because if one type fails, maybe another won’t.  Different types of vaccines work better in some virus families than others. But for coronaviruses, there’s no blueprint. Back in 2003 when scientists attempted vaccines against SARS, a cousin of the new virus, animal studies hinted at safety problems but then SARS disappeared and vaccine funding dried up. Vaccines against another COVID-19 cousin named MERS have only reached first-step safety testing. “In 20/20 hindsight, we should have worked harder on coronavirus vaccines back then,” said Dr. Sten Vermund, dean of the Yale School of Public Health. Now, “we’re obligated to try a variety of strategies if we want fast results.” PROS AND CONS China’s Sinovac and SinoPharm are testing “inactivated” vaccines, made by growing the new coronavirus and killing it. The companies have revealed little information about how the shots differ. But the technology is tried-and-true — polio shots and some types of flu vaccine are inactivated virus — although it’s hard to scale up to rapidly produce millions of doses. Most other vaccines in the pipeline aim to train the immune system to recognize a piece of the new coronavirus — mostly, the spiky protein that studs its outer surface.  One way: Use a harmless virus to carry the spike protein into the body. It’s easier to produce but determining which virus is the best “carrier” is a key question. China’s CanSino Biologics brewed its vaccine using a common cold-causing adenovirus, engineered so it won’t spread in the body. And in case people’s immune systems fight off the cold virus before the vaccine can do its job, Pollard’s Oxford team instead chose an adenovirus that normally infects chimpanzees. Another way: Inject a piece of the coronavirus genetic code that instructs the body itself to produce spike protein that in turn primes the immune system to attack. It’s a new and unproven technology but one that promises even faster production. Vaccines made by NIH and Moderna, Inovio Pharmaceuticals, and that Pfizer-BioNtech collaboration use genetic code approaches. Still more methods are next in line: Vaccine made of spike protein nanoparticles, and even a nasal spray alternative to shots. PROVING THEY WORK Most vaccine studies so far are tracking safety and whether volunteers’ blood shows any immune reactions. Some have jumped to larger numbers quickly, but there’s still concern about being able to prove real-world protection.  If study participants are holed up at home or live in areas where the virus has quit spreading rapidly, then too few may get sick for scientists to tell if the vaccine or social distancing was what protected them. The Oxford study, for example, will track about 1,000 people, half given the real vaccine. But the team plans a later-stage study with another 5,000 volunteers for a final answer and knows it might have to move to other countries. “When you’re chasing a pandemic, the place that looks like the right one to go to today will be the wrong place two weeks from now. And that makes it really difficult,” Pollard said. In the U.S., some lawmakers have urged a different and controversial experiment: Recruit young, healthy volunteers who agree to be deliberately infected with the new coronavirus to prove if a vaccine protects them. But some healthy adults do die from COVID-19 — and until doctors better understand why, that so-called “challenge study” makes for a risky proposition with serious ethical questions, Yale’s Vermund noted.  The World Health Organization last week called for countries to offer to be test sites for an international project that will speed the timeline by admitting on a rolling basis promising vaccine candidates for further study in locations where COVID-19 remains widespread at the time.  In the U.S., the Trump administration is planning its own project dubbed Operation Warp Speed that will overlap studies of “different candidates that are made differently and act differently,” Birx said.  If early evidence was strong enough and the virus is still widespread, the Food and Drug Administration might even consider emergency use of a vaccine before final test results were in, Dr. Peter Marks, who directs the FDA office that oversees vaccines, recently told reporters. SUPPLYING THE WORLD Whenever the first useful vaccine is identified, there won’t be enough for everyone. So a growing number of vaccine makers say they’re already starting to brew tons of doses — wasting millions of dollars if they bet on the wrong candidate but shaving a few months off mass vaccinations if their choice pans out. “We need to start building new manufacturing sites now,” said Wellcome Trust vaccine chief Charlie Weller. “And we need to accept that some of these sites will be created for vaccines that will ultimately fail.” It’s not just a gamble for shareholders. The U.S. government already has deals with Moderna and Johnson & Johnson that together total nearly $1 billion and include scaling up production.  “The critical thing at the beginning is just to make as much stuff as we can,” said Dr. Richard Hatchett, CEO of the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, which is funding several COVID-19 vaccine attempts around the world. Even if one works, expect rationing early on as policymakers determine who most needs the first doses — possibly health workers or the elderly — until there’s enough for the world, rich and poor countries alike. “I am concerned about what I call vaccine nationalism. That’s the tension between obligations elected leaders will feel to protect the lives of their citizens” versus the imperative for equitable global sharing, Hatchett said. And with billions who’ll need a dose or maybe several, just one winner in this race won’t cut it. “It’s not likely that one manufacturer or one candidate vaccine is going to be able to deal with the global need and supply that need,” Pollard said. ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content. ___ For more coverage of the pandemic, visit https://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak.For the first time, a major study suggests that an experimental drug works against the new coronavirus, and U.S. government officials said Wednesday that they would work to make it available to appropriate patients as quickly as possible. In a study of 1,063 patients sick enough to be hospitalized, Gilead Sciences’s remdesivir shortened the time to recovery by 31% — 11 days on average versus 15 days for those just given usual care, officials said. The drug also might be reducing deaths, although that’s not certain from the partial results revealed so far. “What it has proven is that a drug can block this virus,” the National Institutes of Health’s Dr. Anthony Fauci said.  “This will be the standard of care,” and any other potential treatments will now have to be tested against or in combination with remdesivir, he said.  No drugs are approved now for treating the coronavirus, which has killed about 226,000 people worldwide since it emerged late last year in China. An effective treatment for COVID-19 could have a profound effect on the pandemic’s impact, especially because a vaccine is likely to be a year or more away.  Fauci revealed the results while speaking from the White House. Remdesivir was being evaluated in at least seven major studies, but this one, led by the NIH, was the strictest test. Independent monitors notified study leaders just days ago that the drug was working, so it was no longer ethical to continue with a placebo group. Dr. Elizabeth Hohmann, who enrolled 49 patients in the experiment at Massachusetts General Hospital, said study leaders were told Tuesday night that the results are based on “the first cut of 460 patients.” “There’s over 1,000 in the study so there’s a lot more information to come” and full results need to be seen, she said. “I’m cautiously optimistic.” Dr. Babafemi Taiwo, chief of infectious diseases at Northwestern Medicine, which also participated in the study, called the results “really exciting.” “For the first time we have a large, well-conducted trial” showing a treatment helps, he said. “This is not a miracle drug ... but it’s definitely better than anything we have.” Fauci said the partial results showed that the drug had “a clear-cut significant positive effect,” shortening the time to hospital discharge by four days. By comparison, antiviral drugs for the flu shorten illness by about one day on average and only when started within a day or two of symptoms first appearing.  In the remdesivir study, about 8% of those on the drug died versus 11.6% of the comparison group, but the difference is not large enough for scientists to say the drug was the reason. No information was given on side effects. Fauci said full results would be published in a medical journal soon. He said final numbers might change a bit but that the study’s overall conclusion would not. Remdesivir is among dozens of treatments being tried against the coronavirus but was the farthest along in testing. It’s given through an IV and blocks an enzyme the virus uses to copy its genetic material. In animal tests against SARS and MERS, diseases caused by similar coronaviruses, the drug helped prevent infection and reduced the severity of symptoms when given early enough in the course of illness.  “We are excited and optimistic” about the new results, said Vanderbilt University’s Dr. Mark Denison. His lab first tested remdesivir against other coronaviruses in 2013 and has done much research on it since, but was not involved in the NIH study. “It’s active against every coronavirus that we’ve ever tested,” Denison said. “It was very hard for the virus to develop resistance to remdesivir. That means the drug would likely be effective over longer term use.” The NIH study started in February; the first participant was a patient in Nebraska who had been evacuated from the Diamond Princess cruise ship docked in Japan. It quickly enrolled its original goal of 440 patients and then was expanded to give more answers on questions such as which subgroups may or may not benefit, and other factors that may affect success, such as how early the drug was given.  The study only tested the drug in patients sick enough to be hospitalized — typically with pneumonia and often needing oxygen — so its safety and effectiveness for people less ill isn’t known. The study will continue to enroll new patients. It was set up as an umbrella trial to test many treatments, although they now will have to be tested against remdesivir or with it, Fauci said. Separately on Wednesday, California-based Gilead announced partial results from its own ongoing study of the drug in severely ill, hospitalized COVID-19 patients. The company said patients treated for five days “achieved similar improvement” in health as others treated for 10 days. However, that result is hard to interpret because there is no comparison group of people getting usual care, so it’s impossible to know how much patients would have improved on their own.  Yet another study tested remdesivir in severely ill patients in China, which was stopped after only 237 of a planned 453 patients were enrolled. Partial results published Wednesday in the British medical journal Lancet suggest the drug did not speed recovery in that study, but it was too small to be definitive, Fauci and study leaders said. Gilead also is testing remdesivir in a separate study of moderately ill coronavirus patients. No results have yet been announced from that study, which does have a comparison group.  Besides these studies, Gilead also has given remdesivir to more than 1,700 patients on a case-by-case emergency basis. The drug is not yet approved anywhere in the world for any use. A statement from the Food and Drug Administration says that the agency has been talking with Gilead “regarding making remdesivir available to patients as quickly as possible, as appropriate.”  Gilead said it was ramping up production and aims to have more than 140,000 treatment courses by the end of May, more than 500,000 by October and more than 1 million by December.  __ AP reporter Matthew Perrone in Washington contributed to this report. __ Marilynn Marchione can be followed on Twitter at  http://twitter.com/MMarchioneAP ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.WASHINGTON (AP) — The woman was dying. New York’s Mount Sinai Hospital was about to call her husband and break the news that there was nothing left to try. Then Dr. Hooman Poor took a gamble.  With high-stress, high-stakes decisions, doctors around the world are frantically trying to figure out how COVID-19 is killing their patients so they can attempt new ways to fight back. One growing theory: In the sickest of the sick, little blood clots clog the lungs. Poor couldn’t prove it. The tests required would further endanger his staff, who were already at risk of getting the virus. But the lung specialist saw clues that were “screaming blood clots.” So Poor pulled out a drug best known for treating strokes, and held his breath. “I said, ‘What do we actually have to lose?’” Poor told The Associated Press. “That’s when I decided to give not just a blood thinner but a blood clot buster.” Exactly what’s going on with blood clots in at least some COVID-19 patients is a mystery.  Chinese doctors were first to sound the alarm. In March, Chinese heart specialists advised the American College of Cardiology to watch for clots and said certain blood tests showing a rise in clot risk might signal which patients were in greatest danger. Other reports suggested the clots can show up all over the body. But were they a cause of deterioration or an effect? Already, many hospitals are attempting preventive doses of blood thinners to keep clots from forming. There’s huge debate over what kind to try, what dose is safe — the drugs can cause dangerous bleeding — and how soon to start. In New York, Poor was going a step further with a drug named tPA that doesn’t prevent clots — it breaks them up.  It’s an example of how, with no vaccine or approved treatment for the coronavirus, many overwhelmed doctors are following trails of clues to figure out what to try next. Poor’s 55-year-old patient wasn’t getting enough oxygen even after doctors rolled her onto her stomach for an extreme ventilation technique called “prone positioning.” She was in shock. Other organs were failing fast. Twenty minutes after the injection of tPA, her oxygen levels rose. Poor was elated. But not for long. “She gets better, but then she starts to get worse,” he said. “Most likely we’re breaking up the clot, but she is immediately forming the clot again.” So he next tried something novel, putting the woman on a low-dose drip of tPA for about 24 hours together with a blood thinner, in hopes of chipping away at existing clots while blocking new ones. To Poor’s dismay, the experimental treatment bought the woman only a few more days of life. A sudden, different complication killed her on Friday. But last weekend, Poor’s team tested the new clot-fighting approach in four additional severely ill patients. One didn’t survive, dying of cardiac arrest from a massive blood clot in his heart. The rest saw improvement in oxygen levels and shock. As of Friday, three remained on ventilators but were doing better, especially one who had been treated soon after her lungs failed. In a new report, Poor called for urgent study of whether abnormal clotting drives at least some people’s deterioration, even as his own hospital updated treatment advice for its sickest patients. Others are onto the same lead. Specialists at the University of Colorado and Harvard recently published a similar tPA research call, and cited three additional cases where it was tried as hospitals in Colorado and Massachusetts prepare for a study. “We’re taking care of extremely ill patients that are dying in front of us, and we can’t get any diagnostic testing,” yet still have to make treatment decisions, said Dr. Steven Pugliese, a lung specialist at the University of Pennsylvania.  Pugliese called Poor’s tPA report “very intriguing” and concluded: “What these doctors did in these very ill patients who were dying was a judgment call, and it was the right thing to do.” But with the bleeding risk, it has to be studied in carefully chosen patients, Pugliese said, especially with no good way to tell in advance who really has these tiny clots. Poor first noticed oddities as his ICU filled with patients who just weren’t responding to care the way doctors expected. They were on breathing machines after developing ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome. It’s an inflammatory form of lung failure that, when caused by other infections, stiffens lungs. At least early on, Poor didn’t see that. “It was like ‘Groundhog Day’ with each patient,” he said, referring to the movie where the same events repeat day after day. They had severe abnormalities in oxygen and carbon dioxide levels but “shockingly, their lungs were not stiff.” He recalled Italian doctors who spotted the same thing and wrote in an American Thoracic Society journal that COVID-19 was causing atypical ARDS. Back in Poor’s hospital, when ventilated patients looked improved enough to let them wake up a bit, alarms would sound as their blood oxygen levels immediately plummeted. “The residents would yell at me, ‘So and so is desaturating!’” Poor recalled. “Classically in ARDS, we think that’s because the lung is collapsing.” But it wasn’t. Poor often treats an emergency called pulmonary embolism, a large clot in the lungs that can quickly kill. The COVID-19 patients didn’t look quite like that. Nor were their hearts struggling to pump blood into the lungs. Then as he was doing laundry at 2 a.m., Poor remembered a rare disease in which some lung blood vessels abnormally dilate even as others are clogged. If that explains the COVID-19 contradictions, he thought, a clot-buster might help. “I did a case series of five. This does not prove anything,” he cautioned. “Perhaps it brings light to possibilities where further research can delve into what exactly is going on.” ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.NEW YORK (AP) — As health officials around the world push to get more ventilators to treat coronavirus patients, some doctors are moving away from using the breathing machines when they can. The reason: Some hospitals have reported unusually high death rates for coronavirus patients on ventilators, and some doctors worry that the machines could be harming certain patients. The evolving treatments highlight the fact that doctors are still learning the best way to manage a virus that emerged only months ago. They are relying on anecdotal, real-time data amid a crush of patients and shortages of basic supplies. Mechanical ventilators push oxygen into patients whose lungs are failing. Using the machines involves sedating a patient and sticking a tube into the throat. Deaths in such sick patients are common, no matter the reason they need the breathing help.  Generally speaking, 40% to 50% of patients with severe respiratory distress die while on ventilators, experts say. But 80% or more of coronavirus patients placed on the machines in New York City have died, state and city officials say. Higher-than-normal death rates also have been reported elsewhere in the U.S., said Dr. Albert Rizzo, the American Lung Association’s chief medical officer. Similar reports have emerged from China and the United Kingdom. One U.K. report put the figure at 66%. A very small study in Wuhan, the Chinese city where the disease first emerged, said 86% died. The reason is not clear. It may have to do with what kind of shape the patients were in before they were infected. Or it could be related to how sick they had become by the time they were put on the machines, some experts said.  But some health professionals have wondered whether ventilators might actually make matters worse in certain patients, perhaps by igniting or worsening a harmful immune system reaction. That’s speculation. But experts do say ventilators can be damaging to a patient over time, as high-pressure oxygen is forced into the tiny air sacs in a patient’s lungs. “We know that mechanical ventilation is not benign,” said Dr. Eddy Fan, an expert on respiratory treatment at Toronto General Hospital. “One of the most important findings in the last few decades is that medical ventilation can worsen lung injury — so we have to be careful how we use it.” The dangers can be eased by limiting the amount of pressure and the size of breaths delivered by the machine, Fan said. But some doctors say they’re trying to keep patients off ventilators as long as possible, and turning to other techniques instead. Only a few weeks ago in New York City, coronavirus patients who came in quite sick were routinely placed on ventilators to keep them breathing, said Dr. Joseph Habboushe, an emergency medicine doctor who works in Manhattan hospitals. But increasingly, physicians are trying other measures first. One is having patients lie in different positions — including on their stomachs — to allow different parts of the lung to aerate better. Another is giving patients more oxygen through nose tubes or other devices. Some doctors are experimenting with adding nitric oxide to the mix, to help improve blood flow and oxygen to the least damaged parts of the lungs. “If we’re able to make them better without intubating them, they are more likely to have a better outcome — we think,” Habboushe said. He said those decisions are separate from worries that there are not enough ventilators available. But that is a concern as well, Habboushe added. There are widespread reports that coronavirus patients tend to be on ventilators much longer than other kinds of patients, said Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious diseases expert at Vanderbilt University. Experts say that patients with bacterial pneumonia, for example, may be on a ventilator for no more than a day or two. But it’s been common for coronavirus patients to have been on a ventilator “seven days, 10 days, 15 days, and they’re passing away,” said New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, when asked about ventilator death rates during a news briefing on Wednesday. That’s one reason for worries that ventilators could grow in short supply. Experts worry that as cases mount, doctors will be forced to make terrible decisions about who lives and who dies because they won’t have enough machines for every patient who needs one. New York State Health Commissioner Dr. Howard Zucker said Wednesday that officials are looking into other possible therapies that can be given earlier, but added “that’s all experimental.” The new virus is a member of the coronavirus family that can cause colds as well as more serious illnesses. Health officials say it spreads mainly from droplets when an infected person coughs or sneezes. There is no proven drug treatment or vaccine against it.  Experts think most people who are infected suffer nothing worse than unpleasant but mild illnesses that may include fever and coughing.  But roughly 20% — many of them older adults or people weakened by chronic conditions — can grow much sicker. They can have trouble breathing and suffer chest pain. Their lungs can become inflamed, causing a dangerous condition called acute respiratory distress syndrome. An estimated 3% to 4% may need ventilators. “The ventilator is not therapeutic. It’s a supportive measure while we wait for the patient’s body to recover,” said Dr. Roger Alvarez, a lung specialist with the University of Miami Health System in Florida, who is a leader in the effort to use nitric oxide to keep patients off ventilators for as long as possible. Zachary Shemtob said he was “absolutely terrified” when he was told his 44-year-old husband, David, needed to be put on a ventilator at NYU Langone last month after becoming infected with the virus. “Needing to be ventilated might mean never getting off the ventilator,” he said. Shemtob said the hospital did not give any percentages on survival, but he got the impression it was essentially a coin flip. He looked up the rates only after his husband was breathing on his own six days later.  “A coin flip was generous it seems,” he said. But Shemtob noted cases vary. His husband is relatively young.  “David is living proof that they can really save lives, and how incredibly important they are,” Shemtob said. ___ Associated Press reporters Candice Choi and Jennifer Peltz in New York contributed to this report. ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.The new coronavirus made Dr. Jag Singh a patient at his own hospital. His alarm grew as he saw an X-ray of his pneumonia-choked lungs and colleagues asked his wishes about life support while wheeling him into Massachusetts General’s intensive care unit. When they offered him a chance to help test remdesivir, an experimental drug that’s shown promise against some other coronaviruses, “it did not even cross my mind once to say ‘no,’” said Singh, a heart specialist.  Coronavirus patients around the world have been rushing to join remdesivir studies that opened in hospitals in the last few weeks. Interest has been so great that the U.S. National Institutes of Health is expanding its study, which has nearly reached its initial goal of 440 patients. The drug’s maker, California-based Gilead Sciences, is quickly ramping up its own studies, too. “I would enroll my family in a heartbeat” if the need arose, said Dr. Libby Hohmann, who placed Singh and nearly 30 others in the NIH one at Mass General. To have no approved medicines for COVID-19 now is “kind of terrifying,” she said.  For most people, the new coronavirus causes mild or moderate symptoms, which can include fever and cough but sometimes pneumonia requiring hospitalization. The risk of death is greater for older adults and people with other health problems.  There are no medicines approved to fight the new coronavirus, which has already killed 74,000 people around the world. The crisis has sparked a race to find a vaccine to prevent the disease it causes, COVID-19, along with medicines and therapies to make the disease less deadly. Remdesivir is given through an IV. It’s designed to interfere with an enzyme that reproduces viral genetic material.  In animal tests against SARS and MERS, diseases caused by similar coronaviruses, the drug helped prevent infection and reduced the severity of symptoms when given early enough in the course of illness. It’s farther along in testing than many other potential therapies and the current studies could lead to regulatory approval. Gilead has given remdesivir to more than 1,700 patients on a case-by-case emergency basis, but more people ultimately will be helped if the company does the needed studies to prove safety and effectiveness, chief executive Dan O’Day wrote in a recent letter to the public.  “Many people have reached out to Gilead to advocate for access to remdesivir on behalf of friends and loved ones. I can only imagine how it must feel to be in that situation,” he wrote. “We are taking the ethical, responsible approach.” In another letter on Saturday, O’Day said the company has 1.5 million doses, which could mean more than 140,000 treatment courses, depending on how long treatment needs to last. The company is providing the drug for free for now and has set a goal of making 500,000 treatment courses by October and more than a million by the end of the year.  Gilead supplied remdesivir for two studies in China expected to give results by the end of the month. It also launched two studies for hospitalized patients in the U.S., Asia, Europe and elsewhere. One in severely ill patients tests five versus 10 days of treatment. Another in moderately sick patients compares those two options to standard care alone.  “There’s so much anxiety about the disease that the patients are quite interested” and no one offered the chance has refused, said Dr. Arun Sanyal, the study leader at Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond. The first patient he enrolled was a previously healthy middle-aged man who had an out-of-state visitor a few days before his symptoms began. What started as mild illness escalated to profound shortness of breath requiring supplemental oxygen. At University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center, Dr. Grace McComsey has enrolled roughly half a dozen patients. “We’re seeing more and more younger people, like 30, really sick,” she said. The NIH study is the most rigorous test. It compares remdesivir to placebo infusions, and neither patients nor doctors know who is getting what until the end of the study. Besides the U.S., it’s open in Japan, Korea and Singapore. In Chicago, an 89-year-old man was Northwestern Memorial Hospital’s first participant and “the family was very excited” to have him included, said infectious diseases chief Dr. Babafemi Taiwo. At the University of California, Irvine, Dr. Alpesh Amin has enrolled several patients. All are getting standard care even if they wind up getting a placebo rather than remdesivir, Amin said. The Boston cardiologist, Singh, said he was willing to take that chance to advance science even if he personally winds up not benefiting. He’s now recovering at home after spending a week in the hospital. “The word ‘placebo’ freaks some people out,” but rigorous testing is needed to avoid giving false hope or using something unsafe. Still, it’s tough to face patients with no proven therapy now, Hohmann said. “The worst thing is seeing some really young people who are really, really sick,” such as a 49-year-old man with three young children on life support, she said. “That’s pretty awful.” ___ Marilynn Marchione can be followed on Twitter: @MMarchioneAP ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.WASHINGTON (AP) — Hospitals are gearing up to test if a century-old treatment used to fight off flu and measles outbreaks in the days before vaccines, and tried more recently against SARS and Ebola, just might work for COVID-19, too: using blood donated from patients who’ve recovered. Doctors in China attempted the first COVID-19 treatments using what the history books call “convalescent serum” -- today, known as donated plasma -- from survivors of the new virus.  Now a network of U.S. hospitals is waiting on permission from the Food and Drug Administration to begin large studies of the infusions both as a possible treatment for the sick and as vaccine-like temporary protection for people at high risk of infection. There’s no guarantee it will work. “We won’t know until we do it, but the historical evidence is encouraging,” Dr. Arturo Casadevall of Johns Hopkins University’s school of public health told The Associated Press. Casadevall drew on that history in filing the FDA application. The FDA is “working expeditiously to facilitate the development and availability of convalescent plasma” a spokesman said.  Here are some questions and answers about this latest quest for a treatment. WHAT EXACTLY IS THIS POSSIBLE THERAPY? It may sound like “back to the Stone Age,” but there’s good scientific reason to try using survivors’ blood, said Dr. Jeffrey Henderson of Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, who coauthored the FDA application with Casadevall and another colleague at the Mayo Clinic. When a person gets infected by a particular germ, the body starts making specially designed proteins called antibodies to fight the infection. After the person recovers, those antibodies float in survivors’ blood -- specifically plasma, the liquid part of blood — for months, even years. One of the planned studies would test if giving infusions of survivors’ antibody-rich plasma to newly ill COVID-19 patients would boost their own body’s attempts to fight off the virus. To see if it works, researchers would measure if the treatment gave patients a better chance of living or reduced the need for breathing machines. One caution: While regular plasma transfusions are a mainstay of medicine, very rarely they can cause a lung-damaging side effect. COULD IT ALSO ACT LIKE A VACCINE? Sort of, but unlike a vaccine, any protection would only be temporary.  A vaccine trains people’s immune systems to make their own antibodies against a target germ. The plasma infusion approach would give people a temporary shot of someone else’s antibodies that are short-lived and require repeated doses. Still, if FDA agrees, a second study would give antibody-rich plasma infusions to certain people at high risk from repeated exposures to COVID-19, such as hospital workers or first responders, said Dr. Liise-anne Pirofski of New York’s Montefiore Health System and Albert Einstein College of Medicine. That also might include nursing homes when a resident becomes ill, in hopes of giving the other people in the home some protection, she said. “We need both things desperately,” Pirofski said. “We need to be able to break the cycle of transmission and we also need to be able to help people who are ill.” WHAT’S THE HISTORY? These plasma infusions were used most famously during the 1918 flu pandemic, and against numerous other infections, such as measles and bacterial pneumonia, before vaccines and modern medicines came along. Long-ago research is sketchy. But in the Journal of Clinical Investigation earlier this month, Casadevall and Pirofski cited evidence that 1918 flu patients given the infusions were less likely to die. And a 1935 medical report detailed how doctors stopped a measles outbreak from sweeping through a boarding school using “serum” from prior patients. The old-fashioned approach still is dusted off every so often to tackle surprise outbreaks such as SARS in 2002, and in 2014 when Ebola survivors’ plasma was used to treat other patients during the West Africa epidemic. Even during those recent outbreaks, strict studies of the technique were not done, but Casadevall said there were clues that the plasma helped. Casadevall thinks that when it didn’t work, it may have been used too late. “Somebody at the end of their lives, it’s very hard to affect” any disease at that point, he cautioned. A more modern approach is to brew this type of antibody in the lab, something Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and other companies are working on. Using blood from COVID-19 survivors is a decidedly more labor-intensive approach — but researchers could start banking the plasma as soon as regulators give the OK. HOW WOULD DOCTORS GET THE PLASMA? Blood banks take plasma donations much like they take donations of whole blood; regular plasma is used in hospitals and emergency rooms every day. If someone’s donating only plasma, their blood is drawn through a tube, the plasma is separated and the rest infused back into the donor’s body. Then that plasma is tested and purified to be sure it doesn’t harbor any blood-borne viruses and is safe to use. For COVID-19 research, the difference would be who does the donating -- people who have recovered from the coronavirus. Scientists would measure how many antibodies are in a unit of donated plasma — tests just now being developed that aren’t available to the general public — as they figure out what’s a good dose, and how often a survivor could donate. Researchers aren’t worried about finding volunteer donors but caution it will take some time to build up a stock. “I get multiple emails a day from people saying, ‘Can I help, can I give my plasma?’” Pirofski said. —— The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.Excitement about treating the new coronavirus with malaria drugs is raising hopes, including with President Donald Trump. But the evidence that they may help is thin, and a run on the drugs is complicating access for people who need them for rheumatoid arthritis or lupus. Chloroquine and a similar drug, hydroxychloroquine, showed encouraging signs in small, early tests against the coronavirus. But the drugs have major side effects, one reason scientists don’t want to give them without evidence of their value, even in this emergency. Yet those preliminary studies sparked intense interest after Trump tweeted that hydroxychloroquine plus an antibiotic could be “one of the biggest game changers in the history of medicine” and should “be put in use immediately.” He cited a French study that gave the combo to six patients.  Some French doctors and politicians also are pushing to expand hydroxychloroquine’s use. The mayor of the French city of Nice, Christian Estrosi, said on television Monday that he was on his sixth day of treatment and has “the sense I’ve been cured.” Scientists, however, warn about raising false hopes and say major studies are needed to prove the drugs are safe and effective against coronavirus, and to show that people would not have recovered just as well on their own. One such study starts Tuesday in New York. “Right now, there is no drug that looks like it’s proven so overwhelming in early-stage clinical trials that we can say it’s highly promising,” former Food and Drug Administration commissioner Dr. Scott Gottlieb said Sunday on CBS’ “Face the Nation.” Some people are even trying to take matters into their own hands, with disastrous consequences. A Phoenix-area man died and his wife is in critical condition after taking chloroquine phosphate, an additive used to clean fish tanks. The cleaning agent has the same active ingredient as the medicine chloroquine but is formulated differently. Dr. Daniel Brooks of Banner Health Care’s poison center in Phoenix urged people not to self-medicate. “The last thing that we want right now is to inundate our emergency departments with patients who believe they found a vague and risky solution,” he said. THE DRUGS AND SIDE EFFECTS Chloroquine has been used to treat malaria since the 1930s. Hydroxychloroquine came along a decade later and has fewer side effects. The latter is sold in generic form and under the brand name Plaquenil for use against several diseases.  The drugs can cause heart rhythm problems, severely low blood pressure and muscle or nerve damage. Plaquenil’s label warns of possible damage to the retina, especially when used at higher doses, for longer times and with certain other medicines such as the breast cancer drug tamoxifen.  “Chloroquine is an extremely toxic drug with a terrible side effect profile. Hydroxychloroquine is far safer, but its side effects are still significant,” Meghan May, a microbiologist at the University of New England College of Osteopathic Medicine in Biddeford, Maine, wrote in an email. “If it is not abundantly clear that it is beneficial, giving this drug to a critically ill patient feels risky.”  THE EVIDENCE That’s where the evidence comes in — and, so far, there is not much. Hydroxychloroquine curbed coronavirus’ ability to enter cells in lab tests, researchers reported  last week in the journal Nature Medicine. That doesn’t mean it would do the same in people or that they could tolerate the doses tested in the lab. A  report from China claimed chloroquine helped more than 100 patients at 10 hospitals, but they had various degrees of illness and were treated with various doses for different lengths of time. They also might have recovered without the drug — there was no comparison group. The French study has attracted the most attention. Doctors gave hydroxychloroquine to 26 people with confirmed coronavirus infections, including some with no symptoms. Six also were given the antibiotic azithromycin.  Some of the 26 were not counted in the final results because they didn’t complete the study — what’s known as “lost to followup” — but that included three who worsened and were sent to intensive care, one who died a day after later testing negative for the virus, and one who stopped treatment because of nausea.  After six days, no patients given hydroxychloroquine plus azithromycin had virus detected in swabs from the back of the nose, versus 57% of those given the malaria drug alone and 12.5% of some other patients who received neither drug. That’s encouraging, but many things could have affected the outcome, such as how sick people were, when they were treated, what other treatments they received, as well as their age, gender and underlying health conditions.  “It is a very weak study ... leaving us in suspension of whether the combination strategy has any merit,” said Dr. Eric Topol, a cardiologist and head of the Scripps Research Translational Institute in San Diego. Its biggest limitation: A drop in detected virus doesn’t mean the drugs will improve survival or shorten illness.  “It could very well be that the drug is reducing viral shedding but having no impact on the clinical course of those patients,” Gottlieb said.  A STRAINED SUPPLY The supply already is pinched for patients who need the drugs for other reasons. A University of Utah service that tracks shortages says four of the seven companies that make generic hydroxychloroquine have reported them. Three other generic drugmakers previously stopped making the tablets. Five manufacturers have stopped making chloroquine, but three others still do. Erin Fox, senior director of the Utah service, wrote in an email that the university’s health system has detected that some doctors are writing prescriptions for hydroxychloroquine “for themselves and family friends to have on hand or hoard just in case.”  The university refuses to fill those prescriptions, and at least one state has banned hoarding: The Ohio Board of Pharmacy says pharmacists can’t dispense hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine unless for lupus or rheumatoid arthritis or a confirmed COVID-19 case. Patients already are feeling pinched. Toni Grimes, 47, has been taking hydroxychloroquine for 13 years for lupus and said Monday that, for the first time, her standard 90-day refill order is being delayed until March 30. Grimes, who runs a Phoenix-area Lupus Foundation support group, said another member also hasn’t received her refill. “This is our mainstay” treatment, she said.  STUDIES HAVE STARTED Among the studies underway is one led by  the University of Minnesota throughout the U.S. to see if hydroxychloroquine can prevent people exposed to the virus from getting sick or reduce the severity of illness if they do. It’s aimed at health care workers and people with someone in their home who has tested positive. People can email covid19@umn.edu if they think they’re eligible. ___ Associated Press writers Lindsey Tanner in Chicago, Angela Charlton in Paris, Linda A. Johnson in Trenton, New Jersey, and Astrid Galvan in Phoenix contributed to this report. ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.Some cancer surgeries are being delayed, many stent procedures for clogged arteries have been pushed back and infertility specialists were asked to postpone helping patients get pregnant. Doctors in virtually every field are scrambling to alter care as the new coronavirus spreads.  Medical groups issued advice this week on how hospitals and doctors should adapt as beds and supplies are pinched and worries rise about exposing patients to possible infection. That includes canceling elective surgeries, including many for slow-growing or early-stage cancers, which many people would consider not elective at all.  Luciano Orsini’s operation, set for April 1 at Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia, was pushed to April 29. He lost one kidney to cancer last year and was eager for this surgery to remove tumors on the sole kidney he has left. “I don’t want it to get any larger,” Orsini said of his cancer, which his doctor says it’s growing so slowly that he should be safe waiting. He understands but said: “The anxiety of just have this inside of you and not knowing and wanting to get it out” is hard. Choices like this are happening across the United States, said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld of the American Cancer Society. “We are going to face ethical dilemmas, not just in cancer care but in medical care in general,” he said. “We recognize that any delay is not good but we may not have a choice.” The cancer society on Tuesday urged people to forgo mammograms, colonoscopies and other routine cancer screenings until the outbreak eases.  On Wednesday, Vice President Mike Pence called on hospitals to delay all elective procedures across the country to help ensure medical capacity is focused on stemming the spread of the coronavirus. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services administrator Seema Verma said her agency will soon issue guidance on elective procedures, including dental care.  Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus response coordinator, also addressed the issue, telling hospitals and dentists: “Things that don’t need to be done over the next two weeks, don’t get it done.” Medical care is being rescheduled for unplanned reasons, too: On Tuesday, Joslin Diabetes Center in Boston canceled all patient appointments after a staff member tested positive for the virus. In Seattle, the U.S. city with the most virus cases, surgeon Dr. David Byrd of the University of Washington said many women with early-stage breast cancer that’s fueled by estrogen — the most common form of the disease — could try hormone-blocking drugs and delay surgery for a month or two. One of his patients this week chose that because she was worried about the risks of virus infection if she went to a hospital for surgery now. “This tumor probably took months to years to form. The likelihood of it spreading in the next few weeks is highly unlikely,” Byrd said. Many prostate and thyroid cancer operations also can wait, cancer doctors say. Other cases pose tougher decisions, Byrd and other doctors wrote in a paper published Wednesday by the Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network.  Cancer doctors “will face the heavy reality of rationing care,” they wrote. “As the pandemic progresses, there will come a point when channeling a large amount of resources for an individual patient will be in direct conflict with the greater social good.”  At Fox Chase, it was a tough call to advise Orsini to delay his kidney cancer operation, said surgery chief Dr. Robert Uzzo. Hundreds of surgeries each week at his hospital are under scrutiny to see which can be put off. “We want to balance the harm of delaying immediate cancer care against the harm of potential COVID infection or possible transmission to other people,” Uzzo said. “What people hear about a lot are about ventilators, respirators, personal protective equipment” being in short supply, but there also are shortages of blood and other things needed for surgery, he added. IV chemotherapy treatments also are being scrutinized to see if a delay seems safe. Some patients can be switched to an oral medicine, and sometimes home health care can administer IV drugs, but only certain cancer drugs are approved for that. “It’s not necessarily a simple solution,” said Dr. Richard Schilsky, chief medical officer of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, which has posted patient advice. Family planning also has been disrupted. The American Society for Reproductive Medicine on Tuesday called for suspension of most infertility treatments, including in vitro or lab dish fertilization, retrieving eggs or sperm, and transferring embryos to a womb. Doctors should continue to treat patients in the midst of these procedures, but start no new ones until the virus outbreak eases, the group said. Wei Escala has been preparing to freeze eggs for a possible future pregnancy but decided to postpone next steps. “Egg freezing can wait for a few weeks or a few months, it’s no problem,” said Escala, who runs a software company in Austin, Texas. Delaying it to avoid spreading the virus is the responsible thing to do “for myself and for everybody.”  Heart groups have advised postponing elective stent procedures for people with stable chest pain caused by clogged arteries. That’s virtually all outpatient cases at New York-Presbyterian/Columbia University Medical Center, said the chief of these services, Dr. Ajay Kirtane. Emergency stent procedures for heart attacks are still happening. Several heart groups warned patients this week against discontinuing certain medicines. Some ACE inhibitors, like captopril, enalapril and lisinopril, and ARB medications, like losartan and valsartan, that are widely used to treat high blood pressure, heart failure and diabetes have been linked in some reports to COVID-19, the disease the new virus causes. “There is the suggestion that the receptors that interact with these drugs also are the receptors that the virus are attaching to,” but that’s not known for sure, said Dr. Mariell Jessup, the American Heart Association’s chief scientific officer. Some reports suggest the drugs help and others suggest they don’t, she said. “The harm that could come with withdrawing these drugs ... is much greater than continuing the drugs and individualizing the care for each patient if they develop symptoms” of COVID-19, Jessup said.  In a podcast Wednesday with a medical journal editor, the National Institutes of Health’s Dr. Anthony Fauci said there’s no data showing harm but some scientific basis to think there could be a relationship between the drugs and the coronavirus. “It is a possibility that we need to address” with more information, he said.  ___ AP medical writer Carla K. Johnson contributed from Seattle.  —— The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content. SEATTLE (AP) — The first people to roll up their sleeves to receive an experimental vaccine for the coronavirus say they were inspired to help because they wanted to do more to fight the disease than wash their hands and work from home. Three of the study participants spoke to The Associated Press on Monday following the trial’s first injections in Seattle. They said the shots were no more painful than an ordinary season flu vaccine. Some will get higher dosages than others to test how strong the dose should be. They will be checked for side effects and have their blood tested to determine whether the vaccine is revving up their immune systems. The volunteers said they weren’t acting in hopes of protecting themselves. They understand their role is a small part of what could be an 18-month hunt for a successful shot that could be distributed widely. They work in the tech industry and in health research. Two have children, and all three are working from home to slow the spread of COVID-19.  They are a 43-year-old operations manager at a small tech company, a 46-year-old network engineer at Microsoft and a 25-year-old editorial coordinator at an independent global health research center at the University of Washington. ___ Jennifer Haller, 43, still cuts up apples for her 16-year-old son and 13-year-old daughter each morning, even though the teenagers now make their own lunches. She leaves for work before they head to school on a normal day. On Friday, however, the governor ordered the closure of all Washington state schools that were still open. Her company wants everyone to work from home. Her husband, a software tester, was laid off last week, a move unrelated to the pandemic. The family’s income was cut in half. The job market looks grim. “I figure we probably need to prepare for him to be off work for six months,” she said. Haller works as an operations manager at a small tech company that normally runs out of a shared working space in Seattle. She learned of the vaccine study through Facebook on March 3, the day Kaiser Permanente Washington Research Institute started recruiting. She submitted her application immediately. Two days later, she was dining at a Mexican restaurant when she answered a phone call from an unknown number. It was a member of the research team asking if she wanted to participate and if she had 15 minutes to answer some questions. She interrupted her dinner and agreed. “We all feel so helpless. This is an amazing opportunity for me to do something,” she said Monday.  ___ Neal Browning, 46, lives in Bothell, Washington, north of Seattle, with his fiancee and their daughters. He works as a network engineer at Microsoft, one of the first companies to require its employees to work remotely. At a neighborhood gathering Sunday, Browning watched his daughters and other children improvise a game of tag without touching each other. They’d been told about social distancing, a way to fight the virus by staying away from others. “Kids are fairly adaptable,” Browning said. “If you give them a set of rules, they like to follow them if at all possible.” Browning and his fiancee have three daughters between them, ages 8, 9 and 11. The girls are proud of him for testing the first vaccine for the new virus, he said. “Every parent wants their children to look up to them,” Browning said Monday after his shot. But he’s told the girls not to brag to their friends too much. “It’s other people too. It’s not just Dad out there.” ___ Rebecca Sirull, 25, barely stopped working to get her shot Monday, participating in a conference call for work while sitting in the research institute’s clinic. She moved to Seattle from the Boston area in December to work as editorial coordinator for the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation.  She lives in an apartment with roommates, and her social life took a hit with the coronavirus restrictions. The ultimate frisbee team she joined for the spring season is no longer playing: “Our very first game was canceled,” she said. “The dating scene is kind of on hold for the moment,” Sirull added. “You know, people talk about finding their quarantine buddy, but I’m happy to kind of wait another couple months. You know, it’s not that pressing an issue right now for me.” She’s heard friends make dark jokes about parallels between the coronavirus pandemic and the start of every zombie apocalypse movie ever made. “I say, ‘No, guys, it doesn’t have to go that way!’” She joined the vaccine study as “a way to contribute to the situation in a positive way, considering, you know, the main guidelines that we all have right now are to stay home and do nothing, which is sort of a hard message to hear when you want to help out.” ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.SEATTLE (AP) — U.S. researchers gave the first shots in a first test of an experimental coronavirus vaccine Monday, leading off a worldwide hunt for protection even as the pandemic surges. With careful jabs in the arms of four healthy volunteers, scientists at the Kaiser Permanente Washington Research Institute in Seattle began an anxiously awaited first-stage study of a potential COVID-19 vaccine developed in record time after the new virus exploded out of China and fanned out across the globe. “We’re team coronavirus now,” Kaiser Permanente study leader Dr. Lisa Jackson said on the eve of the experiment. “Everyone wants to do what they can in this emergency.” The Associated Press observed as the study’s first participant, an operations manager at a small tech company, received the injection in an exam room. “We all feel so helpless. This is an amazing opportunity for me to do something,” Jennifer Haller, 43, of Seattle said before getting vaccinated. Her two teenagers “think it’s cool” that she’s taking part in the study. After the injection, she left the exam room with a big smile: “I’m feeling great.” Three others were next in line for a test that will ultimately give 45 volunteers two doses, a month apart. Neal Browning, 46, of Bothell, Washington, is a Microsoft network engineer who says his young daughters are proud he volunteered. “Every parent wants their children to look up to them,” he said. But he’s told them not to brag to their friends. “It’s other people, too. It’s not just Dad out there.” Monday’s milestone marked just the beginning of a series of studies in people needed to prove whether the shots are safe and could work. Even if the research goes well, a vaccine would not be available for widespread use for 12 to 18 months, said Dr. Anthony Fauci of the U.S. National Institutes of Health. At a news conference, President Donald Trump praised how quickly the research had progressed. Fauci noted that 65 days have passed since Chinese scientists shared the virus’ genetic sequence. He said he believed that was a record for developing a vaccine to test. This vaccine candidate, code-named mRNA-1273, was developed by the NIH and Massachusetts-based biotechnology company Moderna Inc. There’s no chance participants could get infected because the shots do not contain the coronavirus itself. It’s not the only potential vaccine in the pipeline. Dozens of research groups around the world are racing to create a vaccine against COVID-19. Another candidate, made by Inovio Pharmaceuticals, is expected to begin its own safety study next month in the U.S., China and South Korea. The Seattle experiment got underway days after the World Health Organization declared the new virus outbreak a pandemic because of its rapid global spread, which has infected more than 169,000 people and killed more than 6,500. COVID-19 has upended the world’s social and economic fabric since China first identified the virus in January, with broad regions shuttering schools and businesses, restricting travel, canceling entertainment and sporting events, and encouraging people to stay away from each other. Starting what scientists call a first-in-humans study is a momentous occasion for scientists, but Jackson described her team’s mood as “subdued.” They’ve been working around-the-clock readying the research in a part of the U.S. struck early and hard by the virus. Still, “going from not even knowing that this virus was out there ... to have any vaccine” in testing in about two months is unprecedented, Jackson told the AP. Some of the study’s carefully chosen healthy volunteers, ages 18 to 55, will get higher dosages than others to test how strong the inoculations should be. Scientists will check for any side effects and draw blood samples to test if the vaccine is revving up the immune system, looking for encouraging clues like the NIH earlier found in vaccinated mice. “We don’t know whether this vaccine will induce an immune response or whether it will be safe. That’s why we’re doing a trial,” Jackson stressed. “It’s not at the stage where it would be possible or prudent to give it to the general population.” Most of the vaccine research under way globally targets a protein aptly named “spike” that studs the surface of the new coronavirus and lets it invade human cells. Block that protein and people cannot get infected. Researchers at the NIH copied the section of the virus’ genetic code that contains the instructions for cells to create the spike protein. Moderna encased that “messenger RNA” into a vaccine. The idea: The body will become a mini-factory, producing some harmless spike protein. When the immune system spots the foreign protein, it will make antibodies to attack — and be primed to react quickly if the person later encounters the real virus. That’s a much faster way of producing a vaccine than the traditional approach of growing virus in the lab and preparing shots from either killed or weakened versions of it. But because vaccines are given to millions of healthy people, it takes time to test them in large enough numbers to spot an uncommon side effect, cautioned Dr. Nelson Michael of the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, which is developing a different vaccine candidate. “The science can go very quickly but, first, do no harm, right?” he told reporters last week. The Seattle research institute is part of a government network that tests all kinds of vaccines and was chosen for the coronavirus vaccine study before COVID-19 began spreading widely in Washington state. Kaiser Permanente screened dozens of people, looking for those who have no chronic health problems and are not currently sick. Researchers are not checking whether would-be volunteers already had a mild case of COVID-19 before deciding if they are eligible. If some did, scientists will be able to tell by the number of antibodies in their pre-vaccination blood test and account for that, Jackson said. Participants will be paid $100 for each clinic visit in the study. ___ Neergaard reported from Washington, D.C.  ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.Is it the flu, a cold or the new coronavirus? Patients and doctors alike are parsing signs of illness to figure out who needs what tests or care and how worried they should be. “You have three different major viruses floating around at the same time,” causing somewhat similar symptoms — but different levels of concern, said Dr. Gary LeRoy, president of the American Academy of Family Physicians. So what’s the biggest danger? And why are we responding to them so differently?  FAMILIAR FOE COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, is a flu-like illness that has killed a small fraction of the number of people that the flu kills every year. Through the first four months of the outbreak, coronavirus has killed about 4,300 people. Flu kills 290,000 to 650,000 every year around the world, according to the World Health Organization.  To some, that comparison seems comforting because flu is such a familiar foe. President Donald Trump regularly brings it up, noting in a tweet how many more Americans die from flu and adding, “Nothing is shut down, life & the economy go on ... Think about that!” But to public health experts, the huge number of flu deaths is exactly why extraordinary steps should be taken to try to prevent the new coronavirus from spreading widely.  The flu’s annual return can’t be stopped because it’s already so embedded in the population. There is still a chance COVID-19 cases can be limited or spread slowed while treatments are developed. HOW DEADLY ARE THE VIRUSES? Flu kills about 0.1% of those it infects, but that’s still hundreds of thousands of people each year because it infects millions. Researchers are still trying to understand just how deadly the new coronavirus is. The mortality rate from infection with the virus isn’t known yet because the cases caught in an early part of an outbreak are often the most severe, people with mild or no symptoms aren’t being tested, and sometimes overwhelmed hospitals struggle to care for the sickest patients. Various reports have estimated the fatality rate from less than 1% to as high as 4% among cases diagnosed so far, depending on location. Most people infected by the new coronavirus develop mild or moderate symptoms and recover after about two weeks.  SO WHAT DO I HAVE? Flu, cold and coronavirus often share certain symptoms, but differences in intensity and how they appear  can offer clues to which one is causing the misery. Doctors can test for the flu and get results within a day, but coronavirus testing is still limited by availability in the United States. Colds are often suspected because adults get about two on average each year, said LeRoy, a family medicine doctor and associate dean at Wright State University in Dayton, Ohio. “The common cold just starts out with a sore or scratchy throat, cough, runny nose, stuffy nose” and any fever is usually mild, he said. Flu symptoms are more intense and usually come on suddenly, the Yale New Haven Health System advises. They can include a high fever (over 100.5 degrees), extreme exhaustion, muscle or body aches, a dry cough and chills.  “It really hits you like a bus,” and people may start a day well but feel terrible by afternoon, LeRoy said.  Flu symptoms can include a runny or stuffy nose, headaches and possibly vomiting or diarrhea, though the latter two are more common in children than adults, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says. Symptoms of COVID-19 may appear more slowly. They usually include fever, a dry cough and noticeable shortness of breath, according to the World Health Organization. A minority of cases develop pneumonia, and the disease is especially worrisome for the elderly and those with other medical problems such as high blood pressure, obesity, diabetes or heart conditions. One study of hospitalized patients in China found that about half did not have a fever when they were admitted but nearly all developed one. WHAT TO DO IF YOU’RE SICK Don’t go straight to your doctor’s office -- that just risks making more people sick, officials urge. Call ahead, and ask if you need to be seen and where. Fever, cough and noticeable shortness of breath -- “if you have those three components, especially if it’s associated with some recent travel or someone you know who’s been exposed to COVID-19, those things should prompt you to call for medical attention,” LeRoy said. “Mildly ill patients should be encouraged to stay home,” the CDC’s Dr. Sue Gerber told doctors on a conference call last week. People having difficulty breathing should seek care, and older people or those with other conditions should contact their doctors early in the course of illness, she said.  PREVENTION To protect yourself, wash your hands well and often, keep them away from your face, and avoid crowds and standing close to people. There’s one big difference between flu and coronavirus: A vaccine exists to help prevent the flu and it’s not too late to get it. It won’t protect you from catching the coronavirus, but may put you in a better position to fight it.  “You don’t want to have a compromised immune system if you were to encounter coronavirus,” LeRoy said.  ___ Marilynn Marchione can be followed on Twitter at http://twitter.com/MMarchioneAP ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.WASHINGTON (AP) — The flu-like virus that exploded from China has researchers worldwide once again scrambling to find a vaccine against a surprise health threat, with no guarantee one will arrive in time. Just days after Chinese scientists shared the genetic map of the culprit coronavirus, researchers at the U.S. National Institutes of Health had engineered a possible key ingredient for a vaccine they hope to begin testing by April. Scientists from Australia to France, along with a list of biotech and vaccine companies, jumped in the race, pursuing different types of inoculations. And Texas researchers froze an experimental vaccine developed too late to fight an earlier coronavirus — SARS, or severe acute respiratory syndrome — but are pushing U.S. and Chinese authorities to give it a try this time around. Because the new virus is a close cousin of SARS, it just might protect, said Dr. Peter Hotez of Baylor College of Medicine and Texas Children’s Hospital. All that work is coming at lightning speed compared to past outbreaks. Yet many experts agree it still may take a year — if every step along the way goes well — for any vaccine to be ready for widespread use. That’s if it’s even needed by then.  Globally, more than 31,400 people are infected and the death toll climbed past 630. The overwhelming majority are in China, but more than 310 people with the illness have been reported in over two dozen other countries.  For now, health officials are isolating the sick to fight spread of the virus, which causes fever, cough and in severe cases pneumonia. With no specific treatment, some doctors also are experimenting with antiviral medicines developed for other conditions. “Ours is already manufactured and could take off pretty quickly,” said Hotez, who created the earlier SARS vaccine with Texas Children’s colleague Maria Elena Bottazzi. But “there’s still no road map for what you do to make a vaccine in the midst of a devastating public health outbreak.” NIH specialists say rather than chasing outbreaks, it’s time to pursue prototype vaccine designs that could work for entire virus families, ready to be pulled off the shelf at the first sign of a new disease. “We have the technology now. It’s feasible from an engineering and biological standpoint,” said Dr. Barney Graham, deputy director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases’ Vaccine Research Center. Without that step, “we’re going to be at risk for new pandemics.” A FASTER VACCINE RECIPE Traditionally, making vaccines required first growing lots of virus in a lab. The NIH team is pursuing a newer and far faster method: Simply use a piece of the virus’ genetic code, called messenger RNA or mRNA, that instructs cells to make a particular protein. “We think of RNA as the software of life,” said Dr. Tal Zaks, chief medical officer of Moderna Inc., which is developing mRNA vaccines for other diseases and working with NIH on the new coronavirus.  Inject the right piece and “you’ve taught the body to make its own medicine,” he explained. As cells produce just that protein, the immune system learns to recognize it, primed to attack if the entire virus ever comes along. The target: A protein aptly named “spike” that lets the virus bind to cells. It studs the surface of coronaviruses — the new one as well as its cousins SARS, which erupted in China in 2002 and spread to 26 countries, and MERS, or Middle East respiratory syndrome, which emerged in 2012.  Graham’s team zeroed in on the RNA responsible for the new virus’ production of spike and then — because prior research showed the protein can change shape — engineered a more stable version of it. Moderna is manufacturing samples of the synthetic mRNA vaccine for NIH to use in animal studies and, hopefully within three months, first-stage safety tests in people. If further testing proves it really works, the hope is scientists could simply swap in a new spike code if another coronavirus comes along. That’s important because after three such outbreaks in less than 20 years, “this is not the last,” predicted Dr. Mark Denison, a virologist at Vanderbilt University Medical Center. It’s key to find vaccine “strategies that go after these unique things common to every coronavirus.” WHAT ELSE IS IN THE PIPELINE Inovio Pharmaceuticals is pursuing a similar approach with synthetic DNA, and recently reported promising results from first-stage testing of a MERS vaccine. It’s collaborating with a Chinese company, Beijing Advaccine, in hopes of being able to test a new vaccine candidate in China later this year.  In France, researchers at the Pasteur Institute are piggybacking on the tried-and-true vaccine against measles. They’ve had some early success mixing genetic material from other viruses into that vaccine, and now hope to put the immune system on alert against this new coronavirus in the same way. “The work we’re doing now involves making a vaccine against measles but re-engineered in the sense that it has antigens from the new coronavirus,” said virologist Frederic Tangy, head of Pasteur’s vaccine innovation department.  What about Hotez’s old SARS vaccine? In that case a piece of the spike protein was genetically engineered and grown in a lab, a classic vaccine technology compared to the newer and less proven Moderna and Inovio approaches. The Texas researchers showed the vaccine protected animals but in 2016 ran out of money for further testing and froze what was left. Every six months, Hotez thaws a small sample to make sure it’s still usable. CHASING OUTBREAKS Past outbreaks are full of such missed opportunities: There’s no commercial vaccine for MERS even though illnesses still occur. The birth defect-causing Zika outbreak was ending by the time experimental shots were ready to test. The bright spot: Ebola vaccines. Some candidates began early testing during the massive Ebola epidemic in West Africa in 2014-2016, although the outbreak waned before scientists had proof they worked. But authorities and vaccine companies kept up the research, and by 2018 shots were ready to help tamp down an outbreak still smoldering in Congo. The World Health Organization will meet next week to identify promising drug and vaccine candidates for the new coronavirus and fast-track their development, much like happened with Ebola.  “To put it bluntly, we’re shadow boxing,” said WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. “We need to bring this shadow out into the light so that we can attack it properly.” ___ Associated Press writers Rodrique Ngowi in Boston, Alex Turnbull in Paris and Maria Cheng in London contributed to this report. ___ The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content.