Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A lawyer for the family of George Floyd, whose death sparked unrest across the US, has accused a police officer of "premeditated murder". Minneapolis policeman Derek Chauvin has been charged with third-degree murder, but lawyer Benjamin Crump told CBS news it was a case of first-degree murder. "We think that he had intent... almost nine minutes he kept his knee in a man's neck that was begging and pleading for breath," he said. Several US cities have imposed curfews. The Floyd case has reignited US anger over police killings of black Americans. It follows the high-profile cases of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Eric Garner in New York and others that have driven the Black Lives Matter movement. "The fact that officer Chauvin kept his knee on his neck for almost three minutes after he was unconscious. We don't understand how that was not first degree murder. We don't understand how all these officers haven't been arrested," lawyer Crump said. Three other officers present at the time have also since been sacked. For many the outrage over George Floyd's death also reflects years of frustration over socioeconomic inequality and segregation, not least in Minneapolis itself. In video footage, Mr Chauvin, 44, can be seen kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for several minutes on Monday. Mr Floyd, 46,  repeatedly says that he is unable to breathe.  There have been five nights of arson and looting in Minneapolis and the adjacent city of St Paul. Minnesota's Governor Tim Walz said on Saturday he was deploying the full Minnesota National Guard for the first time since World War Two. Governor Walz said racism in his state had created the conditions for Mr Floyd's death. The National Guard - the US reserve military force for domestic emergencies - said on Sunday that 5,000 of its personnel had been activated in 15 states and Washington DC. It added that "state and local law enforcement agencies remain responsible for security". In the CBS interview, lawyer Benjamin Crump also said "we now have the audio from the police bodycam and we hear where one officer says 'he doesn't have a pulse, maybe we should turn him on his side', but yet officer Chauvin says 'no, we're going to keep him in this position'. That's intent. "Also, the fact that officer Chauvin kept his knee on his neck for almost three minutes after he was unconscious." The lawyer also said Mr Chauvin and Mr Floyd already knew each other before Mr Floyd's death in custody. He said the Floyd family was "notified by the owner of a club that Derek Chauvin was an off-duty police officer where George Floyd was a security guard, and so they had to overlap". Huge demonstrations have taken place in at least 30 cities across the US. They were largely peaceful on Saturday, but violence flared later in the day. Besides Minneapolis and Los Angeles, the cities under night curfew include Atlanta, Chicago, Denver, Louisville, Richmond, San Francisco and Seattle.  One of the cities worst affected by unrest is Los Angeles. California Governor Gavin Newsom declared a state of emergency in the city and activated the National Guard. The entire city is under curfew. Numerous shops have been looted, including on the famous retail avenues, Melrose and Fairfax, while overhead footage showed fires burning. Earlier police fired rubber bullets and hit protesters with batons. Hundreds of arrests have been made.  In New York City, police arrested about 350 people overnight and dozens of police suffered light injuries. In Salt Lake City, a man aimed a bow and arrow at protesters and was attacked by the crowd, Reuters reported.  President Donald Trump's national security adviser told CNN "I don't think there's systemic racism" in the police. Robert O'Brien said "there are some racist police, I think they're the minority, I think they're the few bad apples and we need to root them out". On Saturday evening, President Trump said Mr Floyd's death had "filled Americans with horror, anger and grief". He also denounced the actions of "looters and anarchists", accusing them of dishonouring the memory of Mr Floyd. What was needed, he said, was "healing not hatred, justice not chaos". "I will not allow angry mobs to dominate - won't happen," he added. Thousands took part in an anti-racism protest march in central London on Sunday, defying social distancing rules imposed because of coronavirus. They gathered in Trafalgar Square, then the crowd moved on to the US embassy.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A lawyer for the family of George Floyd, whose death sparked unrest across the US, has accused a police officer of "premeditated murder". Minneapolis policeman Derek Chauvin has been charged with third-degree murder, but lawyer Benjamin Crump told CBS news it was a case of first-degree murder. "We think that he had intent... almost nine minutes he kept his knee in a man's neck that was begging and pleading for breath," he said. Several US cities have imposed curfews. The Floyd case has reignited US anger over police killings of black Americans. It follows the high-profile cases of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Eric Garner in New York and others that have driven the Black Lives Matter movement. "The fact that officer Chauvin kept his knee on his neck for almost three minutes after he was unconscious. We don't understand how that was not first degree murder. We don't understand how all these officers haven't been arrested," lawyer Crump said. Three other officers present at the time have also since been sacked. For many the outrage over George Floyd's death also reflects years of frustration over socioeconomic inequality and segregation, not least in Minneapolis itself. In video footage, Mr Chauvin, 44, can be seen kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for several minutes on Monday. Mr Floyd, 46,  repeatedly says that he is unable to breathe.  There have been five nights of arson and looting in Minneapolis and the adjacent city of St Paul. Minnesota's Governor Tim Walz said on Saturday he was deploying the full Minnesota National Guard for the first time since World War Two. Governor Walz said racism in his state had created the conditions for Mr Floyd's death. The National Guard - the US reserve military force for domestic emergencies - said on Sunday that 5,000 of its personnel had been activated in 15 states and Washington DC. It added that "state and local law enforcement agencies remain responsible for security". In the CBS interview, lawyer Benjamin Crump also said "we now have the audio from the police bodycam and we hear where one officer says 'he doesn't have a pulse, maybe we should turn him on his side', but yet officer Chauvin says 'no, we're going to keep him in this position'. That's intent. "Also, the fact that officer Chauvin kept his knee on his neck for almost three minutes after he was unconscious." The lawyer also said Mr Chauvin and Mr Floyd already knew each other before Mr Floyd's death in custody. He said the Floyd family was "notified by the owner of a club that Derek Chauvin was an off-duty police officer where George Floyd was a security guard, and so they had to overlap". Huge demonstrations have taken place in at least 30 cities across the US. They were largely peaceful on Saturday, but violence flared later in the day. Besides Minneapolis and Los Angeles, the cities under night curfew include Atlanta, Chicago, Denver, Louisville, Richmond, San Francisco and Seattle.  One of the cities worst affected by unrest is Los Angeles. California Governor Gavin Newsom declared a state of emergency in the city and activated the National Guard. The entire city is under curfew. Numerous shops have been looted, including on the famous retail avenues, Melrose and Fairfax, while overhead footage showed fires burning. Earlier police fired rubber bullets and hit protesters with batons. Hundreds of arrests have been made.  In New York City, police arrested about 350 people overnight and dozens of police suffered light injuries. In Salt Lake City, a man aimed a bow and arrow at protesters and was attacked by the crowd, Reuters reported.  President Donald Trump's national security adviser told CNN "I don't think there's systemic racism" in the police. Robert O'Brien said "there are some racist police, I think they're the minority, I think they're the few bad apples and we need to root them out". On Saturday evening, President Trump said Mr Floyd's death had "filled Americans with horror, anger and grief". He also denounced the actions of "looters and anarchists", accusing them of dishonouring the memory of Mr Floyd. What was needed, he said, was "healing not hatred, justice not chaos". "I will not allow angry mobs to dominate - won't happen," he added. Thousands took part in an anti-racism protest march in central London on Sunday, defying social distancing rules imposed because of coronavirus. They gathered in Trafalgar Square, then the crowd moved on to the US embassy.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The US will designate the anti-fascist group Antifa a terrorist organisation, President Donald Trump says.  The president accused Antifa of starting riots that stemmed from protests over George Floyd's death. Mr Floyd, a black man, died in police custody earlier this week, reigniting anger at police treatment of African-Americans.  Protests over his death have turned violent, prompting major cities to impose curfews. On Saturday, Minnesota's Democratic Governor Tim Walz suggested that foreign influences, white supremacists and drug cartels were behind the violence, giving few other details.  On Twitter Mr Trump blamed "Antifa-led anarchists" and "Radical Left Anarchists" for the unrest, again without providing more specifics.  The United States of America will be designating ANTIFA as a Terrorist Organization. End of Twitter post  by @realDonaldTrump Antifa - short for anti-fascist or Anti-Fascist action - is a protest movement that strongly opposes neo-Nazis, fascism, white supremacists and racism.  Most members oppose all forms of racism and sexism, and strongly oppose what they see as the nationalist, anti-immigration and anti-Muslim policies that Mr Trump has enacted. Anti-government and anti-capitalist, Antifa's members are often perceived as more closely aligned with anarchists than the mainstream left. The movement gained new prominence in the US for its role in confronting white supremacists at a rally in Charlottesville, Virginia in 2017. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US astronauts Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken have docked with, and entered, the International Space Station (ISS). Their Dragon capsule - supplied and operated by the private SpaceX company - attached to the bow section of the orbiting lab 422km above China. After a wait for leak, pressure and temperature checks, the pair disembarked to join the Russian and American crew already on the ISS. Hurley and Behnken launched from Florida on Saturday. Theirs is the first crew outing launched from American soil since the retirement of the US space agency (Nasa) shuttles nine years ago.  This is the first time in human history @NASA_Astronauts have entered the @Space_Station from a commercially-made spacecraft. @AstroBehnken and @Astro_Doug have finally arrived to the orbiting laboratory in @SpaceX's Dragon Endeavour spacecraft. pic.twitter.com/3t9Ogtpik4 End of Twitter post  by @NASA The mission marks the beginning of a new era in which Nasa will be purchasing transport services from the commercial sector. No more will it own and operate the American vehicles that run to and from the station. This will be done exclusively by firms such as SpaceX of Hawthorne, California, which is led by tech billionaire Elon Musk. Confirmation of the Dragon's attachment at the ISS came at 14:16 GMT (15:16 BST) on Sunday, 19 hours after leaving the Kennedy Space Center atop a Falcon rocket also provided by SpaceX. The docking was a fully automated process; Hurley and Behnken had no need to get involved - although they had practised some manual flying on approach.  The doors between Dragon and the ISS were opened at 17:02 GMT (18:02 BST). When Hurley and Behnken floated through, they were met by ISS Commander and fellow Nasa astronaut Chris Cassidy and Russian cosmonauts Anatoly Ivanishin and Ivan Vagner. "We're just happy to be here and Chris is going to put us work. And hopefully we will fit in and not mess too many things up," said Doug Hurley as he nursed a bruise picked up on his forehead.  Bob Behnken said the pair were well rested and ready for the tasks ahead. "We did get probably a good seven hours or so (of sleep)," he said in a radio link with mission control in Houston, Texas. "The first night is always a little bit of a challenge, but the Dragon was a slick vehicle, and we had good air flow and so we had an excellent evening. (We're) just excited to be back in low-Earth orbit again." Nasa Administrator Jim Bridenstine congratulated the duo on a job well done: "The whole world saw this mission and we are so, so proud of everything you've done for our country and, in fact, to inspire the world." SpaceX flew a first demonstration of its new crew vehicle last year, but that had only a dummy aboard. This sortie is the first to carry humans. Hurley's and Behnken's job on the mission is to test all onboard systems and to give their feedback to engineers. SpaceX and Nasa need a clean crewed demonstration so they can move swiftly to the next phase of the company's $2.6bn (£2.1bn) contract, which will encompass six astronaut "taxi" flights, with the first of these likely to occur at the end of August.  Hurley's and Behnken's arrival at the ISS means they get to claim a Stars and Stripes flag placed on the platform by the members of the very last space shuttle mission in 2011. The Atlantis orbiter's crew left this flag as an incentive to all those that came after them. The flag, which also flew on the very first shuttle flight in 1981, will now be returned to Earth to be given to the mission that next goes beyond Earth orbit.   Earlier, Hurley and Behnken named their Dragon ship in the time-honoured tradition of US spacefarers. They called it "Endeavour", in part to celebrate the new course being set by Nasa and its commercial partners, but also to acknowledge the past contribution to American space efforts by Shuttle Endeavour, on which both Hurley and Behnken served in the late 2000s. It's somewhat uncertain how long Hurley and Behnken will stay at the ISS, but perhaps as much as four months. In that time, they will become members of the current ISS Expedition 63 crew, taking part in the platform's everyday science and maintenance activities. Chris Cassidy joked that because his new crewmates arrived on a Sunday, they had missed the cleaning chores that normally take place on a Saturday. "We'll catch up next weekend," the commander said. Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has said he will postpone this year's G7 summit and invite leaders of other countries to participate in the talks. "I don't feel that... it properly represents what's going on in the world. It's a very outdated group of countries," Mr Trump said on Saturday. The G7 group, which the US hosts this year, includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the UK.  The president said Russia, South Korea, Australia and India should be invited. Speaking to reporters on board the presidential plane Air Force One, Mr Trump said that he was delaying the summit - which was scheduled to take place later in June  - until September.  Last week, Mr Trump said it might be possible to hold a gathering at the White House and potentially parts of Camp David, the US presidential country retreat, despite concerns over the coronavirus pandemic. German Chancellor Angela Merkel later rejected the president's invitation to attend a summit in person because of the outbreak.  Her spokesman thanked Mr Trump, but said the German leader "cannot agree to her personal participation, to a journey to Washington". On Friday, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson "agreed on the importance of convening the G7 in person in the near future" following a conversation with the US president, the White House said in a statement.  The G7 - or Group of Seven - leaders were scheduled to meet by videoconference in June in response to Covid-19. The group is made up of the seven of the world's largest economies. It regards itself as "a community of values", with freedom and human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and prosperity and sustainable development as its key principles.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Microsoft is to replace dozens of contract journalists on its MSN website and use automated systems to select news stories, US and UK media report. The curating of  stories from news organisations and selection of headlines and pictures for the MSN site is currently done by  journalists. Artificial intelligence will perform these news production tasks, sources told the Seattle Times.   Microsoft said it was part of an evaluation of its business.  The US tech giant said in a statement: "Like all companies, we evaluate our business on a regular basis. This can result in increased investment in some places and, from time to time, redeployment in others. These decisions are not the result of the current pandemic." Microsoft, like some other tech companies, pays news organisations to use their content on its website. But it employs journalists to decide which stories to display and how they are presented.  Around 50 contract news producers will lose their jobs at the end of June, the Seattle Times reports, but a team of full-time journalists will remain. "It's demoralising to think machines can replace us but there you go," one of those facing redundancy told the paper. Some  sacked journalists warned that artificial intelligence may not be fully familiar with strict editorial guidelines, and could end up letting through inappropriate stories.  Twenty-seven of those losing their jobs are employed by the UK's PA Media, the Guardian reports.  One journalist quoted in the paper said: "I spend all my time reading about how automation and AI is going to take all our jobs - now it's taken mine."  Microsoft is one of many tech companies experimenting with forms of so-called robot journalism to cut costs.   Google is also investing in projects to understand how it might work.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump has been criticised at home and abroad after announcing he is ending US ties with the World Health Organization (WHO).  The EU urged him to reconsider the decision, while Germany's health minister called it a "disappointing setback for international health". The head of the US Senate's health committee, a Republican like Mr Trump, said now was not the time to leave. Mr Trump said the WHO had failed to hold China to account over coronavirus. The WHO, a UN agency that helps countries promote healthcare and tackle outbreaks of disease, has faced regular criticism from the US president over its handling of the outbreak. He suspended US funding to the WHO last month and on Friday permanently halted the payment, which last year stood at more than $400m (£324m; €360m), the largest single contribution at around 15% of its total budget. European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and top EU diplomat, Josep Borrell, said in a statement: "In the face of this global threat, now is the time for enhanced co-operation and common solutions. Actions that weaken international results must be avoided. "We urge the US to reconsider its announced decision." German Health Minister Jens Spahn described the setback as "disappointing" although he accepted the WHO "needs reform". "The EU must take a leading role and engage more financially," he said. A spokesperson for the UK said: "Coronavirus is a global challenge and the World Health Organization has an important role to play in leading the international health response. We have no plans to withdraw our funding." The chair of the US Senate Health Committee, Lamar Alexander, said the move could hamper the discovery of a vaccine against Covid-19 and urged a reversal of the decision in the "strongest terms possible". "Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis has been dealt with, not in the middle of it," he said. Ex-presidential candidate and US Senator Elizabeth Warren tweeted: "President Trump's decision to leave the @WHO during a global pandemic alienates our allies, undermines our global leadership, and threatens the health of the American people." Anders Nordstrom, a former WHO acting director general, said he was "deeply concerned" the move would increase political tension at a time when "we need to have global solidarity". South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize called the decision "unfortunate".  WHO member states agreed on 19 May to set up an independent inquiry into the global response to the pandemic. Speaking  at the White House, Mr Trump said: "Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs."  It is not clear when any US withdrawal might take place. A 1948 agreement between the US and WHO allows for one year's notice before pulling out.  Mr Trump has accused China of trying to cover up the outbreak of coronavirus, which occurred in the city of Wuhan late last year. He also says that "China has total control over the World Health Organization". The president accused China of pressurising the WHO to "mislead the world" about the virus, without elaborating. "The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government," he said. The US will redirect its funds for the WHO  to other health groups. More than 102,000 people in the US have lost their lives to Covid-19 - by far the biggest death toll in the world.  Opponents say Mr Trump is trying to deflect criticism of his handling of the pandemic ahead of his re-election bid this year. Meanwhile, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has said that Mr Trump is trying to mislead the public, smear China and "shift the blame for [the US's] own incompetent response".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A lawyer for the family of George Floyd, whose death sparked unrest across the US, has accused a police officer of "premeditated murder". Minneapolis policeman Derek Chauvin has been charged with third-degree murder, but lawyer Benjamin Crump told CBS news it was a case of first-degree murder. "We think that he had intent... almost nine minutes he kept his knee in a man's neck that was begging and pleading for breath," he said. Several US cities have imposed curfews. The Floyd case has reignited US anger over police killings of black Americans. It follows the high-profile cases of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Eric Garner in New York and others that have driven the Black Lives Matter movement. "The fact that officer Chauvin kept his knee on his neck for almost three minutes after he was unconscious. We don't understand how that was not first degree murder. We don't understand how all these officers haven't been arrested," lawyer Crump said. Three other officers present at the time have also since been sacked. For many the outrage over George Floyd's death also reflects years of frustration over socioeconomic inequality and segregation, not least in Minneapolis itself. In video footage, Mr Chauvin, 44, can be seen kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for several minutes on Monday. Mr Floyd, 46,  repeatedly says that he is unable to breathe.  There have been five nights of arson and looting in Minneapolis and the adjacent city of St Paul. Minnesota's Governor Tim Walz said on Saturday he was deploying the full Minnesota National Guard for the first time since World War Two. Governor Walz said racism in his state had created the conditions for Mr Floyd's death. The National Guard - the US reserve military force for domestic emergencies - said on Sunday that 5,000 of its personnel had been activated in 15 states and Washington DC. It added that "state and local law enforcement agencies remain responsible for security". In the CBS interview, lawyer Benjamin Crump also said "we now have the audio from the police bodycam and we hear where one officer says 'he doesn't have a pulse, maybe we should turn him on his side', but yet officer Chauvin says 'no, we're going to keep him in this position'. That's intent. "Also, the fact that officer Chauvin kept his knee on his neck for almost three minutes after he was unconscious." The lawyer also said Mr Chauvin and Mr Floyd already knew each other before Mr Floyd's death in custody. He said the Floyd family was "notified by the owner of a club that Derek Chauvin was an off-duty police officer where George Floyd was a security guard, and so they had to overlap". Huge demonstrations have taken place in at least 30 cities across the US. They were largely peaceful on Saturday, but violence flared later in the day. Besides Minneapolis and Los Angeles, the cities under night curfew include Atlanta, Chicago, Denver, Louisville, Richmond, San Francisco and Seattle.  One of the cities worst affected by unrest is Los Angeles. California Governor Gavin Newsom declared a state of emergency in the city and activated the National Guard. The entire city is under curfew. Numerous shops have been looted, including on the famous retail avenues, Melrose and Fairfax, while overhead footage showed fires burning. Earlier police fired rubber bullets and hit protesters with batons. Hundreds of arrests have been made.  In New York City, police arrested about 350 people overnight and dozens of police suffered light injuries. In Salt Lake City, a man aimed a bow and arrow at protesters and was attacked by the crowd, Reuters reported.  President Donald Trump's national security adviser told CNN "I don't think there's systemic racism" in the police. Robert O'Brien said "there are some racist police, I think they're the minority, I think they're the few bad apples and we need to root them out". On Saturday evening, President Trump said Mr Floyd's death had "filled Americans with horror, anger and grief". He also denounced the actions of "looters and anarchists", accusing them of dishonouring the memory of Mr Floyd. What was needed, he said, was "healing not hatred, justice not chaos". "I will not allow angry mobs to dominate - won't happen," he added. Thousands took part in an anti-racism protest march in central London on Sunday, defying social distancing rules imposed because of coronavirus. They gathered in Trafalgar Square, then the crowd moved on to the US embassy.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The US will designate the anti-fascist group Antifa a terrorist organisation, President Donald Trump says.  The president accused Antifa of starting riots that stemmed from protests over George Floyd's death. Mr Floyd, a black man, died in police custody earlier this week, reigniting anger at police treatment of African-Americans.  Protests over his death have turned violent, prompting major cities to impose curfews. On Saturday, Minnesota's Democratic Governor Tim Walz suggested that foreign influences, white supremacists and drug cartels were behind the violence, giving few other details.  On Twitter Mr Trump blamed "Antifa-led anarchists" and "Radical Left Anarchists" for the unrest, again without providing more specifics.  The United States of America will be designating ANTIFA as a Terrorist Organization. End of Twitter post  by @realDonaldTrump Antifa - short for anti-fascist or Anti-Fascist action - is a protest movement that strongly opposes neo-Nazis, fascism, white supremacists and racism.  Most members oppose all forms of racism and sexism, and strongly oppose what they see as the nationalist, anti-immigration and anti-Muslim policies that Mr Trump has enacted. Anti-government and anti-capitalist, Antifa's members are often perceived as more closely aligned with anarchists than the mainstream left. The movement gained new prominence in the US for its role in confronting white supremacists at a rally in Charlottesville, Virginia in 2017. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US astronauts Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken have docked with, and entered, the International Space Station (ISS). Their Dragon capsule - supplied and operated by the private SpaceX company - attached to the bow section of the orbiting lab 422km above China. After a wait for leak, pressure and temperature checks, the pair disembarked to join the Russian and American crew already on the ISS. Hurley and Behnken launched from Florida on Saturday. Theirs is the first crew outing launched from American soil since the retirement of the US space agency (Nasa) shuttles nine years ago.  This is the first time in human history @NASA_Astronauts have entered the @Space_Station from a commercially-made spacecraft. @AstroBehnken and @Astro_Doug have finally arrived to the orbiting laboratory in @SpaceX's Dragon Endeavour spacecraft. pic.twitter.com/3t9Ogtpik4 End of Twitter post  by @NASA The mission marks the beginning of a new era in which Nasa will be purchasing transport services from the commercial sector. No more will it own and operate the American vehicles that run to and from the station. This will be done exclusively by firms such as SpaceX of Hawthorne, California, which is led by tech billionaire Elon Musk. Confirmation of the Dragon's attachment at the ISS came at 14:16 GMT (15:16 BST) on Sunday, 19 hours after leaving the Kennedy Space Center atop a Falcon rocket also provided by SpaceX. The docking was a fully automated process; Hurley and Behnken had no need to get involved - although they had practised some manual flying on approach.  The doors between Dragon and the ISS were opened at 17:02 GMT (18:02 BST). When Hurley and Behnken floated through, they were met by ISS Commander and fellow Nasa astronaut Chris Cassidy and Russian cosmonauts Anatoly Ivanishin and Ivan Vagner. "We're just happy to be here and Chris is going to put us work. And hopefully we will fit in and not mess too many things up," said Doug Hurley as he nursed a bruise picked up on his forehead.  Bob Behnken said the pair were well rested and ready for the tasks ahead. "We did get probably a good seven hours or so (of sleep)," he said in a radio link with mission control in Houston, Texas. "The first night is always a little bit of a challenge, but the Dragon was a slick vehicle, and we had good air flow and so we had an excellent evening. (We're) just excited to be back in low-Earth orbit again." Nasa Administrator Jim Bridenstine congratulated the duo on a job well done: "The whole world saw this mission and we are so, so proud of everything you've done for our country and, in fact, to inspire the world." SpaceX flew a first demonstration of its new crew vehicle last year, but that had only a dummy aboard. This sortie is the first to carry humans. Hurley's and Behnken's job on the mission is to test all onboard systems and to give their feedback to engineers. SpaceX and Nasa need a clean crewed demonstration so they can move swiftly to the next phase of the company's $2.6bn (£2.1bn) contract, which will encompass six astronaut "taxi" flights, with the first of these likely to occur at the end of August.  Hurley's and Behnken's arrival at the ISS means they get to claim a Stars and Stripes flag placed on the platform by the members of the very last space shuttle mission in 2011. The Atlantis orbiter's crew left this flag as an incentive to all those that came after them. The flag, which also flew on the very first shuttle flight in 1981, will now be returned to Earth to be given to the mission that next goes beyond Earth orbit.   Earlier, Hurley and Behnken named their Dragon ship in the time-honoured tradition of US spacefarers. They called it "Endeavour", in part to celebrate the new course being set by Nasa and its commercial partners, but also to acknowledge the past contribution to American space efforts by Shuttle Endeavour, on which both Hurley and Behnken served in the late 2000s. It's somewhat uncertain how long Hurley and Behnken will stay at the ISS, but perhaps as much as four months. In that time, they will become members of the current ISS Expedition 63 crew, taking part in the platform's everyday science and maintenance activities. Chris Cassidy joked that because his new crewmates arrived on a Sunday, they had missed the cleaning chores that normally take place on a Saturday. "We'll catch up next weekend," the commander said. Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has said he will postpone this year's G7 summit and invite leaders of other countries to participate in the talks. "I don't feel that... it properly represents what's going on in the world. It's a very outdated group of countries," Mr Trump said on Saturday. The G7 group, which the US hosts this year, includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the UK.  The president said Russia, South Korea, Australia and India should be invited. Speaking to reporters on board the presidential plane Air Force One, Mr Trump said that he was delaying the summit - which was scheduled to take place later in June  - until September.  Last week, Mr Trump said it might be possible to hold a gathering at the White House and potentially parts of Camp David, the US presidential country retreat, despite concerns over the coronavirus pandemic. German Chancellor Angela Merkel later rejected the president's invitation to attend a summit in person because of the outbreak.  Her spokesman thanked Mr Trump, but said the German leader "cannot agree to her personal participation, to a journey to Washington". On Friday, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson "agreed on the importance of convening the G7 in person in the near future" following a conversation with the US president, the White House said in a statement.  The G7 - or Group of Seven - leaders were scheduled to meet by videoconference in June in response to Covid-19. The group is made up of the seven of the world's largest economies. It regards itself as "a community of values", with freedom and human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and prosperity and sustainable development as its key principles.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Microsoft is to replace dozens of contract journalists on its MSN website and use automated systems to select news stories, US and UK media report. The curating of  stories from news organisations and selection of headlines and pictures for the MSN site is currently done by  journalists. Artificial intelligence will perform these news production tasks, sources told the Seattle Times.   Microsoft said it was part of an evaluation of its business.  The US tech giant said in a statement: "Like all companies, we evaluate our business on a regular basis. This can result in increased investment in some places and, from time to time, redeployment in others. These decisions are not the result of the current pandemic." Microsoft, like some other tech companies, pays news organisations to use their content on its website. But it employs journalists to decide which stories to display and how they are presented.  Around 50 contract news producers will lose their jobs at the end of June, the Seattle Times reports, but a team of full-time journalists will remain. "It's demoralising to think machines can replace us but there you go," one of those facing redundancy told the paper. Some  sacked journalists warned that artificial intelligence may not be fully familiar with strict editorial guidelines, and could end up letting through inappropriate stories.  Twenty-seven of those losing their jobs are employed by the UK's PA Media, the Guardian reports.  One journalist quoted in the paper said: "I spend all my time reading about how automation and AI is going to take all our jobs - now it's taken mine."  Microsoft is one of many tech companies experimenting with forms of so-called robot journalism to cut costs.   Google is also investing in projects to understand how it might work.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump has been criticised at home and abroad after announcing he is ending US ties with the World Health Organization (WHO).  The EU urged him to reconsider the decision, while Germany's health minister called it a "disappointing setback for international health". The head of the US Senate's health committee, a Republican like Mr Trump, said now was not the time to leave. Mr Trump said the WHO had failed to hold China to account over coronavirus. The WHO, a UN agency that helps countries promote healthcare and tackle outbreaks of disease, has faced regular criticism from the US president over its handling of the outbreak. He suspended US funding to the WHO last month and on Friday permanently halted the payment, which last year stood at more than $400m (£324m; €360m), the largest single contribution at around 15% of its total budget. European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and top EU diplomat, Josep Borrell, said in a statement: "In the face of this global threat, now is the time for enhanced co-operation and common solutions. Actions that weaken international results must be avoided. "We urge the US to reconsider its announced decision." German Health Minister Jens Spahn described the setback as "disappointing" although he accepted the WHO "needs reform". "The EU must take a leading role and engage more financially," he said. A spokesperson for the UK said: "Coronavirus is a global challenge and the World Health Organization has an important role to play in leading the international health response. We have no plans to withdraw our funding." The chair of the US Senate Health Committee, Lamar Alexander, said the move could hamper the discovery of a vaccine against Covid-19 and urged a reversal of the decision in the "strongest terms possible". "Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis has been dealt with, not in the middle of it," he said. Ex-presidential candidate and US Senator Elizabeth Warren tweeted: "President Trump's decision to leave the @WHO during a global pandemic alienates our allies, undermines our global leadership, and threatens the health of the American people." Anders Nordstrom, a former WHO acting director general, said he was "deeply concerned" the move would increase political tension at a time when "we need to have global solidarity". South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize called the decision "unfortunate".  WHO member states agreed on 19 May to set up an independent inquiry into the global response to the pandemic. Speaking  at the White House, Mr Trump said: "Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs."  It is not clear when any US withdrawal might take place. A 1948 agreement between the US and WHO allows for one year's notice before pulling out.  Mr Trump has accused China of trying to cover up the outbreak of coronavirus, which occurred in the city of Wuhan late last year. He also says that "China has total control over the World Health Organization". The president accused China of pressurising the WHO to "mislead the world" about the virus, without elaborating. "The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government," he said. The US will redirect its funds for the WHO  to other health groups. More than 102,000 people in the US have lost their lives to Covid-19 - by far the biggest death toll in the world.  Opponents say Mr Trump is trying to deflect criticism of his handling of the pandemic ahead of his re-election bid this year. Meanwhile, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has said that Mr Trump is trying to mislead the public, smear China and "shift the blame for [the US's] own incompetent response".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The US will designate the anti-fascist group Antifa a terrorist organisation, President Donald Trump says.  The president accused Antifa of starting riots that stemmed from protests over George Floyd's death. Mr Floyd, a black man, died in police custody earlier this week, reigniting anger at police treatment of African-Americans.  Protests over his death have turned violent, prompting major cities to impose curfews. On Saturday, Minnesota's Democratic Governor Tim Walz suggested that foreign influences, white supremacists and drug cartels were behind the violence, giving few other details.  On Twitter Mr Trump blamed "Antifa-led anarchists" and "Radical Left Anarchists" for the unrest, again without providing more specifics.  The United States of America will be designating ANTIFA as a Terrorist Organization. End of Twitter post  by @realDonaldTrump Antifa - short for anti-fascist or Anti-Fascist action - is a protest movement that strongly opposes neo-Nazis, fascism, white supremacists and racism.  Most members oppose all forms of racism and sexism, and strongly oppose what they see as the nationalist, anti-immigration and anti-Muslim policies that Mr Trump has enacted. Anti-government and anti-capitalist, Antifa's members are often perceived as more closely aligned with anarchists than the mainstream left. The movement gained new prominence in the US for its role in confronting white supremacists at a rally in Charlottesville, Virginia in 2017. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US astronauts Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken have docked with, and entered, the International Space Station (ISS). Their Dragon capsule - supplied and operated by the private SpaceX company - attached to the bow section of the orbiting lab 422km above China. After a wait for leak, pressure and temperature checks, the pair disembarked to join the Russian and American crew already on the ISS. Hurley and Behnken launched from Florida on Saturday. Theirs is the first crew outing launched from American soil since the retirement of the US space agency (Nasa) shuttles nine years ago.  This is the first time in human history @NASA_Astronauts have entered the @Space_Station from a commercially-made spacecraft. @AstroBehnken and @Astro_Doug have finally arrived to the orbiting laboratory in @SpaceX's Dragon Endeavour spacecraft. pic.twitter.com/3t9Ogtpik4 End of Twitter post  by @NASA The mission marks the beginning of a new era in which Nasa will be purchasing transport services from the commercial sector. No more will it own and operate the American vehicles that run to and from the station. This will be done exclusively by firms such as SpaceX of Hawthorne, California, which is led by tech billionaire Elon Musk. Confirmation of the Dragon's attachment at the ISS came at 14:16 GMT (15:16 BST) on Sunday, 19 hours after leaving the Kennedy Space Center atop a Falcon rocket also provided by SpaceX. The docking was a fully automated process; Hurley and Behnken had no need to get involved - although they had practised some manual flying on approach.  The doors between Dragon and the ISS were opened at 17:02 GMT (18:02 BST). When Hurley and Behnken floated through, they were met by ISS Commander and fellow Nasa astronaut Chris Cassidy and Russian cosmonauts Anatoly Ivanishin and Ivan Vagner. "We're just happy to be here and Chris is going to put us work. And hopefully we will fit in and not mess too many things up," said Doug Hurley as he nursed a bruise picked up on his forehead.  Bob Behnken said the pair were well rested and ready for the tasks ahead. "We did get probably a good seven hours or so (of sleep)," he said in a radio link with mission control in Houston, Texas. "The first night is always a little bit of a challenge, but the Dragon was a slick vehicle, and we had good air flow and so we had an excellent evening. (We're) just excited to be back in low-Earth orbit again." Nasa Administrator Jim Bridenstine congratulated the duo on a job well done: "The whole world saw this mission and we are so, so proud of everything you've done for our country and, in fact, to inspire the world." SpaceX flew a first demonstration of its new crew vehicle last year, but that had only a dummy aboard. This sortie is the first to carry humans. Hurley's and Behnken's job on the mission is to test all onboard systems and to give their feedback to engineers. SpaceX and Nasa need a clean crewed demonstration so they can move swiftly to the next phase of the company's $2.6bn (£2.1bn) contract, which will encompass six astronaut "taxi" flights, with the first of these likely to occur at the end of August.  Hurley's and Behnken's arrival at the ISS means they get to claim a Stars and Stripes flag placed on the platform by the members of the very last space shuttle mission in 2011. The Atlantis orbiter's crew left this flag as an incentive to all those that came after them. The flag, which also flew on the very first shuttle flight in 1981, will now be returned to Earth to be given to the mission that next goes beyond Earth orbit.   Earlier, Hurley and Behnken named their Dragon ship in the time-honoured tradition of US spacefarers. They called it "Endeavour", in part to celebrate the new course being set by Nasa and its commercial partners, but also to acknowledge the past contribution to American space efforts by Shuttle Endeavour, on which both Hurley and Behnken served in the late 2000s. It's somewhat uncertain how long Hurley and Behnken will stay at the ISS, but perhaps as much as four months. In that time, they will become members of the current ISS Expedition 63 crew, taking part in the platform's everyday science and maintenance activities. Chris Cassidy joked that because his new crewmates arrived on a Sunday, they had missed the cleaning chores that normally take place on a Saturday. "We'll catch up next weekend," the commander said. Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has said he will postpone this year's G7 summit and invite leaders of other countries to participate in the talks. "I don't feel that... it properly represents what's going on in the world. It's a very outdated group of countries," Mr Trump said on Saturday. The G7 group, which the US hosts this year, includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the UK.  The president said Russia, South Korea, Australia and India should be invited. Speaking to reporters on board the presidential plane Air Force One, Mr Trump said that he was delaying the summit - which was scheduled to take place later in June  - until September.  Last week, Mr Trump said it might be possible to hold a gathering at the White House and potentially parts of Camp David, the US presidential country retreat, despite concerns over the coronavirus pandemic. German Chancellor Angela Merkel later rejected the president's invitation to attend a summit in person because of the outbreak.  Her spokesman thanked Mr Trump, but said the German leader "cannot agree to her personal participation, to a journey to Washington". On Friday, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson "agreed on the importance of convening the G7 in person in the near future" following a conversation with the US president, the White House said in a statement.  The G7 - or Group of Seven - leaders were scheduled to meet by videoconference in June in response to Covid-19. The group is made up of the seven of the world's largest economies. It regards itself as "a community of values", with freedom and human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and prosperity and sustainable development as its key principles.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Microsoft is to replace dozens of contract journalists on its MSN website and use automated systems to select news stories, US and UK media report. The curating of  stories from news organisations and selection of headlines and pictures for the MSN site is currently done by  journalists. Artificial intelligence will perform these news production tasks, sources told the Seattle Times.   Microsoft said it was part of an evaluation of its business.  The US tech giant said in a statement: "Like all companies, we evaluate our business on a regular basis. This can result in increased investment in some places and, from time to time, redeployment in others. These decisions are not the result of the current pandemic." Microsoft, like some other tech companies, pays news organisations to use their content on its website. But it employs journalists to decide which stories to display and how they are presented.  Around 50 contract news producers will lose their jobs at the end of June, the Seattle Times reports, but a team of full-time journalists will remain. "It's demoralising to think machines can replace us but there you go," one of those facing redundancy told the paper. Some  sacked journalists warned that artificial intelligence may not be fully familiar with strict editorial guidelines, and could end up letting through inappropriate stories.  Twenty-seven of those losing their jobs are employed by the UK's PA Media, the Guardian reports.  One journalist quoted in the paper said: "I spend all my time reading about how automation and AI is going to take all our jobs - now it's taken mine."  Microsoft is one of many tech companies experimenting with forms of so-called robot journalism to cut costs.   Google is also investing in projects to understand how it might work.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump has been criticised at home and abroad after announcing he is ending US ties with the World Health Organization (WHO).  The EU urged him to reconsider the decision, while Germany's health minister called it a "disappointing setback for international health". The head of the US Senate's health committee, a Republican like Mr Trump, said now was not the time to leave. Mr Trump said the WHO had failed to hold China to account over coronavirus. The WHO, a UN agency that helps countries promote healthcare and tackle outbreaks of disease, has faced regular criticism from the US president over its handling of the outbreak. He suspended US funding to the WHO last month and on Friday permanently halted the payment, which last year stood at more than $400m (£324m; €360m), the largest single contribution at around 15% of its total budget. European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and top EU diplomat, Josep Borrell, said in a statement: "In the face of this global threat, now is the time for enhanced co-operation and common solutions. Actions that weaken international results must be avoided. "We urge the US to reconsider its announced decision." German Health Minister Jens Spahn described the setback as "disappointing" although he accepted the WHO "needs reform". "The EU must take a leading role and engage more financially," he said. A spokesperson for the UK said: "Coronavirus is a global challenge and the World Health Organization has an important role to play in leading the international health response. We have no plans to withdraw our funding." The chair of the US Senate Health Committee, Lamar Alexander, said the move could hamper the discovery of a vaccine against Covid-19 and urged a reversal of the decision in the "strongest terms possible". "Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis has been dealt with, not in the middle of it," he said. Ex-presidential candidate and US Senator Elizabeth Warren tweeted: "President Trump's decision to leave the @WHO during a global pandemic alienates our allies, undermines our global leadership, and threatens the health of the American people." Anders Nordstrom, a former WHO acting director general, said he was "deeply concerned" the move would increase political tension at a time when "we need to have global solidarity". South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize called the decision "unfortunate".  WHO member states agreed on 19 May to set up an independent inquiry into the global response to the pandemic. Speaking  at the White House, Mr Trump said: "Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs."  It is not clear when any US withdrawal might take place. A 1948 agreement between the US and WHO allows for one year's notice before pulling out.  Mr Trump has accused China of trying to cover up the outbreak of coronavirus, which occurred in the city of Wuhan late last year. He also says that "China has total control over the World Health Organization". The president accused China of pressurising the WHO to "mislead the world" about the virus, without elaborating. "The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government," he said. The US will redirect its funds for the WHO  to other health groups. More than 102,000 people in the US have lost their lives to Covid-19 - by far the biggest death toll in the world.  Opponents say Mr Trump is trying to deflect criticism of his handling of the pandemic ahead of his re-election bid this year. Meanwhile, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has said that Mr Trump is trying to mislead the public, smear China and "shift the blame for [the US's] own incompetent response".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window My Money is a series looking at how people spend their money - and the sometimes tough decisions they have to make. Here Alyssa Hulme from Heber City in Utah, US, takes us through a week in her life during the coronavirus pandemic. Alyssa, 31, is a freelance writer and educational consultant. She and her husband Randy have four children: Ellie, eight, Max, seven, Amethyst, four and Josie, one. She has been homeschooling her children for a year, months before the pandemic started.  She says her week started out mundane but ended up awesome! She had no idea on Monday where she would be by Sunday.  Over to Alyssa.... I started the day nursing my one-year-old, passed her off to her dad for breakfast and settled down for a solid 45 minutes of private time before spending the rest of the day homeschooling three kids and caring for a baby. After prayer, meditation, and setting my To-Dos for the day, I purchased a course, the 30-day Money Cure with Carol Tuttle for $297 (£242). The course is on gaining financial affluence by clearing out limiting belief systems that don't serve me and replacing them with healthy practices. I have been looking forward to this course for months and have set aside money for this specific purpose.  After that I moved on to begin my day with my family and set everyone to their beginning tasks of piano, chores, and math. We've been homeschooling for a year now, so it's been a pretty typical day. But at lunchtime instead of transitioning to a play date, my husband took our eldest out for one-on-one time to help supplement the loss of activities and outings that has come with Covid-19 lockdowns.  We've been isolating since the end of February and the loss of friends is wearing on us all. During our midday quiet time I taught two online vocal training lessons virtually to students who live in town. Typically they'd come to my home, but we are all still isolating. After that we settled into our evening routine: I made dinner, we ate together and then held our weekly "family night" - an evening of talent shows, games, treats and fun. Total spend: $297 (£242) I continued with the money course. I am starting up a homeschool consulting business and really want to get on the correct and mentally healthy track for the sake of my business. The course has helped me identify several limiting beliefs I can clear up to allow space for more growth. Then, as every weekday for months, we did homeschool, lunch and quiet time in the afternoon.  During quiet time I had a virtual occupational therapy appointment for my one-year-old in order to evaluate her for possible gross motor delays. This is free through our state. Next I had a virtual appointment with my therapist. This costs $110 after insurance and is withdrawn from my Health Saving Account, an account we pay into monthly through my husband's pay check and is tax free. Therapy always really takes it out of me and today it was compounded by some new business issues I'm working through, so my husband picked up dinner from a fastfood Chinese restaurant for $40. It ended up being a lot of food and will last a good two and a half meals for the six of us.  I took the evening to work more on my business and work on my personal goals. Normally I'd go out with friends or go to the gym, but everything is closed, so I get to save more money and get to know my bed a little better. Total spend: $150 (£122) Our big outing today was a trip up the canyon near our home. We spent two hours hiking in the woods, building fairy houses and crossing streams.  Later in the evening I started making plans for next year's homeschool and bought some notebooks and stationery through Target.com. I really dislike online shopping, especially for something as personal as a notebook. As a writer, the size, weight and binding of a notebook really matters to me, so buying from an online shop is very disorienting.  I also bought a summer dress through Target.com, something I can easily nurse in and hope to be able to wear out and about someday here soon when the quarantine is lifted. Our county just moved to a low-risk status, so hopefully my husband and I can start up our weekly date nights soon.  Total spend: $110.52 (£90) Late last night my husband discovered that he will not be returning to work in his office until the end of 2020. We discussed buying a motorhome, living in it for the next six months, renting out our home, and working and doing homeschool on the go. This has been a dream of ours for 10 years, but it never worked out with our careers. Now is the time.  Today we decided to rent an RV (recreational vehicle) - $1,160 for four nights - and start testing out different configurations and living quarters. We decided to head for Yellowstone National Park. Two of the four entrances are now open! I found an RV site and started packing up.  I normally would have gone grocery shopping last night but our travel plans halted that. As a result we were out of food today, so I grabbed lunch from a local shop for $33.50 and dinner from a restaurant for $45. This is not a normal thing for us to just pick up and drop a ton of money on travel, but we have now been in isolation since the end of February and we are all so ready to have a new experience.  This money is coming from the allotment my husband and I had set aside to celebrate our 10 year anniversary tomorrow, but all our kid-free-for-the-first-time-in-five-years international travel plans were squashed by the virus. This will be an interesting substitute.  We parked the RV along our path to Yellowstone at a Walmart. Anyone can park there overnight for free, so it's a great backup to have in mind when travelling.  Total spend: $1,238.50 (£1,005) Happy 10 year anniversary to my husband and me! We celebrate the day by first getting groceries from Walmart and starting the trek to Yellowstone. I bought groceries for the week for $233. Not too bad for a family of six with limited fridge and cupboard space. We stopped to fill up the RV with gas for $213. After several hours of driving, we arrived at the spot I had reserved online yesterday for two nights, a total of $180, including water and electricity plug-ins. It's a little high for an RV site, but it's the closest I could find to the park entrance online and we decided to value time in the park over the cost of the campsite. (All the sites inside the park are closed due to Covid-19.) Total spend: $626 (£510) More blogs from the BBC's My Money Series: We woke early and headed to the park today, but it was closed due to a snowstorm. The road ended up getting 12 inches of snow in some places! Instead of exploring the park we explored the National Forest just outside. Total spend: $0 We got up early again and were able to enter the park! We used our National Parks Pass to get in, so no cost today. We did everything that was open in the park, the big attractions for us being the Upper and Lower falls outlooks, the Grand Prismatic Spring, and Old Faithful.  We saw so much wildlife on this trip, far more than my husband or I even saw here as children. We drove by and hiked next to elk, bison, deer, egrets, and even several bears including a baby and mama bear. We attribute this expanse of wildlife to conservation efforts in the park as well as the closure of the park over the last several months.  The snow also allowed us to see all the animal tracks throughout the park which our kids loved! Old Faithful had the largest crowd, but still very small even for this time of year. We watched with a small, social distancing crowd for the big event, and then headed out. We were tempted to get take-out from the lodge near Old Faithful, but decided to continue eating the food we'd already purchased knowing the lodge food prices are really marked up.  We packed up and exited the park through the South Entrance and drove through Grand Tetons National Park and got gas in Jackson Hole for $176. Wyoming has lots of open land for free parking, but with a new vehicle and dark terrain, we decided to stay overnight in a National Forest campsite a half hour away for $15 for the night. We pulled in about 23:00, paid via cash in a drop box, and enjoyed sleeping next to a river and under a blanket of stars. Total spend: $191 (£156) Thanks for coming with me on my 10 year wedding anniversary trip! This is not the trip we'd planned, but it's been wonderful for our family. We've seen two more National Parks, taken a break from quarantine in a way that feels safe for us, and enjoyed our beautiful nation.  This is an unusually high week for us because we went on our trip. But considering $2,000 of that was spent on our trip and only $613.02 spent on our normal life, I feel good about that. We had $2,000+ saved for months now to go to Barbados later this summer, but we have given up all international travel until the virus settles down. All in, I feel like this was a successful trip. We would not be moving forward with purchasing an RV had we not had the real life experience of travelling in one for an extended period of time.  The remaining $613.02 also reflects an unusual cost in the money course I am taking. I haven't purchased class tuition in probably five years, but being home all the time has me under-stimulated and needing a project.  I think like many families these days, our spending in many areas has decreased (no extracurriculars, less shopping and self-care purchases, almost no gas purchases), but in other ways expanded. I don't bring my kids into any grocery stores anymore, so when my husband is too busy at work to be with them and we run out of food, I get take-out meals. When our mental health is being run down by monotony, we rent RVs, buy our kids bikes, and online shop for anything to help the kids make it through the day. This is survival for us.  I feel very privileged to be financially secure and have a very stable income. While the world is in chaos we will continue to use money as a tool to support our mental wellbeing and try to take advantage of the new opportunities opening up to us.  We're looking for more people to share what they spend their money on. If you're interested, please email my.money@bbc.co.uk or get in touch via our My Money (World) Facebook group, or if you live in the UK, please join our My Money (UK) Facebook group and we'll aim to contact you.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The US has been convulsed by nationwide protests over the death of an African-American man in police custody. George Floyd, 46, died after being arrested by police outside a shop in Minneapolis, Minnesota. Footage of the arrest on 25 May shows a white police officer, Derek Chauvin, kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck while he was pinned to the floor. Mr Chauvin, 44, has since been charged with murder. The key events that led to Mr Floyd's death happened within just 30 minutes. Based on accounts from witnesses, video footage and official statements, here's what we know so far.  It began with a report of a fake $20 (£16.20) bill. A report was made on the evening of 25 May, when Mr Floyd bought a pack of cigarettes from Cup Foods, a grocery store. Believing the $20 bill he used to be counterfeit, a store employee reported it to police.  Mr Floyd had been living in Minneapolis for several years after moving there from his native Houston, Texas. He had recently been working as a bouncer in the city but, like millions of other Americans, was left jobless by the coronavirus pandemic.  Mr Floyd was a regular at Cup Foods. He was a friendly face, a pleasant customer who never caused any trouble, the store owner Mike Abumayyaleh told NBC.  But Mr Abumayyaleh was not at work on the day of the incident. In reporting the suspicious bill, his teenage employee was just following protocol. In a call to 911, made at 20:01, the employee told the operator he had demanded the cigarettes back but "he [Floyd] doesn't want to do that", according to a transcript released by authorities. The employee said the man appeared "drunk" and "not in control of himself", the transcript says.   Shortly after the call, at around 20:08, two police officers arrived. Mr Floyd was sitting with two other people in a car parked around the corner. After approaching the car, one of the officers, Thomas Lane, pulled out his gun and ordered Mr Floyd to show his hands. In an account of the incident, prosecutors do not explain why Mr Lane thought it necessary to draw his gun. Mr Lane, prosecutors said, "put his hands on Mr Floyd, and pulled him out of the car". Then Mr Floyd "actively resisted being handcuffed". Once handcuffed, though, Mr Floyd became compliant while Mr Lane explained he was being arrested for "passing counterfeit currency".  It was when officers tried to put Mr Floyd in their squad car that a struggle ensued.  At around 20:14, Mr Floyd "stiffened up, fell to the ground, and told the officers he was claustrophobic", according to the report.  Mr Chauvin arrived at the scene. He and other officers were involved in further attempt to put Mr Floyd in the police car. During this attempt, at 20:19, Mr Chauvin pulled Mr Floyd out of the passenger side, causing him to fall to the ground, the report said.  He lay there, face down, still in handcuffs. That's when witnesses started to film Mr Floyd, who appeared to be in a distressed state. These moments, captured on multiple mobile phones and shared widely on social media, would prove to be Mr Floyd's last. Mr Floyd was restrained by officers, while Mr Chauvin placed his left knee between his head and neck. "I can't breathe," Mr Floyd said repeatedly, pleading for his mother and begging "please, please, please". For eight minutes and 46 seconds, Mr Chauvin kept his knee on Mr Floyd's neck, the prosecutors' report says. About six minutes into that period, Mr Floyd became non-responsive. In videos of the incident, this was when Mr Floyd fell silent, as bystanders urged the officers to check his pulse. One of the other officers, JA Kueng, did just that, checking Mr Floyd's right wrist, but "couldn't find one". Yet, the officers did not move.  At 20:27, Mr Chauvin removed his knee from Mr Floyd's neck. Motionless, Mr Floyd was rolled on to a gurney and taken to the Hennepin County Medical Center in an ambulance.  He was pronounced dead around an hour later. On the night before his death, Mr Floyd had spoken to one his closest friends, Christopher Harris. He had advised Mr Floyd to contact a temporary jobs agency. Forgery, he said, was out of character for Mr Floyd. "The way he died was senseless," Harris said. "He begged for his life. He pleaded for his life. When you try so hard to put faith in this system, a system that you know isn't designed for you, when you constantly seek justice by lawful means and you can't get it, you begin to take the law into your own hands."Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Tensions between Minneapolis' black community and the police did not start with the death of George Floyd. They have been years in the making. On a hot Thursday morning in the Longfellow neighbourhood of Minneapolis, a 28-year-old father named Nuwman stood outside the Minneapolis Police Department's Third Precinct drinking a large coffee as smoke wafted past from the smouldering ruins of nearby buildings.  It was day three of protests over the death of 46-year-old George Floyd, after a white police officer named Derek Chauvin kneeled on his neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds. Floyd begged for his life before falling unconscious and dying in the street, in full view of witnesses and a rolling mobile phone camera. Four officers, including Chauvin, were fired from the department for their involvement. The previous night, tensions ignited, and for the first time the city saw looting, arson and violence. At least one man died in a shooting at a pawn shop. "This is everyday. Everyday that these police officers have enforced their protocol has led up to this," said Nuwman, his voice rising with emotion over the din of protesters and sirens. "This is not just a singular moment. This is a cataclysm. A combination of all the things that happened before." That night, protesters stormed the precinct as police cruisers flew out of the rear parking lot, abandoning it to demonstrators who quickly moved from room to room lighting blazes.  The following afternoon, a Friday, saw the arrest of Chauvin by Minnesota's Bureau of Criminal Apprehension. Chauvin has been charged with murder. This is not the first instance of a controversial, police-involved killing in the region. In 2016, Philando Castile was shot and killed by a police officer in a neighbourhood just 15 minutes away from the current epicentre of protest.  In 2017, a Minneapolis officer was charged with the shooting death of Justine Damond after she called to report a possible sexual assault. In 2015, protests erupted over the shooting death of Jamar Clark, a 24-year-old man who was being pursued by Minneapolis officers. All three deaths sparked protest movements and yielded mixed results in terms of prosecution. Yanez was tried and acquitted. Mohamed Noor, Damond's shooter, was sentenced to 12.5 years. No charges were brought in Clark's case.  For some, Floyd's death was the continuation of those stories. "WE SHOULD HAVE BURNT THE CITY DOWN FOR PHILANDO CASTILE," one person posted on social media.  But in some ways, the pictures beamed around the world this week tell a story that's unique.  Demonstrations are occurring in the midst of a historic, global pandemic. The sheer amount of property damage and arson has been staggering. The swiftness with which officers were fired, and the speed in which Chauvin was arrested and charged surprised many. But Minneapolis - while a prosperous city that celebrates liberal policies and politicians - has struggled for years with socioeconomic inequality and segregation. It's a phenomenon that's been dubbed the "Minnesota paradox".  The Twin Cities, as Minneapolis and St Paul are known, are still overwhelmingly white - about one-quarter of the population is non-white - and its neighbourhoods are still highly segregated. Most people of colour live on the cities' north sides.  They were shaped by racist red-lining policies dating to the early 20th Century, when black families were not allowed to buy homes in certain neighbourhoods. In the 1960s, the state built a major highway that cut through and destroyed a thriving black community known as Rondo in St Paul.  According to a 2018 study, the rate of black homeownership in the Twin Cities is among the lowest in the nation. Even before the pandemic caused massive layoffs, 10% of black residents were unemployed compared to 4% of whites. That disparity ranks as one of the nation's worst.  In 2016, the average white household in the Twin Cities made about $76,000 a year, while the average black household earned just $32,000. Thirty-two percent of black Twin Citians fell below the poverty line, while only 6.5% of whites did.  Racial disparities persist in the way the community is policed.  After Philando Castile was killed, data released about police traffic stops in the area showed that 44% of stops were black drivers, though the population was only 7% black.  According to the Minneapolis police department's own data, in 2018 55% of drivers stopped for "equipment violations" were black.  As Covid-19 ravages the area, these disparities are sure to worsen, as thousands lose their jobs, and their homes to evictions and foreclosures.  On Friday afternoon, residents of both St Paul and Minneapolis headed into the streets carrying brooms and pails, and slowly began to literally pick up the pieces of the town.  Following the announcement that former officer Chauvin had been jailed and charged with third-degree murder and manslaughter, protesters at Minneapolis City Hall let up a cheer.  But it was quickly replaced by a new demand: "One down, three to go." Follow Jessica on TwitterShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window As the US grapples with the coronavirus outbreak, President Donald Trump and and his likely election rival, Joe Biden, have been locking horns over the handling of the crisis. They've traded accusations about access to China for US health experts, and restrictions on flights from China following the outbreak. We've been looking at some of these claims and counter-claims. President Trump failed to get US health officials into China to inspect the outbreak Mr Biden has said there was "no effort" by the president to get US officials into China to inspect the initial outbreak, and also claimed that "Trump never got a CDC team on the ground in China."  But the Trump administration says it did try. Health Secretary Alex Azar told journalists in late January that the US had offered on 6 January to send a team from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) - an offer that was repeated later that month and in February. The CDC is the top government body responsible for protecting public health. Two US experts did get into China as part of a multinational delegation from the World Health Organization, which went in mid-February. These were Weigong Zhou from the US CDC, and Clifford Lane from the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.  It's also worth adding that the CDC itself has had an office in China for decades (more on this further down). Trump allowed 40,000 people to travel to US from China after the travel ban President Trump and Mr Biden have also clashed over how airtight the restrictions introduced on travel from China are. Mr Trump issued an order on 31 January which stopped foreign nationals who had been in China in the previous two weeks from entering the US. This came into effect on 2 February.  An advert by the Biden campaign claims the president let 40,000 travellers into the US from China after he signed the order. President Trump has hit back, saying these were US citizens coming home.  The order does have exemptions for US citizens, legal residents, and non-citizen relatives with close ties. Flight data analysed by the New York Times shows 40,000 people arrived in the US directly from China in the two months after President Trump's restrictions. We don't know how many of these were US citizens, but it is unlikely they all were  - as President Trump claims - with other exemptions also applying. President Trump cut the numbers of US disease experts in China before the outbreak This claim by Mr Biden refers to the presence of a CDC office inside China, which it's maintained for decades. Joe Biden said: "We had over 44, if I'm not mistaken, people from the CDC in China, to observe what was going on. The president brought home the vast majority of them and I think left only four in place." Mr Biden is right that overall numbers of CDC staff in China have come down significantly, but he's not correct about the numbers.  The CDC website says that as of March this year there were 14 staff in total working in China - three from the US and 11 employed locally. That's down from 47 CDC staff a year earlier, eight of whom were US employees and 39 of whom were locally recruited. Mr Biden further alleges that a key US expert role inside China has not been filled. He said: "We had an American official stationed inside the Chinese disease control agency serving as our eyes and ears. President Trump left the position vacant as the outbreak hit." It's true that the last American - a CDC employee -  left her role in China's disease control agency in 2019 before the coronavirus emerged, and was not replaced. When President Trump was asked about this on 22 March, he said that media reports about the CDC were "100 percent wrong" and then referred the question to Robert Redfield, the CDC director, who was with him.  Mr Redfield said the CDC "China office is actually being augmented, as we speak," but didn't explain why this particular role had ceased. Biden called Trump xenophobic for China travel ban President Trump claims Mr Biden "went crazy" and called him "xenophobic" for banning people entering the US from China. When the order was announced, Mr Biden did say it wasn't the time for "Donald Trump's record of hysterical xenophobia", and the next day tweeted a similar message. The Biden campaign says this wasn't a reference to the travel restrictions, but to the president's overall record in office. Mr Biden has never specifically said he opposed travel restrictions per se, but he did say in March that "travel restrictions based on favouritism and politics, rather than risk, will be counter-productive". He publicly supported the travel ban in early April, with his campaign saying: "Science supported this ban, therefore he did too." President Trump has also said Mr Biden wrote him a letter of apology regarding his comments about the China travel restrictions, but this isn't true, according to the Biden campaign. Read more from Reality Check Send us your questions Follow us on TwitterShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window For years, Twitter resisted calls to treat President Trump just like any other user. Then this week, everything changed. On Tech Tent, we examine the conflict between the president and his favourite social media platform. It began on Wednesday. Twitter had been under fire for allowing tweets in which the president shared a far-fetched conspiracy theory about an alleged crime involving a TV presenter and former Republican congressman.  But instead of taking action on those tweets, it fact-checked two others - about postal voting under a new policy which seeks to deter content which might suppress voting. Social media expert Chris Stokel-Walker tells Tech Tent that if Twitter thought limiting action to the area of elections was a cautious first step, it was wrong. "As soon as you start engaging in any sort of moderation or comment on politics, you run the risk of potentially alienating 50% of your audience - and given our very politically fractious times, that is more of a risk than ever," he said. Having taken that first step, and seeing President Trump immediately go nuclear and threatening to go so far as to shut the social media platform down, Twitter might have been tempted to go quiet for a bit. Instead, it chose escalation.  In the early hours of Friday morning, in a tweet about the protests in Minneapolis over the death of a black man, Mr Trump warned: "when the looting starts, the shooting starts".  Twitter's moderation team swung into action - after consulting CEO Jack Dorsey - and obscured the tweet with a message saying that rules on glorifying violence had been broken. Users could still see the tweet by clicking through that message, but sharing it was made harder.  A few hours later, as the president woke up, the official White House account simply repeated the offending tweet. We watched with bated breath to see what would happen and, sure enough, Twitter's moderators slapped the same warning on the tweet. It is difficult to see either side backing down now.  The White House is busy scouring Twitter to find examples of other world leaders who have glorified violence without any comeback. Others are finding all sorts of old Trump tweets that appear to have broken the rules by, for instance, spreading misinformation about treatments for coronavirus. Jack Dorsey, who had appeared very reluctant to apply anything but the most light-touch regulation, now finds himself faced with the unappealing prospect of cracking down on world leaders far and wide. Meanwhile, there is not exactly much solidarity being shown by Facebook. In general, it has been a more tightly-moderated platform than Twitter, but Mark Zuckerberg has made it clear he has no intention of following Jack Dorsey's lead when it comes to fact checking politicians. Donald Trump's Facebook page has simply replicated the posts which fell foul of Twitter - with no sign of fact-checking or finger-wagging. "This is the kind of thing that Donald Trump revels in," says Chris Stokel-Walker, "an ex-reality TV star who likes to stir the pot. He's now managed to set Mark Zuckerberg and Jack Dorsey against each other." For all the rage about freedom of speech from the president - and remember Twitter as a private company can do what it likes in that area - he seems unlikely to kill what has become his main platform for getting his message out.  Like the fighting couple in some dodgy romcom, Trump and Twitter need each other - though one suspects Jack Dorsey might be tempted to throw the President out and change the locks.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window News stories emerge almost daily in the US about police being called over black Americans doing nothing more than being black. Writer Barrett Holmes Pitner explains why he thinks American racism is unique.  Last week in California, three black people - a Jamaican, a Canadian of Nigerian descent, and a London native - were confronted by seven police cars as they checked out of their Airbnb because a white American thought they were robbing the house. Though they were not American, they were still subjected to racist American stereotypes - and being confronted with tense, potentially life-threatening altercations with police without ever committing a crime. I've travelled a fair amount around the world, but America's racist status quo remains unique and alarmingly oppressive. American racism is entirely complexion-based and monolithic. One's nationality is immaterial. Years ago during one of my trips to France, a woman at La Poste refused to sell me stamps because she thought I was African.  When she learned that I was American, she apologised and sold me the stamps. The racism I experienced in France is totally unacceptable, but it provided an escape not afforded last week to these three visitors to America. In France, nationality usurped race, and while that can have its own problems, it was still very different from the racism back home.  When I was in London, I lived in Bethnal Green during the 2011 riots, which started after London police officers killed Mark Duggan, a black man. As teenage vandals looted and set my neighbourhood ablaze, I remember casually walking down the street during the chaos and having a London police officer politely ask me to return to my flat. There was no tense exchange, I was not arrested, and I never feared for my life.  During the week of the riots, Londoners openly discussed how black people might receive different treatment from law enforcement, but conversations focused on analysing policing techniques, discussing ways to keep teenagers off of the streets during the summer when they do not have school, and catching looters via CCTV. In the American discourse, a supposedly inherent danger or criminality of black bodies would have been used to justify the police's killing of Duggan and present the riots as an inevitable by-product of a "culture of crime". The killing of Michael Brown and the riots in Ferguson followed this all-too-familiar American script. Racism towards black people in America has largely nothing to do with immigration or nationality. There is no home country for African-Americans to connect to. Instead it is essentially a status quo of domestic alienation, dehumanisation, criminalisation, and terror. European racism is bad, but it was still more welcoming than America's. America's systemic racism starts with slavery and the various slave codes - state or federal laws created that codified the inhumane practice of chattel slavery into law. The American South was a "slave society", not merely a society with slaves. However, following the abolition of slavery, laws similar to the slave codes continued to oppress black people. Following the Civil War, these "black codes" had the explicit purpose of depriving newly freed black Americans of the rights they had won. Black codes varied from state to state, but their legal foundation centred on vagrancy laws that allowed for an African American to be arrested if he was unemployed or homeless. They applied to countless blacks because housing and employment opportunities for freed blacks in the South were almost non-existent after the war.  Supporters of Virginia's Vagrancy Act of 1866, one of these measures, stated that it would reinstitute "slavery in all but its name". White Southerners would report blacks for vagrancy, and law enforcement would arrest them and sentence African-Americans to up three months of forced labour on public or private lands. The federal government fought against black codes during Reconstruction by electing former abolitionists and freed blacks to public office, and creating laws and adding amendments to the US Constitution to protect the rights of black Americans.  But following the collapse of Reconstruction in 1877, Southern states brought them back. Black codes became the bedrock of state constitutions. Poll taxes and literacy exams to prevent African Americans from voting soon became the norm. Jim Crow and racial segregation, which governed the South until the 1960s, are outgrowths of those laws. As black families fled the South in the 20th Century during the Great Migration, black codes followed them to Los Angeles, Chicago, New York and elsewhere. Black Americans - who were domestic refugees fleeing state-funded terrorism - allegedly brought crime, unemployment, vagrancy, and drugs. Police departments across America responded with more black codes and aggressive policing of black communities. Black life has always been criminalised and dehumanised in America. During Barack Obama's presidency, Michael Brown, Eric Garner and countless other unarmed African-Americans were killed by police, but with a black president many Americans felt progress was attainable. Social media raised awareness of these injustices and helped create the Black Lives Matter movement. Under President Donald Trump, we have the same type of violence that America has always had, but now we have, at best, an indifferent federal government, and at worst a racist president. Due to this change, more white Americans are emboldened to re-employ black codes.  Under Obama, social media championed our desire for progress, and today it documents our obvious regression. Last week in New York City, a black lawyer and her 19-year-old daughter were handcuffed and detained by police after being falsely accused of shoplifting. During the same week, the police were called by a white student at Yale University because a black Yale student was sleeping in the common area in their dormitory. In late April, an African-American family had the police called on them by a white woman for having a cookout in a public park. Following the arrest of two black men for sitting in a Starbucks, and the increased awareness of similar injustices, the world can more clearly see the racist applications of the law that black people constantly face in America. Their arrest was black codes in 2018, but without the three months of forced labour. Trump's presidency has exacerbated the problem and social media has raised awareness, but employing black codes and masquerading oppression against black people as democratic justice and fair law enforcement has sadly always been America's status quo. Barrett Holmes Pitner is a writer and journalist based in Washington, DC. Correction: An earlier version of this report incorrectly stated that Trayvon Martin was killed by police.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The US will designate the anti-fascist group Antifa a terrorist organisation, President Donald Trump says.  The president accused Antifa of starting riots that stemmed from protests over George Floyd's death. Mr Floyd, a black man, died in police custody earlier this week, reigniting anger at police treatment of African-Americans.  Protests over his death have turned violent, prompting major cities to impose curfews. On Saturday, Minnesota's Democratic Governor Tim Walz suggested that foreign influences, white supremacists and drug cartels were behind the violence, giving few other details.  On Twitter Mr Trump blamed "Antifa-led anarchists" and "Radical Left Anarchists" for the unrest, again without providing more specifics.  The United States of America will be designating ANTIFA as a Terrorist Organization. End of Twitter post  by @realDonaldTrump Antifa - short for anti-fascist or Anti-Fascist action - is a protest movement that strongly opposes neo-Nazis, fascism, white supremacists and racism.  Most members oppose all forms of racism and sexism, and strongly oppose what they see as the nationalist, anti-immigration and anti-Muslim policies that Mr Trump has enacted. Anti-government and anti-capitalist, Antifa's members are often perceived as more closely aligned with anarchists than the mainstream left. The movement gained new prominence in the US for its role in confronting white supremacists at a rally in Charlottesville, Virginia in 2017. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A lawyer for the family of George Floyd, whose death sparked unrest across the US, has accused a police officer of "premeditated murder". Minneapolis policeman Derek Chauvin has been charged with third-degree murder, but lawyer Benjamin Crump told CBS news it was a case of first-degree murder. "We think that he had intent... almost nine minutes he kept his knee in a man's neck that was begging and pleading for breath," he said. Several US cities have imposed curfews. The Floyd case has reignited US anger over police killings of black Americans. It follows the high-profile cases of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Eric Garner in New York and others that have driven the Black Lives Matter movement. "The fact that officer Chauvin kept his knee on his neck for almost three minutes after he was unconscious. We don't understand how that was not first degree murder. We don't understand how all these officers haven't been arrested," lawyer Crump said. Three other officers present at the time have also since been sacked. For many the outrage over George Floyd's death also reflects years of frustration over socioeconomic inequality and segregation, not least in Minneapolis itself. In video footage, Mr Chauvin, 44, can be seen kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for several minutes on Monday. Mr Floyd, 46,  repeatedly says that he is unable to breathe.  There have been five nights of arson and looting in Minneapolis and the adjacent city of St Paul. Minnesota's Governor Tim Walz said on Saturday he was deploying the full Minnesota National Guard for the first time since World War Two. Governor Walz said racism in his state had created the conditions for Mr Floyd's death. The National Guard - the US reserve military force for domestic emergencies - said on Sunday that 5,000 of its personnel had been activated in 15 states and Washington DC. It added that "state and local law enforcement agencies remain responsible for security". In the CBS interview, lawyer Benjamin Crump also said "we now have the audio from the police bodycam and we hear where one officer says 'he doesn't have a pulse, maybe we should turn him on his side', but yet officer Chauvin says 'no, we're going to keep him in this position'. That's intent. "Also, the fact that officer Chauvin kept his knee on his neck for almost three minutes after he was unconscious." The lawyer also said Mr Chauvin and Mr Floyd already knew each other before Mr Floyd's death in custody. He said the Floyd family was "notified by the owner of a club that Derek Chauvin was an off-duty police officer where George Floyd was a security guard, and so they had to overlap". Huge demonstrations have taken place in at least 30 cities across the US. They were largely peaceful on Saturday, but violence flared later in the day. One of the cities worst affected by unrest is Los Angeles. California Governor Gavin Newsom declared a state of emergency in the city and activated the National Guard. The entire city is under a 20:00 to 05:30 curfew. Numerous shops have been looted, including on the famous retail avenues, Melrose and Fairfax, while overhead footage showed fires burning. Earlier police fired rubber bullets and hit protesters with batons. Hundreds of arrests have been made.  In New York City, police arrested about 350 people overnight and dozens of police suffered light injuries. In Salt Lake City, a man aimed a bow and arrow at protesters and was attacked by the crowd, Reuters reported.  President Donald Trump's national security adviser told CNN "I don't think there's systemic racism" in the police. Robert O'Brien said "there are some racist police, I think they're the minority, I think they're the few bad apples and we need to root them out". On Saturday evening, President Trump said Mr Floyd's death had "filled Americans with horror, anger and grief". He also denounced the actions of "looters and anarchists", accusing them of dishonouring the memory of Mr Floyd. What was needed, he said, was "healing not hatred, justice not chaos". "I will not allow angry mobs to dominate - won't happen," he added. Thousands took part in an anti-racism protest march in central London on Sunday, defying social distancing rules imposed because of coronavirus. They gathered in Trafalgar Square, then the crowd moved on to the US embassy.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Hundreds of people demonstrated in support of the Black Lives Matter movement following the death of George Floyd in police custody in the US. The action at Cardiff Castle was organised following the death of unarmed Mr Floyd in Minneapolis, Minnesota, on 25 May. There has been serious civil unrest across the USA sparked by the 46-year-old's death. Ex-policeman Derek Chauvin, 44, is charged with murdering Mr Floyd. Mr Chauvin, who is white, was shown in footage kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck. He and three other police officers have been sacked. He is due to appear in court on Monday. In Cardiff, the protesters sat peacefully in the city centre displaying 'Black Lives Matter' and 'Say their names' placards. Speeches on standing up to injustice and racism were given. One protestor, Donna Ali, said: "If you're silent, you're not going to change anything "It's something we've experienced for many years, whether it's in the US or the UK. "It's really heart-breaking that people can't see past the colour of skin." And Garyn Young added: "It's important we show the unity and strength we have here. "It's important for Welsh people to demonstrate - there's a BAME (Black, Asian, and minority ethnic) community here willing to show solidarity with the rest of the country. "It makes me feel emotional, it's great to see so much passion and so much anger at what's happened." South Wales Police reminded protestors of coronavirus legislation.  A spokesman said: "The event passed without incident with minimal disruption to the wider public."Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Two US astronauts have achieved a world first by launching to the International Space Station (ISS) aboard a spacecraft built by Elon Musk's SpaceX. Here, BBC News profiles the crew members. Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken have broken a nine-year hiatus for Nasa, becoming the first astronauts to launch from US soil since the retirement of the space shuttle in 2011.  In the intervening years, Nasa bought seats for its astronauts - at a cost of tens of millions of dollars per flight - on the Russian Soyuz. But officials have also worked with Elon Musk's company SpaceX and aerospace giant Boeing to develop new, American spacecraft capable of ferrying humans to and from the ISS - under the space agency's Commercial Crew Program. Musk's vehicle will be first to fly; Hurley and Behnken will travel to the ISS in the sleek Crew Dragon spacecraft. "It's well past time to be launching an American rocket from the Florida coast to the International Space Station and I am certainly honoured to be a part of it," Hurley, 53, said at the beginning of May, before the flight. Behnken, 49, added: "On my first flight... I didn't have a son, so I'm really excited to share the mission with him." Nasa chose two of its most experienced astronauts to help California-based SpaceX ready the Crew Dragon for launch. The two are also longstanding friends. "Being lucky enough to fly with your best friend... I think there's a lot of people who wish they could do that," says Hurley. When they launched atop a Falcon 9 rocket, their spouses knew exactly what they were going through. That's because they're astronauts too. Marine Colonel Hurley's wife Karen Nyberg flew into space twice - aboard the shuttle and the Soyuz - retiring from Nasa this year. They have a 10-year-old son, Jack, whose formative years were shaped by space travel. Nyberg began training for a six-month space station mission just a few months after Jack's birth. In the meantime, Hurley was preparing for his own flight - piloting the last ever shuttle mission. Sometimes, Nyberg took Jack to Russia, at other times he stayed at home in Texas. "Literally from the time Jack was old enough to comprehend things, he was either going to Russia or Skyping with mommy. That's just the way it was," Hurley told the Houston Chronicle in 2013. Air Force Colonel Behnken is married to Megan McArthur, who flew on the last mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope in 2009.  As an active member of the astronaut corps, she is a potential candidate to be the first woman on the Moon when Nasa returns in 2024. Their son, Theo, is six. Hurley, Behnken, Nyberg and McArthur all graduated from the same astronaut class (2000) and attended each other's weddings. The men are so used to each other's company, they now have a spooky rapport. They "can predict - almost by body language - what the person's opinion is or what their next action is going to be," Behnken told CNN before the launch. "We've just been doing this so long that it's kind of like having a second set of hands." Hurley says of Behnken: "I know instantaneously when I've not done something correctly - just put it that way. He doesn't have a good poker face."  But Behnken admits Hurley is the more organised of the two. The older of the two men was raised in the hamlet of Apalachin, in upstate New York. "It was just a great small town existence... we didn't get a stoplight until I was, I think, in college," Hurley said in 2009. Behnken hails from  St Ann, a suburb of St Louis, Missouri. In 2010, he described it as "a blue collar kind of a neighbourhood", adding: "I guess, in my bag of tricks... I'm more of a working class sort of a person." He took jobs in construction before deciding that working outdoors in the summer heat wasn't for him.  Both men went to college on military scholarships and gained undergraduate degrees in engineering. While Behnken went on to complete a PhD at Caltech - the elite institute featured in the Big Bang Theory television show - Hurley became an officer in the Marines. They both subsequently trained as military test pilots - at different training schools. It's been the archetypal background for Nasa's astronauts since the days of its first intake - the Mercury Seven. "When I showed up [at Nasa] it was like: 'Well, I have a PhD and an MD,' and I'm sitting there going, 'Mmm, wow! Maybe I was a bit of a slacker'," said Hurley.  "But you know, your professional development as a pilot and the thousands of hours you get as a pilot... brings something to the table." Hurley and Behnken were selected as astronaut candidates three years before the shuttle Columbia broke up on re-entry, killing seven crew members. After the disaster, Nasa decided it would retire the shuttle, handing over space station transport to private firms. Thus, when the two men were finally assigned their flights, the shuttle programme was in its final phase. Their missions focused on fulfilling Nasa's prior commitments to complete construction of the ISS, including the delivery of crew compartments designed to fit in the shuttle's payload bay. When the spaceplane was retired, the pair were assigned to the Commercial Crew Program. In August 2018, Hurley and Behnken were announced as the prime crew for Demo-2, the first flight of SpaceX's vehicle with humans onboard. "Bob and I, the last two years, have essentially been living in California, working hand-in-hand with the folks at SpaceX to get us to this point," Hurley said this month. They've had to get used to the Crew Dragon's touchscreen controls after previously working with the chunky buttons on shuttle instrument panels. Hurley says a background in evaluating military aircraft as test pilots proved crucial in their work with SpaceX. "That, in and of itself, helped both of us tremendously, because all along the process that you see in the military, there are delays, there are technical challenges, there are things that you don't expect and you have to work through them," he explained. Setbacks - including two spectacular explosions that destroyed a rocket and one of the Crew Dragon capsules - have seen the mission slip by nearly four years from its original date of October 2016.  "We were well-prepared for that part of it, when I think it caused some frustration within Nasa as launch dates weren't made," explained Hurley. Despite bumps in the road, Behnken's enthusiasm remained undimmed: "It's probably the dream of every test pilot school student to have the opportunity to fly on a brand new spaceship." Hurley told CNN: "From a first flight standpoint, certainly, there might be some greater quantifiable risk to some degree. "But probably no different to any other spaceflight we've flown humans on before." Follow Paul on Twitter.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Coronavirus is continuing its spread across the world, with more than six million confirmed cases in 188 countries. More than 360,000 people have lost their lives. This series of maps and charts tracks the global outbreak of the virus since it emerged in China in December last year.  The virus, which causes the respiratory infection Covid-19, was first detected in the city of Wuhan, China, in late 2019.  It then spread quickly across the globe in the first months of 2020. Please upgrade your browser to see the full interactive Source: Johns Hopkins University, national public health agencies 
                    Figures last updated
                    
                        31 May 2020, 11:10 BST
                    
                 Note: The map and table in this page use a different source for figures for France from that used by Johns Hopkins University, which results in a slightly lower overall total.  The US has by far the largest number of cases, around one third of the global total, according to figures collated by Johns Hopkins University. With more than 100,000 fatalities, it also has the world's highest death toll.  The UK, Italy, France and Spain are the worst-hit European countries. In China, the official death toll is some 4,600 from about 84,000 confirmed cases, although critics have questioned whether the country's official numbers can be trusted.  
                            *Deaths per 100,000 people
                         
                            Please update your browser to see full interactive
                         
                            This information is regularly updated but may not reflect the latest totals for each country.
                         
                            ** The past data for new cases is a three day rolling average. Due to revisions in the number of cases, an average cannot be calculated for this date.
                         
                            Source: Johns Hopkins University, national public health agencies and UN population data
                         
                            Figures last updated: 31 May 2020, 11:10 BST
                         The outbreak was declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO) on 11 March. This is when an infectious disease is passing easily from person to person in many parts of the world at the same time. The WHO has warned that the pandemic is a long way from being over and said people should be prepared for new outbreaks to build up very quickly - especially in areas where lockdowns are eased. The true number of cases is thought to be much higher than the reported figures, as many of those with milder symptoms have not been tested and counted.   Globally, at least 4.5 billion people - half the world's population - have been living under social distancing measures, according to the AFP news agency's estimates. Those restrictions have had a big impact on the global economy, with the International Monetary Fund warning the world faces the worst recession since the Great Depression of the 1930s. The United Nations World Food Programme has also warned that the pandemic could almost double the number of people suffering acute hunger. While some countries are starting to see confirmed cases and deaths fall following strict lockdown restrictions, others are only now seeing them rise. A sharp increase in cases in Latin America has led the WHO to say the Americas are currently at the centre of the pandemic.  These charts show four countries where deaths are on an upward trajectory - as shown by the red lines. There is particular concern about the situation in Brazil where President Jair Bolsonaro continues to downplay the risks of the virus.  Official figures show some 28,000 people have died so far but a projection by experts at the University of Washington suggests the death toll could exceed 125,000 by early August.   Dr Christopher Murray, who leads the university's Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, said daily deaths in the country may not peak until mid-July unless tough restrictions like those seen in Europe are enforced.  Several other countries in Latin America are seeing widespread outbreaks, including Peru, Mexico, Chile and Ecuador.  Elsewhere, Russia has also seen infections rise rapidly in recent weeks and now has the third highest number of confirmed cases worldwide. South Africa, Egypt, Algeria and Nigeria have seen the largest outbreaks in Africa.  South Korea, which appeared to have brought its outbreak under control with an extensive "track, trace and treat" programme, has been forced to reintroduce some restrictions after a small spike in cases. European countries are now slowly beginning to ease restrictions brought in to slow the spread of the virus. The UK, Italy, Spain and France, along with others, now appear to have passed the peak, with the number of new confirmed cases and deaths falling. The UK has recorded more than 38,000 deaths, the highest number in Europe. Italy is not far behind, with 33,000, while both France and Spain are just below 30,000. However, differences in population size and how countries report their figures, with some including deaths in care homes, or deaths of those suspected but not confirmed of having the virus, means international comparisons are complicated. European countries have varied in their plans to ease lockdowns, but the WHO has urged all nations to adopt a "slow, steady" approach. With more than 1.7 million cases, the US has the highest number of confirmed infections in the world. It has also recorded over 100,000 deaths.  The state of New York has been particularly badly affected, with about 30,000 deaths in total, but the number of daily deaths has now dropped to about 100 - down from 1,000 a day in early April.  At one point, more than 90% of the US population was under mandatory lockdown orders, but all 50 states have now begun to loosen their stay-at-home restrictions and allowed some businesses to reopen - a move health officials fear could further spread the virus. Top US infectious diseases doctor Anthony Fauci has cautioned against opening up public life too soon, warning of further "little spikes" which could become bigger outbreaks. President Trump, who disagrees with Dr Fauci's advice, has made it clear he is keen to reopen the US economy "vaccine or no vaccine". The latest figures show more than 40 million people have lost their jobs since the outbreak hit the US - a quarter of the American workforce. The rise means the jobless rate is now worse than at any time since the Great Depression of the 1930s.  Mr Trump has also announced that he is terminating the country's relationship with the WHO, accusing the organisation of failing to hold China to account over the coronavirus pandemic. He said the US would redirect funds to other bodies instead. The data used on this page comes from a variety of sources. It includes figures collated by Johns Hopkins University, data from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, national governments and health agencies, as well as UN data on populations. When comparing figures from different countries it is important to bear in mind that not all governments are recording coronavirus cases and deaths in the same way. This makes like for like comparisons between countries difficult. Other factors to consider include: different population sizes, the size of the a country's elderly population or whether a particular country has a large amount of its people living in densely populated areas. In addition, countries may be in different stages of the pandemic.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Curfews have been ordered in cities across the US to try to stem unrest sparked by the death of a black man in police custody. But they have been defied in many areas, with shops looted, cars burned and buildings attacked. Riot police have used tear gas and rubber bullets. President Donald Trump urged "healing" over the death of George Floyd but said he could not allow mobs to dominate. A white ex-policeman is charged with murdering Mr Floyd, 46, in Minneapolis. Derek Chauvin, 44, is due to appear in court on Monday. In video footage, Mr Chauvin can be seen kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for several minutes on Monday. Mr Floyd repeatedly says that he is unable to breathe.  Three other officers present at the time have also since been sacked. The Floyd case has reignited US anger over police killings of black Americans. It follows the high-profile cases of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Eric Garner in New York and others that have driven the Black Lives Matter movement. But for many it also reflects years of frustration over socioeconomic inequality and segregation, not least in Minneapolis itself. A big anti-racism protest march also took place in London on Sunday, first in Trafalgar Square, then the crowd moved on to the US embassy. Huge demonstrations have taken place in at least 30 cities across the US. They were largely peaceful on Saturday, but violence flared later in the day. One of the cities worst affected by unrest is Los Angeles. California Governor Gavin Newsom declared a state of emergency in the city and activated the National Guard - the reserve military force that can be called on   to intervene in domestic emergencies. The entire city is under a 20:00 to 05:30 curfew. Numerous shops have been looted, including on the famous retail avenues, Melrose and Fairfax, while overhead footage showed fires burning. Earlier police fired rubber bullets and hit protesters with batons. Hundreds of arrests have been made. Mayor Eric Garcetti said this was "the heaviest moment I've experienced" since the riots in 1992 that were sparked by the acquittal of police over the beating of Rodney King. In New York, some 20 police cars were burned and dozens of arrests made. Video also showed a police car driving into a crowd of protesters. Mayor Bill de Blasio said the situation was not started by the officers, but Congress Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez said his comments were unacceptable and he should not be making excuses for the officers. Chicago Mayor Lori Lightfoot imposed a 21:00 to 06:00 curfew until further notice, saying she was "disgusted" by the violence. "I've seen protesters hurl projectiles at our police department... bottles of water, urine and Lord knows what else," she said. Although in most places curfews were observed by the majority, also in most places there was evidence of defiance. In Atlanta, protesters remained on the streets after the curfew began, damaging property and vehicles. Dozens of arrests were made. Minneapolis,  where George Floyd died, has seen less violence overnight. Some 700 National Guard officers are aiding police and they acted quickly to enforce the curfew imposed there. The Star Tribune said the action had so far headed off the unrest of the previous night. For the second day running, a large crowd of protesters taunted National Guard officers outside the White House in Washington, DC.  Indianapolis was one of the cities that had seen peaceful protests during the day turn violent later. At least one shooting death has occurred, but police said no officers had discharged weapons. In under-curfew Philadelphia, 13 police officers were hurt and at least 35 arrests made as stores were looted, police cars torched and buildings defaced. Overnight curfews have also been declared in Miami, Portland and Louisville, among other cities. San Francisco is the latest to impose a curfew, announced by Mayor London Breed for 20:00 local time on Sunday, after looting and violence. But amid the violence there were also moments of solidarity. In Flint, Michigan, Sheriff Chris Swanson took off the riot helmets of his men, laid down batons and asked protesters what they wanted. After hugs and high fives, they chanted "walk with us" and the sheriff did. Across parts of America, police and protesters have been clashing.In Flint, Michigan, something else happened.This is the exact moment when Sheriff Chris Swanson put down his helmet and baton — and joined protesters on their march.pic.twitter.com/VHnwnpUy8r End of Twitter post  by @Goodable On Saturday evening, Mr Trump said that Mr Floyd's death had "filled Americans with horror, anger and grief". "I stand before you as a friend and ally to every American seeking peace," he said in a televised address from Cape Canaveral in Florida, following the launch into orbit of two Nasa astronauts by billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX company. The president denounced the actions of "looters and anarchists", accusing them of dishonouring the memory of Mr Floyd. What was needed, he said, was "healing not hatred, justice not chaos". "I will not allow angry mobs to dominate - won't happen," he added. Mr Trump has blamed the mayor of Minneapolis - a Democrat - for failing to control the protests, which are the worst since the president took office.  The president's Democratic Party rival, Joe Biden, has accused him of giving oxygen to bigotry and said those responsible for Mr Floyd's death must be held accountable. But he also condemned rioting, saying: "Protesting such brutality is right and necessary. But burning down communities and needless destruction is not." Many mayors and local officials have been trying to separate the genuine protests over Mr Floyd's death from the violent unrest, often blaming "outsiders" for the looting and arson. There have been many reports of residents trying to stop acts of violence. On Monday night, police received a phone call from a neighbourhood grocery store alleging that George Floyd had paid with a counterfeit $20 note. Officers  were attempting to put him in a police vehicle when he dropped to the ground, telling them he was claustrophobic. According to police, he physically resisted officers and was handcuffed. Video of the incident does not show how the confrontation started.  With Mr Chauvin's knee on his neck, Mr Floyd can be heard saying "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me". According to a preliminary autopsy by the county medical examiner, the police officer had his knee on Mr Floyd's neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds - almost three minutes of which was after Mr Floyd became non-responsive. Nearly two minutes before Mr Chauvin removed his knee the other officers checked Mr Floyd's right wrist for a pulse and were unable to find one. He was taken to hospital and pronounced dead around an hour later. The preliminary autopsy, included in the criminal complaint against Mr Chauvin, did not find evidence of "traumatic asphyxia or strangulation". The medical examiner noted Mr Floyd had underlying heart conditions and the combination of these, "potential intoxicants in his system" and being restrained by the officers "likely contributed to his death". Mr Chauvin was charged on Friday with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter over his role in Mr Floyd's death. Mr Floyd's family said they wanted a more serious, first-degree murder charge as well as the arrest of the three other officers involved.  Hennepin County Prosecutor Mike Freeman said he "anticipates charges" for the other officers but would not offer more details.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has said he will postpone this year's G7 summit and invite leaders of other countries to participate in the talks. "I don't feel that... it properly represents what's going on in the world. It's a very outdated group of countries," Mr Trump said on Saturday. The G7 group, which the US hosts this year, includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the UK.  The president said Russia, South Korea, Australia and India should be invited. Speaking to reporters on board the presidential plane Air Force One, Mr Trump said that he was delaying the summit - which was scheduled to take place later in June  - until September.  Last week, Mr Trump said it might be possible to hold a gathering at the White House and potentially parts of Camp David, the US presidential country retreat, despite concerns over the coronavirus pandemic. German Chancellor Angela Merkel later rejected the president's invitation to attend a summit in person because of the outbreak.  Her spokesman thanked Mr Trump, but said the German leader "cannot agree to her personal participation, to a journey to Washington". On Friday, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson "agreed on the importance of convening the G7 in person in the near future" following a conversation with the US president, the White House said in a statement.  The G7 - or Group of Seven - leaders were scheduled to meet by videoconference in June in response to Covid-19. The group is made up of the seven of the world's largest economies. It regards itself as "a community of values", with freedom and human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and prosperity and sustainable development as its key principles.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violence has broken out again in the US as protests continue across the country over the killing of an unarmed black man by police in the state on Minnesota on Monday.  George Floyd died in police custody while an officer kneeled on his neck to pin him down.  In Minnesota - where he was killed - the state's entire national guard was mobilised on Saturday to try to prevent further trouble. All pictures copyrightedShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window As the US grapples with the coronavirus outbreak, President Donald Trump and and his likely election rival, Joe Biden, have been locking horns over the handling of the crisis. They've traded accusations about access to China for US health experts, and restrictions on flights from China following the outbreak. We've been looking at some of these claims and counter-claims. President Trump failed to get US health officials into China to inspect the outbreak Mr Biden has said there was "no effort" by the president to get US officials into China to inspect the initial outbreak, and also claimed that "Trump never got a CDC team on the ground in China."  But the Trump administration says it did try. Health Secretary Alex Azar told journalists in late January that the US had offered on 6 January to send a team from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) - an offer that was repeated later that month and in February. The CDC is the top government body responsible for protecting public health. Two US experts did get into China as part of a multinational delegation from the World Health Organization, which went in mid-February. These were Weigong Zhou from the US CDC, and Clifford Lane from the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.  It's also worth adding that the CDC itself has had an office in China for decades (more on this further down). Trump allowed 40,000 people to travel to US from China after the travel ban President Trump and Mr Biden have also clashed over how airtight the restrictions introduced on travel from China are. Mr Trump issued an order on 31 January which stopped foreign nationals who had been in China in the previous two weeks from entering the US. This came into effect on 2 February.  An advert by the Biden campaign claims the president let 40,000 travellers into the US from China after he signed the order. President Trump has hit back, saying these were US citizens coming home.  The order does have exemptions for US citizens, legal residents, and non-citizen relatives with close ties. Flight data analysed by the New York Times shows 40,000 people arrived in the US directly from China in the two months after President Trump's restrictions. We don't know how many of these were US citizens, but it is unlikely they all were  - as President Trump claims - with other exemptions also applying. President Trump cut the numbers of US disease experts in China before the outbreak This claim by Mr Biden refers to the presence of a CDC office inside China, which it's maintained for decades. Joe Biden said: "We had over 44, if I'm not mistaken, people from the CDC in China, to observe what was going on. The president brought home the vast majority of them and I think left only four in place." Mr Biden is right that overall numbers of CDC staff in China have come down significantly, but he's not correct about the numbers.  The CDC website says that as of March this year there were 14 staff in total working in China - three from the US and 11 employed locally. That's down from 47 CDC staff a year earlier, eight of whom were US employees and 39 of whom were locally recruited. Mr Biden further alleges that a key US expert role inside China has not been filled. He said: "We had an American official stationed inside the Chinese disease control agency serving as our eyes and ears. President Trump left the position vacant as the outbreak hit." It's true that the last American - a CDC employee -  left her role in China's disease control agency in 2019 before the coronavirus emerged, and was not replaced. When President Trump was asked about this on 22 March, he said that media reports about the CDC were "100 percent wrong" and then referred the question to Robert Redfield, the CDC director, who was with him.  Mr Redfield said the CDC "China office is actually being augmented, as we speak," but didn't explain why this particular role had ceased. Biden called Trump xenophobic for China travel ban President Trump claims Mr Biden "went crazy" and called him "xenophobic" for banning people entering the US from China. When the order was announced, Mr Biden did say it wasn't the time for "Donald Trump's record of hysterical xenophobia", and the next day tweeted a similar message. The Biden campaign says this wasn't a reference to the travel restrictions, but to the president's overall record in office. Mr Biden has never specifically said he opposed travel restrictions per se, but he did say in March that "travel restrictions based on favouritism and politics, rather than risk, will be counter-productive". He publicly supported the travel ban in early April, with his campaign saying: "Science supported this ban, therefore he did too." President Trump has also said Mr Biden wrote him a letter of apology regarding his comments about the China travel restrictions, but this isn't true, according to the Biden campaign. Read more from Reality Check Send us your questions Follow us on TwitterShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window My Money is a series looking at how people spend their money - and the sometimes tough decisions they have to make. Here Alyssa Hulme from Heber City in Utah, US, takes us through a week in her life during the coronavirus pandemic. Alyssa, 31, is a freelance writer and educational consultant. She and her husband Randy have four children: Ellie, eight, Max, seven, Amethyst, four and Josie, one. She has been homeschooling her children for a year, months before the pandemic started.  She says her week started out mundane but ended up awesome! She had no idea on Monday where she would be by Sunday.  Over to Alyssa.... I started the day nursing my one-year-old, passed her off to her dad for breakfast and settled down for a solid 45 minutes of private time before spending the rest of the day homeschooling three kids and caring for a baby. After prayer, meditation, and setting my To-Dos for the day, I purchased a course, the 30-day Money Cure with Carol Tuttle for $297 (£242). The course is on gaining financial affluence by clearing out limiting belief systems that don't serve me and replacing them with healthy practices. I have been looking forward to this course for months and have set aside money for this specific purpose.  After that I moved on to begin my day with my family and set everyone to their beginning tasks of piano, chores, and math. We've been homeschooling for a year now, so it's been a pretty typical day. But at lunchtime instead of transitioning to a play date, my husband took our eldest out for one-on-one time to help supplement the loss of activities and outings that has come with Covid-19 lockdowns.  We've been isolating since the end of February and the loss of friends is wearing on us all. During our midday quiet time I taught two online vocal training lessons virtually to students who live in town. Typically they'd come to my home, but we are all still isolating. After that we settled into our evening routine: I made dinner, we ate together and then held our weekly "family night" - an evening of talent shows, games, treats and fun. Total spend: $297 (£242) I continued with the money course. I am starting up a homeschool consulting business and really want to get on the correct and mentally healthy track for the sake of my business. The course has helped me identify several limiting beliefs I can clear up to allow space for more growth. Then, as every weekday for months, we did homeschool, lunch and quiet time in the afternoon.  During quiet time I had a virtual occupational therapy appointment for my one-year-old in order to evaluate her for possible gross motor delays. This is free through our state. Next I had a virtual appointment with my therapist. This costs $110 after insurance and is withdrawn from my Health Saving Account, an account we pay into monthly through my husband's pay check and is tax free. Therapy always really takes it out of me and today it was compounded by some new business issues I'm working through, so my husband picked up dinner from a fastfood Chinese restaurant for $40. It ended up being a lot of food and will last a good two and a half meals for the six of us.  I took the evening to work more on my business and work on my personal goals. Normally I'd go out with friends or go to the gym, but everything is closed, so I get to save more money and get to know my bed a little better. Total spend: $150 (£122) Our big outing today was a trip up the canyon near our home. We spent two hours hiking in the woods, building fairy houses and crossing streams.  Later in the evening I started making plans for next year's homeschool and bought some notebooks and stationery through Target.com. I really dislike online shopping, especially for something as personal as a notebook. As a writer, the size, weight and binding of a notebook really matters to me, so buying from an online shop is very disorienting.  I also bought a summer dress through Target.com, something I can easily nurse in and hope to be able to wear out and about someday here soon when the quarantine is lifted. Our county just moved to a low-risk status, so hopefully my husband and I can start up our weekly date nights soon.  Total spend: $110.52 (£90) Late last night my husband discovered that he will not be returning to work in his office until the end of 2020. We discussed buying a motorhome, living in it for the next six months, renting out our home, and working and doing homeschool on the go. This has been a dream of ours for 10 years, but it never worked out with our careers. Now is the time.  Today we decided to rent an RV (recreational vehicle) - $1,160 for four nights - and start testing out different configurations and living quarters. We decided to head for Yellowstone National Park. Two of the four entrances are now open! I found an RV site and started packing up.  I normally would have gone grocery shopping last night but our travel plans halted that. As a result we were out of food today, so I grabbed lunch from a local shop for $33.50 and dinner from a restaurant for $45. This is not a normal thing for us to just pick up and drop a ton of money on travel, but we have now been in isolation since the end of February and we are all so ready to have a new experience.  This money is coming from the allotment my husband and I had set aside to celebrate our 10 year anniversary tomorrow, but all our kid-free-for-the-first-time-in-five-years international travel plans were squashed by the virus. This will be an interesting substitute.  We parked the RV along our path to Yellowstone at a Walmart. Anyone can park there overnight for free, so it's a great backup to have in mind when travelling.  Total spend: $1,238.50 (£1,005) Happy 10 year anniversary to my husband and me! We celebrate the day by first getting groceries from Walmart and starting the trek to Yellowstone. I bought groceries for the week for $233. Not too bad for a family of six with limited fridge and cupboard space. We stopped to fill up the RV with gas for $213. After several hours of driving, we arrived at the spot I had reserved online yesterday for two nights, a total of $180, including water and electricity plug-ins. It's a little high for an RV site, but it's the closest I could find to the park entrance online and we decided to value time in the park over the cost of the campsite. (All the sites inside the park are closed due to Covid-19.) Total spend: $626 (£510) More blogs from the BBC's My Money Series: We woke early and headed to the park today, but it was closed due to a snowstorm. The road ended up getting 12 inches of snow in some places! Instead of exploring the park we explored the National Forest just outside. Total spend: $0 We got up early again and were able to enter the park! We used our National Parks Pass to get in, so no cost today. We did everything that was open in the park, the big attractions for us being the Upper and Lower falls outlooks, the Grand Prismatic Spring, and Old Faithful.  We saw so much wildlife on this trip, far more than my husband or I even saw here as children. We drove by and hiked next to elk, bison, deer, egrets, and even several bears including a baby and mama bear. We attribute this expanse of wildlife to conservation efforts in the park as well as the closure of the park over the last several months.  The snow also allowed us to see all the animal tracks throughout the park which our kids loved! Old Faithful had the largest crowd, but still very small even for this time of year. We watched with a small, social distancing crowd for the big event, and then headed out. We were tempted to get take-out from the lodge near Old Faithful, but decided to continue eating the food we'd already purchased knowing the lodge food prices are really marked up.  We packed up and exited the park through the South Entrance and drove through Grand Tetons National Park and got gas in Jackson Hole for $176. Wyoming has lots of open land for free parking, but with a new vehicle and dark terrain, we decided to stay overnight in a National Forest campsite a half hour away for $15 for the night. We pulled in about 23:00, paid via cash in a drop box, and enjoyed sleeping next to a river and under a blanket of stars. Total spend: $191 (£156) Thanks for coming with me on my 10 year wedding anniversary trip! This is not the trip we'd planned, but it's been wonderful for our family. We've seen two more National Parks, taken a break from quarantine in a way that feels safe for us, and enjoyed our beautiful nation.  This is an unusually high week for us because we went on our trip. But considering $2,000 of that was spent on our trip and only $613.02 spent on our normal life, I feel good about that. We had $2,000+ saved for months now to go to Barbados later this summer, but we have given up all international travel until the virus settles down. All in, I feel like this was a successful trip. We would not be moving forward with purchasing an RV had we not had the real life experience of travelling in one for an extended period of time.  The remaining $613.02 also reflects an unusual cost in the money course I am taking. I haven't purchased class tuition in probably five years, but being home all the time has me under-stimulated and needing a project.  I think like many families these days, our spending in many areas has decreased (no extracurriculars, less shopping and self-care purchases, almost no gas purchases), but in other ways expanded. I don't bring my kids into any grocery stores anymore, so when my husband is too busy at work to be with them and we run out of food, I get take-out meals. When our mental health is being run down by monotony, we rent RVs, buy our kids bikes, and online shop for anything to help the kids make it through the day. This is survival for us.  I feel very privileged to be financially secure and have a very stable income. While the world is in chaos we will continue to use money as a tool to support our mental wellbeing and try to take advantage of the new opportunities opening up to us.  We're looking for more people to share what they spend their money on. If you're interested, please email my.money@bbc.co.uk or get in touch via our My Money (World) Facebook group, or if you live in the UK, please join our My Money (UK) Facebook group and we'll aim to contact you.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violent protests over the death of an unarmed African-American man in the hands of police officers in Minnesota "are no longer in any way" about his killing, the state's governor has said. Tim Walz spoke after a night of unrest in several US cities over the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. He said that as a result he was taking the unprecedented step of mobilising the state's entire National Guard. There are also reports that military police units could deploy. An ex-Minneapolis policeman has been charged with murder over the death of Mr Floyd, 46, in police custody on Monday. Derek Chauvin, 44 and white, was shown in footage kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for several minutes, even after he said he couldn't breathe. He and three other officers have since been sacked. The video went viral online, reigniting US anger over police killings of black Americans, and reopening deep wounds over racial inequality across the nation. On Friday night protesters clashed with police in cities including New York, Atlanta and Portland. In Washington DC, the White House was briefly locked down. In Houston, where George Floyd grew up, a 19-year-old protester told the Associated Press: "My question is how many more, how many more? I just want to live in a future where we all live in harmony and we're not oppressed." In Minnesota, "our great cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul are under assault," Governor Walz said. "The situation in Minneapolis is now about attacking civil society, instilling fear and disrupting our great city." He said violence on Friday night had made "a mockery of pretending this is about George Floyd's death, or inequities or historical traumas to our communities of colour".  He and other officials have suggested that many violent protesters came from outside the state to cause trouble, but did not give details.  On Saturday, President Donald Trump said Mr Floyd's death had "filled Americans with horror, anger and grief".  "I stand before you as a friend and ally to every American seeking peace," he said in a televised address from Cape Canaveral in Florida, following the launch into orbit of two Nasa astronauts by billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX company.  The president denounced the actions of "looters and anarchists", saying that what was needed was "healing not hatred, justice not chaos".   "I will not allow angry mobs to dominate - won't happen," he added. Mr Trump earlier praised the US Secret Service for securing the White House but said if protesters breached the perimeter they "would have been greeted with the most vicious dogs, and most ominous weapons, I have ever seen". He blamed violence on "organised groups".  Minnesota remains the most volatile region, with curfews ordered for the Twin Cities of Minneapolis-Saint Paul from 20:00 to 06:00 on Friday and Saturday evening. Protesters defied the curfew on Friday. Fires, many from burning cars, were visible in a number of areas and television pictures showed widespread looting.  Hundreds of troops from the National Guard, a reserve military force that can be called on by the US president or state governors to intervene in domestic emergencies, moved in late at night. Minnesota officials said tens of thousands of people turned out on Friday and they are expecting more unrest on Saturday night.  As a result, Gov Walz said he was activating all National Guard troops available in the state  - reportedly up to 13,000 - for the first time in history to respond to rioters. The Pentagon said some US military units were on alert to support Minnesota if asked. There are long-standing tensions between the black community and police in Minneapolis. Another black man, Philando Castile, was shot and killed in 2016 during a traffic stop close to the epicentre of these protests in a case that gained international attention. African-Americans also suffer significant socio-economic inequalities, entrenched segregation and a higher level of unemployment than the white community.  In Atlanta, Georgia, where buildings were vandalised, a state of emergency was declared for some areas to protect people and property.  Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms issued an impassioned plea, saying: "This is not a protest. This is not in the spirit of Martin Luther King Jr. You are disgracing our city. You are disgracing the life of George Floyd." In New York's Brooklyn district, protesters clashed with police, throwing projectiles, starting fires and destroying police vehicles. A number of officers were injured and many arrests made. The mayor of Portland, Oregon, has declared a state of emergency amid looting, fires and an attack on a police precinct. An immediate curfew until 06:00 local time (13:00 GMT) was imposed and it will restart at 20:00. On Monday night, police received a phone call from a neighbourhood grocery store alleging that George Floyd had paid with a counterfeit $20 note. Officers responded and were attempting to put him in a police vehicle when he dropped to the ground, telling them he was claustrophobic. According to police, he physically resisted officers and was handcuffed. Video of the incident does not show how the confrontation started.  With Mr Chauvin's knee on his neck, Mr Floyd can be heard saying "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me". According to a preliminary autopsy by the county medical examiner, the police officer had his knee on Mr Floyd's neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds - almost three minutes of which was after Mr Floyd became non-responsive. Nearly two minutes before Mr Chauvin removed his knee the other officers checked Mr Floyd's right wrist for a pulse and were unable to find one. He was taken to hospital and pronounced dead around an hour later. The preliminary autopsy, included in the criminal complaint against Mr Chauvin, did not find evidence of "traumatic asphyxia or strangulation". The medical examiner noted Mr Floyd had underlying heart conditions and the combination of these, "potential intoxicants in his system" and being restrained by the officers "likely contributed to his death". Mr Chauvin was charged on Friday with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter over his role in Mr Floyd's death. Mr Floyd's family and their lawyer, Benjamin Crump, said that this was "welcome but overdue". The family said they wanted a more serious, first-degree murder charge as well as the arrest of the three other officers involved.  Hennepin County Prosecutor Mike Freeman said he "anticipates charges" for the other officers but would not offer more details.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The private rocket company SpaceX has sent two Nasa astronauts into orbit. It's the first time since the retirement of the shuttles nine years ago that an American crew has made the journey from US territory. Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken are not only trialling a new capsule system, they are also initiating a new business model for Nasa. The agency will no longer own the vehicles it uses but merely purchase the "taxi" service offered by SpaceX. It's hoped companies other than tech billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX outfit will come in to expand the market. The aerospace giant Boeing already has a contract with Nasa to do so.  Mr Musk himself said he was overcome with emotion watching his hardware take the astronauts to orbit.  "I think this is something that should get people right in the heart, of anyone that has the spirit of exploration. And the US is the distillation of the spirit of exploration," he told reporters. The new capability the CEO is offering will end the reliance of Nasa on Russian rockets and capsules to get its people to the International Space Station (ISS). It was a point picked up on by President Donald Trump, who came to Florida to watch the launch. "Past leaders put the US at the mercy of foreign nations to send our astronauts into orbit. Not anymore," he said. "Today we once again proudly launched American astronauts on American rockets - the best in the world - from right here on American soil." Hurley's and Behnken's Dragon ship left Earth atop its Falcon-9 rocket precisely on time - at 15:22 EDT (19:22 GMT / 20:22 BST). Meteorologists had forecast only a 50:50 chance of favourable conditions around Florida's Kennedy Space Center at lift-off, but, as luck would have it, the weather window stayed open and the SpaceX controllers grabbed their opportunity. The Falcon soared off the spaceport's famous 39A pad to head northeast out over the Atlantic. After two-and-a-half minutes, the lower-stage of the vehicle had separated to return to a drone ship at sea. And after a further six minutes, the crew were safely inserted into orbit.  Hurley and Behnken are set to arrive at the ISS on Sunday. They'll use some of the intervening hours to test equipment and procedures in their capsule, including doing some manual flying.  Although the Dragon capsule is a fully automated vehicle capable of finding its own way to the ISS, the crew needs to prepare for all eventualities and that means knowing exactly how the ship will behave in their hands. Uniquely, the Dragon has no control stick; all flight commands must be entered via a touchscreen panel. One of their first tasks in orbit was simply to name their ship - in the tradition of past US spacefarers, all the way back to the Mercury programme. Radioing down to Earth, they announced it would be called Endeavour.  Doug Hurley said: "We chose Endeavour for a few reasons: One, because of this incredible endeavour that Nasa, SpaceX and the US have been on since the end of the shuttle programme back in 2011. The other reason is a little more personal to Bob and I. We both had our first flights on shuttle Endeavour and it just meant so much to us to carry on that name." Endeavour was the ship commanded by British explorer James Cook on his voyage to Australia in the late 18th Century. The length of Hurley's and Behnken's stay at the ISS is uncertain, but is likely to be somewhere between one and four months.  Assuming their return to a splashdown in the Atlantic is as smooth as the launch, Nasa and SpaceX will move directly into the full terms of their new relationship. The company has a $2.6bn (£2.1bn) contract with the agency to fly six operational crew missions to the ISS.  The first of these should occur at the end August, or very soon after; and will see four astronauts climb aboard a Dragon rather than just the two we saw on this occasion. Saturday's launch went ahead against the background of the coronavirus crisis.  Crowds were encouraged not to assemble near the Kennedy complex, and Nasa itself severely limited the number of guests invited on to the spaceport. As for the astronauts, they would ordinarily observe a quarantine before flight. But again Nasa reduced the number of people the men could come into contact with in the weeks running up to launch, and those that had to get close were instructed to wear masks. For SpaceX, Saturday marked another significant milestone for the company which was founded just 18 years ago. The firm has upended the launcher industry with its reusable vehicles and is now pioneering a new market-driven approach to human spaceflight. It hasn't all been plain sailing - as evidenced by a spectacular explosion at the  firm's prototyping facility in Boca Chica, Texas, on Friday. But the company has routinely proved naysayers wrong, and Nasa believes its relationship with Elon Musk will save billion of dollars that can be diverted to the more complex task of getting people back to the Moon and then to Mars.     "We want to establish a commercial environment in low-Earth orbit so that we can focus on the hard job of exploring beyond our home planet, to establish a sustained presence on the Moon and get to Mars to establish a presence there," said Bob Cabana, the director at Kennedy.  "We can't do that if we're locked here in low-Earth orbit, and commercial crew - that's the beginning of a whole new era of spaceflight." Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The US has been convulsed by nationwide protests over the death of an African-American man in police custody. George Floyd, 46, died after being arrested by police outside a shop in Minneapolis, Minnesota. Footage of the arrest on 25 May shows a white police officer, Derek Chauvin, kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck while he was pinned to the floor. Mr Chauvin, 44, has since been charged with murder. The key events that led to Mr Floyd's death happened within just 30 minutes. Based on accounts from witnesses, video footage and official statements, here's what we know so far.  It began with a report of a fake $20 (£16.20) bill. A report was made on the evening of 25 May, when Mr Floyd bought a pack of cigarettes from Cup Foods, a grocery store. Believing the $20 bill he used to be counterfeit, a store employee reported it to police.  Mr Floyd had been living in Minneapolis for several years after moving there from his native Houston, Texas. He had recently been working as a bouncer in the city but, like millions of other Americans, was left jobless by the coronavirus pandemic.  Mr Floyd was a regular at Cup Foods. He was a friendly face, a pleasant customer who never caused any trouble, the store owner Mike Abumayyaleh told NBC.  But Mr Abumayyaleh was not at work on the day of the incident. In reporting the suspicious bill, his teenage employee was just following protocol. In a call to 911, made at 20:01, the employee told the operator he had demanded the cigarettes back but "he [Floyd] doesn't want to do that", according to a transcript released by authorities. The employee said the man appeared "drunk" and "not in control of himself", the transcript says.   Shortly after the call, at around 20:08, two police officers arrived. Mr Floyd was sitting with two other people in a car parked around the corner. After approaching the car, one of the officers, Thomas Lane, pulled out his gun and ordered Mr Floyd to show his hands. In an account of the incident, prosecutors do not explain why Mr Lane thought it necessary to draw his gun. Mr Lane, prosecutors said, "put his hands on Mr Floyd, and pulled him out of the car". Then Mr Floyd "actively resisted being handcuffed". Once handcuffed, though, Mr Floyd became compliant while Mr Lane explained he was being arrested for "passing counterfeit currency".  It was when officers tried to put Mr Floyd in their squad car that a struggle ensued.  At around 20:14, Mr Floyd "stiffened up, fell to the ground, and told the officers he was claustrophobic", according to the report.  Mr Chauvin arrived at the scene. He and other officers were involved in further attempt to put Mr Floyd in the police car. During this attempt, at 20:19, Mr Chauvin pulled Mr Floyd out of the passenger side, causing him to fall to the ground, the report said.  He lay there, face down, still in handcuffs. That's when witnesses started to film Mr Floyd, who appeared to be in a distressed state. These moments, captured on multiple mobile phones and shared widely on social media, would prove to be Mr Floyd's last. Mr Floyd was restrained by officers, while Mr Chauvin placed his left knee between his head and neck. "I can't breathe," Mr Floyd said repeatedly, pleading for his mother and begging "please, please, please". For eight minutes and 46 seconds, Mr Chauvin kept his knee on Mr Floyd's neck, the prosecutors' report says. About six minutes into that period, Mr Floyd became non-responsive. In videos of the incident, this was when Mr Floyd fell silent, as bystanders urged the officers to check his pulse. One of the other officers, JA Kueng, did just that, checking Mr Floyd's right wrist, but "couldn't find one". Yet, the officers did not move.  At 20:27, Mr Chauvin removed his knee from Mr Floyd's neck. Motionless, Mr Floyd was rolled on to a gurney and taken to the Hennepin County Medical Center in an ambulance.  He was pronounced dead around an hour later. On the night before his death, Mr Floyd had spoken to one his closest friends, Christopher Harris. He had advised Mr Floyd to contact a temporary jobs agency. Forgery, he said, was out of character for Mr Floyd. "The way he died was senseless," Harris said. "He begged for his life. He pleaded for his life. When you try so hard to put faith in this system, a system that you know isn't designed for you, when you constantly seek justice by lawful means and you can't get it, you begin to take the law into your own hands."Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump has been criticised at home and abroad after announcing he is ending US ties with the World Health Organization (WHO).  The EU urged him to reconsider the decision, while Germany's health minister called it a "disappointing setback for international health". The head of the US Senate's health committee, a Republican like Mr Trump, said now was not the time to leave. Mr Trump said the WHO had failed to hold China to account over coronavirus. The WHO, a UN agency that helps countries promote healthcare and tackle outbreaks of disease, has faced regular criticism from the US president over its handling of the outbreak. He suspended US funding to the WHO last month and on Friday permanently halted the payment, which last year stood at more than $400m (£324m; €360m), the largest single contribution at around 15% of its total budget. European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and top EU diplomat, Josep Borrell, said in a statement: "In the face of this global threat, now is the time for enhanced co-operation and common solutions. Actions that weaken international results must be avoided. "We urge the US to reconsider its announced decision." German Health Minister Jens Spahn described the setback as "disappointing" although he accepted the WHO "needs reform". "The EU must take a leading role and engage more financially," he said. A spokesperson for the UK said: "Coronavirus is a global challenge and the World Health Organization has an important role to play in leading the international health response. We have no plans to withdraw our funding." The chair of the US Senate Health Committee, Lamar Alexander, said the move could hamper the discovery of a vaccine against Covid-19 and urged a reversal of the decision in the "strongest terms possible". "Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis has been dealt with, not in the middle of it," he said. Ex-presidential candidate and US Senator Elizabeth Warren tweeted: "President Trump's decision to leave the @WHO during a global pandemic alienates our allies, undermines our global leadership, and threatens the health of the American people." Anders Nordstrom, a former WHO acting director general, said he was "deeply concerned" the move would increase political tension at a time when "we need to have global solidarity". South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize called the decision "unfortunate".  WHO member states agreed on 19 May to set up an independent inquiry into the global response to the pandemic. Speaking  at the White House, Mr Trump said: "Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs."  It is not clear when any US withdrawal might take place. A 1948 agreement between the US and WHO allows for one year's notice before pulling out.  Mr Trump has accused China of trying to cover up the outbreak of coronavirus, which occurred in the city of Wuhan late last year. He also says that "China has total control over the World Health Organization". The president accused China of pressurising the WHO to "mislead the world" about the virus, without elaborating. "The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government," he said. The US will redirect its funds for the WHO  to other health groups. More than 102,000 people in the US have lost their lives to Covid-19 - by far the biggest death toll in the world.  Opponents say Mr Trump is trying to deflect criticism of his handling of the pandemic ahead of his re-election bid this year. Meanwhile, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has said that Mr Trump is trying to mislead the public, smear China and "shift the blame for [the US's] own incompetent response".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump has announced that he will start to end preferential treatment for Hong Kong in trade and travel, in response to a new security law pushed by Beijing. He described the Chinese government's moves to introduce the measure in Hong Kong as a "tragedy".  Mr Trump also said he was "terminating" the US relationship with the World Health Organization over Covid-19. China has told the West to "stop interfering" in Hong Kong. The territory, a former British colony, enjoys unique freedoms not seen in mainland China. But many people there see the looming security law as bringing an end to Hong Kong's special status, agreed under a 1984 agreement between China and the UK. There are fears the proposed measure - which has sparked a wave of anti-mainland protests - could quash freedoms by making it a crime to undermine Beijing's authority in the territory. This week, Britain said that if China went forward with the law, it could offer British National (Overseas) passport holders in Hong Kong a path to UK citizenship. On Friday, the UK Home Office confirmed that up to three million people with BNO status could acquire citizenship in this way - as long as they applied for and were granted a passport. Mr Trump said that he no longer considered Hong Kong to be separate from China, and accused Beijing of violating its obligations under the 1984 agreement "China has replaced One Country, Two Systems with One Country, One System", Mr Trump told reporters in the White House's Rose Garden, in a prepared statement that attacked China on several fronts.  "This is a tragedy for Hong Kong... China has smothered Hong Kong's freedom." Currently, Hong Kong - a major global financial centre - enjoys a special status with the US compared to mainland China. It is treated as a separate customs and travel territory and so is not, for example, subject to trade tariffs applied by the US on the mainland. Mr Trump also said sanctions would be imposed on Chinese and Hong Kong officials who were believed by Washington to be involved in eroding the territory's autonomy. He did not outline what form these sanctions would take.  The State Department, he added, would revise its travel advisory for Hong Kong in light of "increased danger of surveillance" from China.  The president also said the US would suspend the entry of foreign nationals from China identified by the US as potential security risks. There are fears that this could affect thousands of graduate students.  No further details were given regarding the "termination" of the US relationship with the WHO. In April, the US president said he would halt funding to the UN agency because it has "failed in its basic duty" in its response to the coronavirus outbreak. He accused it of mismanaging and covering up the spread of the virus after it emerged in China. The Global Times newspaper - run by China's ruling communist party - called the move towards revoking Hong Kong's special status with the US "recklessly arbitrary".  Hong Kong's Justice Secretary Teresa Cheng told the BBC's Chinese Service earlier on Friday that any threat of sanctions was unacceptable.  "Are the sanctions being imposed with a view to coerce another state to change their policy...? Any such sanctions are not going to benefit anyone," she said.   Analysis by Zhaoyin Feng, BBC Chinese  The US removing Hong Kong's special privileges sends a strong warning signal to China, which activists and protesters in the territory will welcome.  The announced measures cover not only Hong Kong, but also intellectual property theft and Chinese firms listed in the US.  According to media reports, Washington is expected to revoke more than 3,000 Chinese graduate students' visas. While this accounts for only 1% of the total number of Chinese students in America, Washington's move will open yet another front in bilateral tensions. But the separate punishments announced for China may not be as harsh as what had been expected, as indicated by a rise in the stock markets after Donald Trump's speech.  Beijing will probably match some of Washington's sanctions and restrictions in a tit-for-tat manner. After a short-lived honeymoon since the trade deal, China and the US appear to be heading towards an abyss at an accelerating speed. China has proposed security legislation which would make it a crime to undermine Beijing's authority in Hong Kong, and could also see China installing its own security agencies in the region for the first time. China's parliament has backed the resolution - which now passes to the country's senior leadership.  Full details about exactly what behaviour will be outlawed under the new security law are not yet clear. It is due to be enacted before September. However, it is expected to criminalise:  Experts say they fear the law could see people punished for criticising Beijing - as happens in mainland China. For example, Nobel Laureate Liu Xiaobo was jailed for 11 years for subversion after he co-authored a document calling for political reform. China's foreign ministry in Hong Kong described US criticism of the new draft law as "utterly imperious, unreasonable and shameless".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has announced that he is terminating the country's relationship with the World Health Organization (WHO). The president has accused the WHO of failing to hold Beijing to account over the coronavirus pandemic. "China has total control over the World Health Organization," the president said while announcing measures aimed at punishing Beijing. Washington will redirect funds to other bodies, he said. The WHO, a UN agency that helps countries promote healthcare and tackle outbreaks of disease, is yet to comment on Mr Trump's decision.  But on Saturday, the European Union led calls for the Trump administration to reconsider its decision, warning it could hamper global efforts to tackle the coronavirus pandemic.  Mr Trump announced last month that he was going to halt US funding for the WHO unless it undertook "substantive improvements" within 30 days. The WHO's Director-General, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, has promised a review of its response to the pandemic and defended its independence. The US is the global health agency's largest single contributor, providing more than $400m (£324m; €360m) in 2019, around 15% of its total budget. Other countries, including Germany and the UK, have said they have no intention of withdrawing funding from the WHO, which is co-ordinating a global initiative to develop a vaccine against Covid-19. Mr Trump, who is campaigning for re-election this year and has been criticised for his own handling of the pandemic, has blamed China for trying to cover up the coronavirus outbreak. More than 102,000 people in the US have lost their lives to Covid-19 - by far the biggest death toll in the world.  "We will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and directing those funds" to other global public health charities, Mr Trump said in the White House Rose Garden. "The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government," he said. He added that China had "instigated a global pandemic that has cost over 100,000 American lives". The president accused China of pressurising the WHO to "mislead the world" about the virus, without giving evidence for his allegations. Mr Trump's criticism of the WHO's handling of the pandemic began last month when he threatened to permanently withdraw US funding, suggesting the UN health agency had "failed in its basic duty" in its response. "It is clear the repeated missteps by you and your organisation in responding to the pandemic have been extremely costly for the world," he wrote in a letter to the WHO's chief on 18 May. He later labelled the WHO a "puppet of China". China has accused the US of being responsible for the spread of the virus on its own soil, attributing the outbreak to American "politicians who lie". Earlier this month, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said Mr Trump was trying to mislead the public, smear China and "shift the blame for [the US's] own incompetent response". WHO member states have since agreed to set up an independent inquiry into the global response to the pandemic. There has been much concern among health experts and politicians, many of whom fear Mr Trump's decision will impede global efforts to bring the pandemic under control. On Saturday, the EU issued a joint statement from its Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and foreign affairs chief Josep Borrell, who urged the US to think again. It said for the WHO to fight pandemics effectively, "the participation and support of all is required and very much needed".  "We urge the US to reconsider its announced decision," the statement added. German's Health Minister Jens Spahn also criticised the move, saying it amounted to a "disappointing backlash for international health". In the US, there has been criticism from across the political spectrum. Republican Senator Lamar Alexander said he disagreed with the president's decision because, without US funding, clinical trials to develop a coronavirus vaccine could be disrupted. "Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis has been dealt with, not in the middle of it," the chair of the US Senate Health Committee said.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Protesters have clashed with police in cities across the US over the killing of an unarmed African-American man at the hands of officers in Minneapolis. Minnesota's governor said the tragedy of the death of George Floyd in police custody had morphed into "something much different - wanton destruction". New York, Atlanta, Portland and other cities have seen violence, while the White House was briefly locked down. An ex-Minneapolis policeman has been charged with murder over the death. Derek Chauvin, who is white, was shown in footage kneeling on 46-year-old Mr Floyd's neck on Monday. He and three other officers have since been sacked. Mr Chauvin, 44, is due to appear in court in Minneapolis for the first time on Monday. President Donald Trump has described the incident as "a terrible, terrible thing" and said he had spoken with Mr Floyd's family, whom he described as "terrific people". The Floyd case has reignited US anger over police killings of black Americans, and reopened deep wounds over racial inequality across the nation. It follows the deaths of Michael Brown, Eric Garner and others, which have all occurred since the Black Lives Matter movement was sparked by the acquittal of neighbourhood watchman George Zimmerman in the shooting death of Trayvon Martin in 2012. Minnesota remains the most volatile region, with curfews ordered for the Twin Cities of Minneapolis-Saint Paul from 20:00 to 06:00 on Friday and Saturday evening. Protesters defied the curfew on Friday. Fires, many from burning cars, were visible in a number of areas with fire officials unable to reach some sites. Television pictures also showed looting in Minneapolis, with police officers thin on the ground. Only at about midnight (05:00 GMT) did police and National Guard troops move in in any numbers, the Star Tribune reports. State Governor Tim Walz, in an early morning press briefing, described the situation as "chaotic, dangerous and unprecedented". He said he took responsibility for "underestimating the wanton destruction and the sheer size of this crowd" when questioned about the lack of police on the streets. He said the Guard deployment was the largest in state history but admitted "there's simply more of them than us". He said those on the streets "don't give one damn" about the stay-at-home order. The Pentagon has put the military on alert for possible deployment in Minneapolis. On Friday evening, crowds gathered near the White House in Washington waving photographs of Mr Floyd and chanting "I can't breathe" - invoking his last words and those of Eric Garner, a black man who died after being held in a police chokehold in New York in 2014. The White House was then temporarily placed on lockdown, with the US Secret Service closing entrances and exits. In Atlanta, a state of emergency was declared for some areas to protect people and property. Buildings were vandalised and a police vehicle was set alight as protesters gathered near the offices of news broadcaster CNN. Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms issued a passionate plea, saying: "This is not a protest. This is not in the spirit of Martin Luther King Jr. You are disgracing our city. You are disgracing the life of George Floyd." In New York's Brooklyn district, protesters clashed with police, throwing projectiles, starting fires and destroying police vehicles. A number of officers were injured and many arrests made. Mayor Bill de Blasio tweeted: "We don't ever want to see another night like this." The mayor of Portland, Oregon, has declared a state of emergency amid looting, fires and an attack on a police precinct. An immediate curfew until 06:00 local time (13:00 GMT) was imposed and it will restart at 20:00. In Detroit, police are investigating after a 19-year-old man was killed when a vehicle pulled up to protesters and shots were fired into the crowd. In Dallas, officers launched tear gas canisters after they were pelted with stones, with tear gas also fired in Phoenix, Indianapolis and Denver. Protesters blocked roads in Los Angeles and also in Oakland, where windows were smashed and "Kill Cops" graffiti sprayed. Mr Chauvin has been charged with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter over his role in Mr Floyd's death. Mr Floyd's family and their lawyer, Benjamin Crump, said that this was "welcome but overdue". The family said they wanted a more serious, first-degree murder charge as well as the arrest of the three other officers involved.  Hennepin County Prosecutor Mike Freeman said he "anticipates charges" for the other officers but would not offer more details. Mr Freeman said his office "charged this case as quickly as evidence has been presented to us". "This is by far the fastest that we've ever charged a police officer," he noted. According to the criminal complaint, Mr Chauvin acted with "a depraved mind, without regard for human life".  Meanwhile, Mr Chauvin's wife has filed for divorce, her lawyers say. The full report by the county medical examiner has not been released, but the complaint states that the post-mortem examination did not find evidence of "traumatic asphyxia or strangulation". The medical examiner noted Mr Floyd had underlying heart conditions and the combination of these, "potential intoxicants in his system" and being restrained by the officers "likely contributed to his death". The report says Mr Chauvin had his knee on Mr Floyd's neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds - almost three minutes of which was after Mr Floyd became non-responsive. Nearly two minutes before he removed his knee the other officers checked Mr Floyd's right wrist for a pulse and were unable to find one. He was taken to the Hennepin County Medical Center in an ambulance and pronounced dead around an hour later. The Minnesota police handbook states that officers trained on how to compress a detainee's neck without applying direct pressure to the airway can use a knee under its use-of-force policy. This is regarded as a non-deadly-force option. At the White House on Friday, Mr Trump said he had asked the justice department to expedite an investigation it announced on Friday into whether any civil rights laws were violated in Mr Floyd's death. The president also said "looters should not be allowed to drown out the voices of so many peaceful protesters". Earlier, he described the rioters as "thugs" who were dishonouring Mr Floyd's memory. Social media network Twitter accused Mr Trump of glorifying violence in a post that said: "When the looting starts, the shooting starts." Officers suspected Mr Floyd had used a counterfeit $20 note and were attempting to put him in a police vehicle when he dropped to the ground, telling them he was claustrophobic. According to police, he physically resisted officers and was handcuffed. Video of the incident does not show how the confrontation started, but a white officer can be seen with his knee on Mr Floyd's neck, pinning him down.  Mr Floyd can be heard saying "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me". A former local nightclub owner has said Mr Chauvin and Mr Floyd both worked as bouncers at her venue in south Minneapolis up until last year, though it is unclear if they knew one another.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Protests against the death of an unarmed black man in police custody in Minneapolis have spread across the United States. Violence erupted again in the city where George Floyd died, but was also seen in New York, Atlanta, Oakland, Dallas and many other cities across the country. The greatest anger among protesters remains in Minneapolis, where people defied a city curfew. The city has been accused of not deploying enough  police and National Guard on the streets. State Governor Tim Walz accepted responsibility but said simply "there's more of them than us". A number of fires were started in Minneapolis, and fire officials said it was too dangerous to reach all of them. Mr Walz said the protests had morphed into chaos and "wanton destruction". Several areas saw looting of shops. But the protests were far wider than previous nights since Mr Floyd's death on Monday. Police in Washington were out in force outside the White House, which was briefly locked down. Police fired pepper spray to keep protesters from the building. Tear gas was used to disperse crowds protesting in Oakland in California.... ... while fireworks were thrown onto Freeway 110 North, in Los Angeles, as protesters tried to block roads. There were also chaotic scenes in Brooklyn, New York, where Mayor Bill de Blasio tweeted: "We don't ever want to see another night like this." Tear gas was fired to disperse protesters both in Detroit... ... and in Phoenix, Arizona. Atlanta also saw some ugly scenes, including this burning of a police car, prompting a passionate plea from Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms. All pictures copyrightedShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A former Minneapolis police officer has been arrested and charged with murder following the death of an unarmed black man in custody. Derek Chauvin, who is white, was shown in footage kneeling on 46-year-old George Floyd's neck on Monday. He and three other officers have been sacked. Days of looting and arson in the Minnesota city have boiled over into nationwide protests. The case has reignited US anger over police killings of black Americans. Hennepin County Prosecutor Mike Freeman said Mr Chauvin was charged with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter. He said he "anticipates charges" for the three other officers but would not offer more details. Mr Freeman said his office "charged this case as quickly as evidence has been presented to us". "This is by far the fastest that we've ever charged a police officer," he noted. According to the criminal complaint, Mr Chauvin acted with "a depraved mind, without regard for human life".  On Friday evening, the White House was placed on lockdown after a protest was held outside. "I can't breathe," demonstrators could be heard chanting, invoking the last words of Mr Floyd and Eric Garner, a black man who died after being held in a police chokehold in New York in 2014. The lockdown ended at about 20:30 EDT (00:30 GMT Saturday), with the US Secret Service reopening the building's entrances and exits to staff.  Meanwhile, curfews have been ordered for the Twin Cities of Minneapolis-Saint Paul, from 20:00 to 06:00 on both Friday and Saturday night.  On Thursday, during the third night of protests over Mr Floyd's death, a police station was set alight. A number of buildings have been burned, looted and vandalised in recent days, prompting the activation of the state's National Guard troops. In Atlanta on Friday, a police vehicle was set alight as protesters gathered near the offices of news broadcaster CNN. There have also been demonstrations elsewhere, including New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, Denver, Houston, Louisville, Phoenix, Columbus and Memphis. Frustration was already simmering over the recent deaths of two other black Americans, Ahmaud Arbery in Georgia and Breonna Taylor. The full report by the county medical examiner has not been released, but the complaint states that the post-mortem examination did not find evidence of "traumatic asphyxia or strangulation". The medical examiner noted Mr Floyd had underlying heart conditions and the combination of these, "potential intoxicants in his system" and being restrained by the officers "likely contributed to his death". The report says Mr Chauvin had his knee on Mr Floyd's neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds - almost three minutes of which was after Mr Floyd became non-responsive. Nearly two minutes before he removed his knee the other officers checked Mr Floyd's right wrist for a pulse and were unable to find one. He was taken to the Hennepin County Medical Center in an ambulance and pronounced dead around an hour later. The Minnesota police handbook states that officers trained on how to compress a detainee's neck without applying direct pressure to the airway can use a knee under its use-of-force policy. This is regarded as a non-deadly-force option. At the White House on Friday, President Donald Trump called the incident "a terrible, terrible thing" and said he had spoken with Mr Floyd's family, whom he described as "terrific people". He said he had asked the justice department to expedite an investigation it announced on Friday into whether any civil rights laws were violated in Mr Floyd's death. The president also said "looters should not be allowed to drown out the voices of so many peaceful protesters". Earlier, he described the rioters as "thugs" who were dishonouring Mr Floyd's memory. Social media network Twitter accused Mr Trump of glorifying violence in a post that said: "When the looting starts, the shooting starts." Mr Floyd's family and their lawyer, Benjamin Crump, said that the arrest was "welcome but overdue". The family said they wanted a more serious, first-degree murder charge as well as the arrest of the other officers involved.  The statement called for the city to change its policing, saying: "Today, George Floyd's family is having to explain to his children why their father was executed by police on video." Former US President Barack Obama also weighed in, saying: "This shouldn't be 'normal' in 2020 America." His statement added: "If we want our children to grow up in a nation that lives up to its highest ideals, we can and must be better." Minnesota Governor Tim Walz said the arrest was "a good first step toward justice". Officers suspected Mr Floyd had used a counterfeit $20 (£16) note and were attempting to put him in a police vehicle when he dropped to the ground, telling them he was claustrophobic. According to police, he physically resisted officers and was handcuffed. Video of the incident does not show how the confrontation started, but a white officer can be seen with his knee on Mr Floyd's neck, pinning him down.  Mr Floyd can be heard saying "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me". A former local nightclub owner has said Mr Chauvin and Mr Floyd both worked as bouncers at her venue in south Minneapolis up until last year, though it is unclear if they knew one another. By Barrett Holmes Pitner  In saying "when the looting starts, the shooting starts", President Donald Trump echoed a December 1967 quote from Miami Police Chief Walter Headley. It was used as a threat towards African Americans in Miami and as part of his brutal "get tough policy" where he advocated the use of guns and dogs to stop civil rights protests. In August of 1968, as Richard Nixon addressed the Republican National Convention in Miami, the police there killed three protesters, injured 18, and arrested over 200 people.   Similar violent police attacks defined America during the 1960s, as African Americans fought for civil rights and voting rights.  It is not a widely known phrase, but Headley's sentiments have long been part of the American status quo - US law enforcement and political figures have made many statements invoking Headley and they still do today.  It's frightening to now hear Headley's words emanate from the highest reaches of our government. Barrett is a writer and journalist based in Washington, DC Read more from BarrettShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The US and the African Development Bank have fallen out over allegations of corruption against the bank's Nigerian head, writes former BBC Africa Business editor Larry Madowo. Akinwumi Adesina is a sharp dresser known for his expensive tailored suits, immaculate white shirts and an endless supply of colourful bow ties.  But the clean public persona of the 60-year-old president of the African Development Bank (AfDB) is now being questioned after a string of corruption and abuse of office allegations from his own staff spilled into the open.  Mr Adesina has denied all the allegations. The board of governors of the 55-year-old institution met on Tuesday to discuss whether to bring in an outside investigator into the allegations concerning the Nigerian's conduct just days after the US rejected an initial inquiry that cleared him. The prospects of an independent probe comes only three months before he was expected to be re-elected unopposed at its annual general meeting in August.  The 20-point allegations of "impunity and bad governance" from unnamed employees have exposed a rift between Mr Adesina and ordinary staff.  The "Group of Concerned Staff Members of the AfDB" claimed that Mr Adesina has used the bank's resources for self-promotion and personal gain while also paying out huge but undeserved severance packages to staff who resigned mysteriously, and favouring his fellow Nigerians.  US Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin personally signed a letter to the board rejecting an internal investigation that cleared Mr Adesina. "Mnuchin's move is significant because it has now cast a limelight on governance issues and on [the] importance of an independent investigation to uphold the integrity of the AfDB," said Barbara Barungi, the bank's former lead economist on Nigeria. "There are very few people that were willing to stick their necks out." Besides the core 54 African countries, the US is one of the 27 non-regional members of the AfDB and its second largest shareholder.  "I think AfDB is Africa's most valuable institution," said one insider who spoke on condition of anonymity.  "But what you have now is the biggest paymaster, the US, in a stand-off against the Africans. If you read Mnuchin's letter carefully, it has put the bank on notice." The BBC has obtained the original whistleblowers' email from January 2020, sent to two executive directors of the bank, Yano Takuji (Japanese) and Steven Dowd (American), and the British director for its Integrity and Anti-Corruption Department Alan Bacarese.  In an April update circulated to a wider pool of senior managers, the whistleblowers said the Ethics Committee headed by Mr Takuji failed to examine their concerns. The committee later carried out an investigation and declared that Mr Adesina was "totally exonerated of all allegations made against him" and recommended that the board of governors adopt its conclusions. In early May, the board's chair - Ivorian Planning Minister Nialé Kaba - wrote to shareholders that the African finance ministers who supervise the bank's management intended to clear Mr Adesina. "We fear that the wholesale dismissal of all allegations without appropriate investigation will tarnish the reputation of this institution as one that does not uphold high standards of ethics and governance," Mr Mnuchin wrote back. "Therefore, the United States cannot support dismissing the allegations at this stage," he added. Mr Kaba said in a statement that a decision had not been made about Mr Adesina and he remained in office.  "The bureau, which I chair, wishes to reassure the public that it is seized with the matter and it is treating it with the utmost seriousness that it deserves," he said. The whistleblowers have accused Mr Adesina of major conflicts of interest in his dealings with current and former employees, unethical conduct and preferential treatment. Sources: AfDB; Forbes magazine Mr Adesina, who holds a PhD in agricultural economics from Purdue University in the US, did not respond to BBC requests for comment but released a statement. "In spite of unprecedented attempts by some to tarnish my reputation and prejudice the bank's governance procedures, I maintain my innocence with regard to trumped up allegations that unjustly seek to impugn my honour and integrity," he wrote.  "I am confident that fair, transparent and just processes that respect the rules, procedures and governance systems of the Bank, and rule of law, will ultimately prove that I have not violated the Code of Ethics of this extraordinary institution." The AfDB board meeting is said to have agreed to an independent investigation into the allegations concerning Mr Adesina's conduct after Denmark, Sweden, Norway and Finland supported the US position, Bloomberg news agency first reported.  "Should it surprise the world that we're getting a second investigation backed by no African country? What does that say about the other countries that have lined up behind the US?" wonders Debisi Araba, a friend of Mr Adesina's.  "He's due to run unopposed but you want to muddy the waters with this stain of corruption. I believe he will be vindicated."   Cape Verde:$33m loan approved to tackle Covid-19 Zimbabwe:$13.7m grant approved to improve health sector Cameroon and Chad:$45m allocated for bridge to link the two states Eswatini:$1.67m given for study on  building dams Mr Araba worked for Mr Adesina in the Nigerian government and was also an intern at the bank while doing his PhD in 2009.  He says the bank has always had a culture of salacious rumour and gossip but faults the US for formalizing the "crass, bargain basement reasoning" into a complaint. This was denied by a US Treasury spokesperson, who told the BBC: "The United States continues to value the AfDB and its efforts to promote development, reduce poverty, and address the current health and economic impacts of the coronavirus pandemic on the African continent." Some policy analysts at think-tanks in Washington, DC,  worry about the timing of the American pushback and its longer-term consequences in Africa. "A prolonged battle will be a distraction for the AfDB when its resources are more desperately needed than ever for its borrowers," Nancy Birdsall, a Senior Fellow at the Center for Global Development told the BBC.  She said it was not good for the AfDB if Mr Mnuchin was unhappy and suggested that "the US Treasury should look for some form of quiet compromise in which no-one loses face". Ms Birdsall also reiterated a recommendation she made in a 2018 paper for the leadership of the AfDB to open up its shareholding, including to China and oil-rich economies.  But Daniel F Runde, senior vice-president at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, disagreed.  He said the Abidjan-based bank that lends exclusively to African governments represented one of the few non-China-led and western-funded approaches to development on the continent. "If Adesina is cleared, the US may need to mend fences with the management because China will probably go on a shopping spree in Africa after Covid-19, and we will need every non-Chinese tool to respond," he said.  Mr Runde saw Mr Mnuchin's letter as "disruption" and called it a good tactic but a poor strategy. "Now that the Trump administration has caused disruption and perhaps made a point, they have to decide when this plays out," he said.  Last October, the 81 shareholders of the bank pledged extra funds to more than double its capital to $208bn (£170bn).  Missouri Congressman Emmanuel Cleaver, who sponsored a bill backing the capital increase in the US House of Representatives, came out in support of the new inquiry. "Independent accountability measures strengthen institutions and reinforce their legitimacy - both domestically and internationally. I am pleased the African Development Bank's Board agreed to take this important step," the Democrat told the BBC in a statement.  Mr Adesina is an eloquent advocate for Africa and the bank and a good fundraiser, but his detractors say he promises more than he delivers.  "His administration hasn't always been fantastic and perhaps he has run roughshod over some people. Maybe the practices haven't always been what they should be, and the feeling is that the board just whitewashed the investigation," the insider said. The whistleblowers also accused Mr Adesina of preferential treatment for Nigeria and Nigerians.  "I don't think we should trivialise the issues and reduce them to anti-Nigerian sentiment," said Ms Barungi, the Ugandan-born, Lagos-based former bank employee.  "It's really more about governance concerns that require attention and the investigation to help clear the air," she added. Mr Araba, a Nigerian, said talk of the "Nigerianisation of the bank" was false as the country was under-represented in employee numbers despite being the largest shareholder.  As the crisis at the bank escalates, employees, consultants and government officials in African capitals, as well as American foreign policy nerds, wonder how this impasse will end.  But at the Treasury building right next to the White House, Mr Mnuchin and his advisors are doubling down. "Undertaking an independent evaluation of facts is not at odds with a presumption of innocence, and by promoting transparency and good governance, it can only strengthen the AfDB's capacity to deliver results to people across Africa," the spokesman told the BBC. Mr Adesina's carefully curated career could crumble if a new investigation criticises his reign at the AfDB. His style is solid, but the substance is now under scrutiny. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Twitter has hidden a tweet by President Donald Trump from his profile, saying it violates rules about glorifying violence. It did the same hours later when the official White House account tweeted a copy of the president's words. Instead of being deleted, both tweets can be viewed by clicking on a prominent warning. It says that "Twitter has determined that it may be in the public's interest for the Tweet to remain accessible." This is the latest twist in an escalating row between Twitter and the White House. The US president finds himself in unexpected company alongside other world leaders whose tweets have been censored. In February 2019, Twitter had a tweet by Iranian Leader Supreme Ayatollah Ali Khamenei removed after it appeared to threaten author Salman Rushdie. Also last year, several accounts associated with Cuban President Raul Castro and members of his government were suspended, citing policy violations. Mr Trump was tweeting about the US city of Minneapolis, which has seen consecutive nights of protests following the death of a black man in police custody. The president said he would "send in the National Guard", and followed that up with a warning that "when the looting starts, the shooting starts." That second tweet was hidden by Twitter for "glorifying violence". Twitter's policy of adding a warning to, rather than deleting, tweets that break its rules when it comes to major public figures was announced in mid-2019. But the social network has never used it on Mr Trump - nor deleted any of his tweets before. "This is the bravest and riskiest thing I've ever seen Twitter - or any social media giant - do," said Carl Miller, from the Centre for the Analysis of Social Media at UK-based think-tank Demos. "This pours rocket fuel over the online-harm-versus-free-speech debate. Online content policy doesn't get more incendiary than this." The same post remains unaltered on Facebook, without any warning attached. On Friday, the president sought to clear up the tweets by saying he was misunderstood.  "Looting leads to shooting, and that's why a man was shot and killed in Minneapolis on Wednesday night - or look at what just happened in Louisville with 7 people shot," he tweeted. Seven people were shot in Louisville, Kentucky, at a protest over the death of Breonna Taylor, who was shot by three white police officers in March. "I don't want this to happen, and that's what the expression put out last night means," he wrote. For years Twitter resisted calls to treat Donald Trump like any other user and make him follow its rules.  Then, on Wednesday, it made a first small move, not removing a tweet but adding a fact-checking link.  The company then had two choices - hunker down and weather the storm or continue to take action in accordance with its stated rules. It has now chosen the latter course of action, calling the president out for glorifying violence.  Any other user would have had their tweet removed, and might have seen their account suspended.  It now looks as though there is no easy way out for either of the two adversaries - a huge battle over the limits of free speech and the rights of social media firms to moderate content is looming. It is difficult to see either side now backing down. The White House is busy scouring Twitter to find examples of other world leaders who have glorified violence without any comeback. Meanwhile others are finding all sorts of old Trump tweets that appear to have broken the rules by, for instance, spreading misinformation about treatments for coronavirus. Twitter boss Jack Dorsey, who had appeared very reluctant to apply anything but the most light-touch regulation, now finds himself faced with the unappealing prospect of cracking down on world leaders far and wide. The move means that other users will not be able to like, reply to, or simply retweet Mr Trump's post, Twitter said. However, they would still be able to retweet it with a comment attached. In a Twitter thread, the social network said: "This tweet violates our policies regarding the glorification of violence based on the historical context of the last line, its connection to violence, and the risk it could inspire similar actions today." The "historical context" is a reference to the phrase "when the looting starts, the shooting starts", coined by Miami Police Chief Walter Headley in 1967, in reference to his aggressive policing policies in black neighbourhoods. A later report submitted to the National Commission on the Causes and Prevention of Violence found that his "get tough" policy, involving "the frequent display of shotguns and dogs by Miami police in black neighbourhoods" contributed to a state of agitation in the black community until the eruption of the 1968 Miami riot some eight months later. Twitter said: "We've taken action in the interest of preventing others from being inspired to commit violent acts, but have kept the tweet on Twitter because it is important that the public still be able to see the tweet given its relevance to ongoing matters of public importance." Hours after the warning was added, President Trump tweeted: "Twitter is doing nothing about all of the lies & propaganda being put out by China or the Radical Left Democrat Party" and alleged that the social network was targeting Republicans. He directly referenced the executive order he signed the previous evening, aimed at removing some of the legal protections given to social media platforms. Earlier this week, Twitter used its fact-checking function to attach warnings to the president's tweets for the first time. That led the president to threaten to "shut down" social networks over allegedly stifling free speech. The executive order signed by Mr Trump has no immediate effect on the social networks, however - instead, it begins a lengthy process that may result in changes down the line.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Tensions between Minneapolis' black community and the police did not start with the death of George Floyd. They have been years in the making. On a hot Thursday morning in the Longfellow neighbourhood of Minneapolis, a 28-year-old father named Nuwman stood outside the Minneapolis Police Department's Third Precinct drinking a large coffee as smoke wafted past from the smouldering ruins of nearby buildings.  It was day three of protests over the death of 46-year-old George Floyd, after a white police officer named Derek Chauvin kneeled on his neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds. Floyd begged for his life before falling unconscious and dying in the street, in full view of witnesses and a rolling mobile phone camera. Four officers, including Chauvin, were fired from the department for their involvement. The previous night, tensions ignited, and for the first time the city saw looting, arson and violence. At least one man died in a shooting at a pawn shop. "This is everyday. Everyday that these police officers have enforced their protocol has led up to this," said Nuwman, his voice rising with emotion over the din of protesters and sirens. "This is not just a singular moment. This is a cataclysm. A combination of all the things that happened before." That night, protesters stormed the precinct as police cruisers flew out of the rear parking lot, abandoning it to demonstrators who quickly moved from room to room lighting blazes.  The following afternoon, a Friday, saw the arrest of Chauvin by Minnesota's Bureau of Criminal Apprehension. Chauvin has been charged with murder. This is not the first instance of a controversial, police-involved killing in the region. In 2016, Philando Castile was shot and killed by a police officer in a neighbourhood just 15 minutes away from the current epicentre of protest.  In 2017, a Minneapolis officer was charged with the shooting death of Justine Damond after she called to report a possible sexual assault. In 2015, protests erupted over the shooting death of Jamar Clark, a 24-year-old man who was being pursued by Minneapolis officers. All three deaths sparked protest movements and yielded mixed results in terms of prosecution. Yanez was tried and acquitted. Mohamed Noor, Damond's shooter, was sentenced to 12.5 years. No charges were brought in Clark's case.  For some, Floyd's death was the continuation of those stories. "WE SHOULD HAVE BURNT THE CITY DOWN FOR PHILANDO CASTILE," one person posted on social media.  But in some ways, the pictures beamed around the world this week tell a story that's unique.  Demonstrations are occurring in the midst of a historic, global pandemic. The sheer amount of property damage and arson has been staggering. The swiftness with which officers were fired, and the speed in which Chauvin was arrested and charged surprised many. But Minneapolis - while a prosperous city that celebrates liberal policies and politicians - has struggled for years with socioeconomic inequality and segregation. It's a phenomenon that's been dubbed the "Minnesota paradox".  The Twin Cities, as Minneapolis and St Paul are known, are still overwhelmingly white - about one-quarter of the population is non-white - and its neighbourhoods are still highly segregated. Most people of colour live on the cities' north sides.  They were shaped by racist red-lining policies dating to the early 20th Century, when black families were not allowed to buy homes in certain neighbourhoods. In the 1960s, the state built a major highway that cut through and destroyed a thriving black community known as Rondo in St Paul.  According to a 2018 study, the rate of black homeownership in the Twin Cities is among the lowest in the nation. Even before the pandemic caused massive layoffs, 10% of black residents were unemployed compared to 4% of whites. That disparity ranks as one of the nation's worst.  In 2016, the average white household in the Twin Cities made about $76,000 a year, while the average black household earned just $32,000. Thirty-two percent of black Twin Citians fell below the poverty line, while only 6.5% of whites did.  Racial disparities persist in the way the community is policed.  After Philando Castile was killed, data released about police traffic stops in the area showed that 44% of stops were black drivers, though the population was only 7% black.  According to the Minneapolis police department's own data, in 2018 55% of drivers stopped for "equipment violations" were black.  As Covid-19 ravages the area, these disparities are sure to worsen, as thousands lose their jobs, and their homes to evictions and foreclosures.  On Friday afternoon, residents of both St Paul and Minneapolis headed into the streets carrying brooms and pails, and slowly began to literally pick up the pieces of the town.  Following the announcement that former officer Chauvin had been jailed and charged with third-degree murder and manslaughter, protesters at Minneapolis City Hall let up a cheer.  But it was quickly replaced by a new demand: "One down, three to go." Follow Jessica on TwitterShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Hollywood mogul Harvey Weinstein has been found guilty of two counts in his sexual assault trial, more than two years after the first allegations against him emerged. Here is a summary of the key events that led him to court: Follow us on Facebook, or on Twitter @BBCNewsEnts. If you have a story suggestion email entertainment.news@bbc.co.uk.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Disgraced film producer Harvey Weinstein has been accused of sexual assault by four further women as he serves a 23-year prison sentence. Court documents filed in New York on Thursday allege several sexual offences dating from 1984 to 2013. One of the four anonymous women was 17 at the time of an alleged attack. Weinstein's legal representative told BBC News: "Mr Weinstein intends to defend against the claims filed anonymously against him yesterday." The lawyer, Imran H Ansari of Aidala, Bertuna & Kamins PC, added: "Some of these claims, including those alleged to have occurred in the 1980s and 1990s, may be barred by the applicable statute of limitations, and not subject to any exceptions under the law, as these plaintiffs do not appear to be complainants in Mr Weinstein's criminal case."  The latest legal cases allege multiple sexual offences against four women, who currently reside in Tennessee, New York, Ecuador and Hungary. Some of the attacks allegedly took place after meetings with Weinstein at the Cannes and Venice Film Festivals. The new allegations include: Allegations against Weinstein began to emerge in October 2017, when The New York Times first reported incidents dating back decades. At least 80 women have since accused him of sexual misconduct, including actresses Gwyneth Paltrow, Uma Thurman and Salma Hayek. The allegations were at the centre of the #MeToo movement that inspired women to go public with misconduct allegations against powerful men. Weinstein issued an apology acknowledging he had "caused a lot of pain", but denied any allegations of non-consensual sex. In February, Weinstein was convicted in New York City of third-degree rape and first-degree criminal sexual act, and later sentenced to 23 years in jail. Follow us on Facebook, or on Twitter @BBCNewsEnts. If you have a story suggestion email entertainment.news@bbc.co.uk.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A police station in Minneapolis has been set alight during a third night of protests over the death of an unarmed black man in custody on Monday.  A police officer was filmed kneeling on the neck of George Floyd, 46, despite him saying he could not breathe.   President Donald Trump said "thugs" were dishonouring his memory and called on the National Guard to restore order.  The incident has added to anger over police killings of black Americans, including Breonna Taylor in Kentucky. Mr Floyd's family have demanded that the four police officers implicated in his death face murder charges. Prosecutors have said they are still gathering evidence. A CNN journalist, Omar Jimenez, and his camera crew were arrested live on air by Minnesota state police officers on Friday morning, apparently because they did not move on when instructed.  The team was released an hour later, after the governor apologised for the arrest. There have also been demonstrations in other US cities, including New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, Denver, Phoenix and Memphis. Twitter accused Mr Trump of glorifying violence in a post that said: "When the looting starts, the shooting starts." On Thursday, protesters gathered outside the police department's 3rd Precinct, the epicentre of the unrest.  Officers fired tear gas and rubber bullets in an attempt to disperse the crowd. But the cordon around the police station, which is near where Mr Floyd died, was breached by protesters, who set fire to it and two other nearby buildings as the officers withdrew. Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey said there had been no choice but to evacuate the police station, adding: "The symbolism of a building cannot outweigh the importance of life, of our officers or the public." He called the unrest "unacceptable", but recognised there was "a lot of pain and anger". He spoke after a tweet from Mr Trump blamed Thursday's violence on a "lack of leadership" in Minneapolis and warned that he would send in the National Guard and "get the job done right" if Mr Frey failed to restore order. National Guard personnel are normally under state control, although they can be put under federal control in emergencies. Mr Trump also tweeted: "Any difficulty and we will assume control but, when the looting starts, the shooting starts." On Friday, the White House Twitter account quoted the president's tweet on looting and shooting. Twitter placed a "public interest notice" on the messages, saying they "violate our policies regarding the glorification of violence based on the historical context of the last line, its connection to violence, and the risk it could inspire similar actions". The historical context arises from riots in Miami in 1968. A federal task force found that the use of the phrase about looting by the Miami police chief at the time was a prime factor in the discontent that triggered the unrest.  Analysis by Jessica Lussenhop, BBC senior staff writer, Minneapolis The "twin cities" of Minneapolis and St Paul, Minnesota heaved with unrest and destruction overnight. Several areas that have no geographical significance to Floyd's death are now seeing damage, and shops all over the region closed and barricaded their doors. Protesters in the streets want one thing: the arrest and prosecution of former Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin, whose knee was pressed into Floyd's neck for several minutes before he died.  But at a press conference on Thursday, Hennepin County Attorney Mike Freeman was noncommittal, promising only a "robust and meticulous" investigation. Both the FBI and the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension are investigating.  It's unclear whether charges would actually bring the violence to a halt.  Developments here are swift and chaotic. Friday morning broke with news that several fires had been set before dawn in Minneapolis and that state police arrested a CNN news crew on live television.  The air in this relatively quiet Midwestern metropolis is filled with sirens and smoke, and it seems there is no end in sight.  Earlier on Thursday, Minnesota Governor Tim Walz had activated the state's National Guard troops at the request of the mayors of Minneapolis and the neighbouring city of St Paul, declaring the situation a "peacetime emergency". Calling for peaceful protests, "not more death and destruction", Mr Walz said the looting, vandalism and arson of Wednesday night had damaged many businesses, including ones owned by minorities. The four policemen involved have been fired, and the mayor has called for criminal charges against the officer seen pinning Mr Floyd. Speaking through tears, Mr Floyd's brother, Philonise, told CNN on Thursday the officers who "executed my brother in broad daylight" must be arrested and that he was "tired of seeing black men die". Mr Trump "was very upset" when he saw the footage of Mr Floyd's death, White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany told reporters on Thursday.  A number of celebrities, including John Boyega and Beyonce, have also expressed outrage over the incident. The incident echoes the case of Eric Garner, who was placed in a police chokehold in New York in 2014. His death became a rallying cry against police brutality and a catalyst in the Black Lives Matter movement. There were also chaotic scenes during rallies in Denver, Colorado and in Columbus, Ohio. The statehouse in Denver was put under lockdown after gunfire was heard, while in Columbus demonstrators reportedly broke some of the statehouse's windows before being dispersed by police. Seven people were also shot in Louisville, Kentucky, at a protest over the death of Breonna Taylor, who was shot by three white police officers in March. Officers responding to reports of the use of counterfeit money approached Mr Floyd in his vehicle on Monday. According to police, he was told to step away from the car, physically resisted officers and was handcuffed. Video of the incident does not show how the confrontation started, but a white officer can be seen with his knee on Mr Floyd's neck, pinning him down.  Mr Floyd can be heard saying "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me". The city has identified the four officers involved as Derek Chauvin, Tou Thao, Thomas Lane and J Alexander Kueng. The Minneapolis Police Officers' Federation said the officers were co-operating with the investigation. The Minnesota police handbook states that officers trained on how to compress the neck without applying direct pressure to the airway can use a knee under its use-of-force policy. This is regarded as a non-deadly-force option. Are you in the area? If you have any information you are willing to share with the BBC you can get in touch by emailing haveyoursay@bbc.co.uk. Please include a contact number if you are willing to speak to a BBC journalist. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Police and protesters clashed for a second night in the US city of Minneapolis after an unarmed black man died in police custody. Tear gas was fired by police, while protesters threw rocks and sprayed graffiti. Businesses were also looted. George Floyd, 46, died on Monday and video showed him gasping for breath as a white policeman knelt on his neck. There have also been protests in Chicago, Illinois, Los Angeles, California, and Memphis, Tennessee. Minnesota Governor Tim Walz activated the state's national guard troops on Thursday, declaring the situation a "peacetime emergency". He said the looting, vandalism and arson of a night earlier had resulted in damage to many businesses, including ones owned by minorities. Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey called on Wednesday for criminal charges against the policeman who was filmed pinning down Mr Floyd. Four police officers involved in the arrest have already been fired. The incident echoes the case of Eric Garner, who was placed in a police chokehold in New York in 2014. His death became a rallying cry against police brutality and a catalyst in the Black Lives Matter movement. They began in the afternoon on Tuesday, when hundreds of people came to the intersection where the incident had taken place. Organisers tried to keep the protest peaceful and maintain coronavirus social distancing, with demonstrators chanting "I can't breathe" and "it could've been me". During the second night of demonstrations on Wednesday, the crowd grew into the thousands, with protesters pelting rocks and some throwing tear-gas canisters back at police. There was a standoff outside the police station where officers formed a human barricade to prevent protesters gaining entry. Analysis by Jessica Lussenhop, BBC senior staff writer, Minneapolis The morning after a violent and destructive night across this city, the air was thick with acrid smoke as buildings continued to smoulder.  Fresh graffiti covers nearly every wall, sign and surface. Bus stop shelters are skeletal with their glass walls completely shattered.  This thriving commercial corner of the city has taken on the look of a war zone.  Much of the worst damage was concentrated around the Minneapolis Police Department's 3rd Precinct, where the officers involved in the killing of George Floyd are believed to have worked. At least 100 demonstrators gathered once again this morning, shouting at a line of silent, helmeted police officers blocking the entrance to the precinct's parking lot. Armed officers watched from the roof. The car park of a looted Target was strewn with debris from inside the store, and people were still freely going in and out of smashed windows and doors, though it appeared to be more out of curiosity than anything. Everyone seemed agog at the extent of the damage.  And it was indiscriminate.  Banks, cheque cashing shops and liquor stores were hit, but the windows of a public library branch were also smashed in, the bookshelves and reading desks scattered with glittering fragments. The classrooms of a charter school in the same strip mall complex as the Target were under several inches of water, as a security alarm droned on from somewhere.  Anger in the streets was palpable. Periodically there were shouts and wails. It seems a foregone conclusion that demonstrations will continue for days if not weeks, and further violence could follow. As one protester told me: "It's sad. But this is how they're going to listen." Mr Floyd's brother, Philonise Floyd, told CNN on Thursday he hoped the officers involved got the death penalty. "I'm never gonna get my brother back," he said. "We need justice." Speaking through tears, he said the officers who "executed my brother in broad daylight" must be arrested and that he was "tired of seeing black men die". He added that he understood why protesters were lashing out. "I can't stop people right now because they have pain - they have the same pain that I feel." Minneapolis Police Chief Medaria Arradondo apologised for the "pain, devastation and trauma" caused by Mr Floyd's death and said his department had contributed to "a deficit of hope" in the city. United Nations human rights chief Michelle Bachelet has also condemned Mr Floyd's death, saying the role of "entrenched and pervasive racial discrimination" must be recognised and dealt with.  She called for protesters to act peacefully, and for police to "take utmost care not to inflame the current situation even more". President Donald Trump "was very upset" when he saw the footage of Mr Floyd's death, White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany told reporters on Thursday. "He wants justice to be served." A number of celebrities and athletes, including John Boyega, LeBron James, Beyonce, and Justin Bieber, have also expressed outrage over the incident. Officers responding to reports of the use of counterfeit money approached Mr Floyd in his vehicle on Monday. According to police, he was told to step away from the car, physically resisted officers and was handcuffed. The police statement noted his apparent "medical distress". Video of the incident does not show how the confrontation started. A white officer can be seen using his knee to pin Mr Floyd to the ground by the neck as Mr Floyd groans "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me". The city has identified the four officers involved as Derek Chauvin, Tou Thao, Thomas Lane and J Alexander Kueng. Local media have named Mr Chauvin as the officer seen with his knee on Mr Floyd's neck. The Minneapolis Police Officers Federation said the officers were co-operating with the investigation. In a statement to local media, the union said "now is not the time to rush to judgment". "We must review all video. We must wait for the medical examiner's report."Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The US city of Minneapolis has endured a third night of clashes between police and protesters. The unrest follows the death of an unarmed black man in police custody in the city on Monday. Video of the death shows George Floyd, 46, groaning "I can't breathe" and "don't kill me" as a white policeman kneels on his neck. On Thursday, police officers fired tear gas and rubber bullets in an attempt to disperse a crowd outside the 3rd Precinct police station, the epicentre of the unrest. But the cordon around the police station was eventually breached by protesters, who set fire to it and two other nearby buildings, as officers withdrew. The Minneapolis Police Department said in a statement that the 3rd Precinct had been evacuated shortly after 22:00 "in the interest of the safety of our personnel". The unrest continued despite the governor of Minnesota ordering the deployment of hundreds of members of the National Guard to restore order. There have also been protests in Chicago, Illinois; Los Angeles, California; and Memphis, Tennessee. All pictures copyrightedShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Drugs normally used to treat malaria, hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine, have been touted as potential treatments for coronavirus. The treatments have been promoted and used by some world leaders, but concerns have been raised about their safety and efficacy.  We've looked at what we know so far about these drugs. US President Donald Trump revealed in May that he was taking hydroxychloroquine as a preventative measure against Covid-19, but then said he'd stopped.  Mr Trump has repeatedly referred to its potential. At a press conference in April, he said: "What do you have to lose? Take it." President Bukele of El Salvador has said he and "other world leaders" were also taking it. And Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro claimed in a video that "hydroxychloroquine is working in all places."  But that was removed by Facebook for breaching its misinformation guidelines. Following Mr Trump's comments, there was a sharp increase reported in prescriptions in the US for both hydroxychloroquine and the related drug, chloroquine. There's also been a global surge in demand for them. There is concern in the scientific community about using such drugs to treat coronavirus. Hydroxychloroquine is safe for treating malaria, and conditions like lupus or arthritis, but so far no clinical trials have recommended it for use against Covid-19. The World Health Organization (WHO) temporarily halted several studies around the world because of safety fears.  It had earlier warned about the dangers of self-medicating with the drug. The WHO announcement came after a study suggested hydroxychloroquine might increase the risk of patients dying from Covid-19. The Lancet medical journal reviewed the medical records of coronavirus patients, and found that there were no benefits to taking these drugs - and they could even increase the risk of heart problems.  But this research has come in for criticism from a group of more than 120 scientists, who have raised issues about how it was carried out.  There are trials in various countries on using the drugs to prevent the illness, sometimes involving frontline workers taking it as a prophylactic.  A trial has begun across Europe, Africa, Asia and South America, testing 40,000 people with either hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine or a placebo to see if it's effective in preventing the virus. Other studies are looking into whether it can help patients who already have Covid-19.  In the US, various trials are under way for a combination of drugs including chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine and an antibiotic called azithromycin, for treating Covid-19 patients.  Nigeria has said it will continue with its own planned clinical trials. The country's drugs approval agency said it does not dispute the WHO's safety warnings, but wanted to generate data from tests on the local population. Morocco, Algeria and Senegal have also decided to continue trials, although Kenya says it will be suspending its planned studies. There is insufficient evidence from this research so far to draw firm conclusions as to their effective use in either prevention or in treatment. There are also risks of serious side effects, including renal and liver damage.  "We need larger, high-quality randomised clinical trials in order to better evaluate their effectiveness," says University of Oxford's Kome Gbinigie, author of a report on anti-malarial testing for Covid-19.  In late March, the US Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) did grant "emergency use" authorisation for these drugs in the treatment of Covid-19 for a limited number of hospitalised cases. That means that in specific circumstances only, hospitals can request and use the medicines for  Covid-19 treatment. But on 24 April, the FDA issued a warning about the dangers of using the substances because of reports of heart rhythm problems in patients. Other countries also deploying these anti-malarial drugs in various settings. Brazil has relaxed its restrictions on the drugs to allow doctors to prescribe them to patients with mild coronavirus symptoms, not just those in a serious condition in hospital.  The Indian government has expanded the use of the drug as a preventative medicine - but only under medical supervision - for healthcare workers in non-coronavirus environments, and police working in areas with high rates of Covid-19.  France, which had authorised hospitals to prescribe them for patients with Covid-19, later reversed the decision after the country's medical watchdog warned of side effects. Read more from Reality Check Send us your questions Follow us on TwitterShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has signed an executive order aimed at removing some of the legal protections given to social media platforms. He said the firms had "unchecked power" to censure and edit the views of users. President Trump has regularly accused platforms such as Twitter and Facebook of stifling conservative voices. The order, which is expected to face legal challenges, comes after Twitter decided to append fact-check labels to two of his tweets this week. On Wednesday Mr Trump accused the company of election interference after it added a warning label to the tweets about claims of widespread fraud in mail-in voting - also known as postal votes. Twitter and other social media platforms strongly condemned the executive order. And early on Friday, Twitter hid one of President Trump's tweets from his profile, saying it violates rules about glorifying violence. Under a 1996 law, website operators, unlike traditional publishers, cannot generally be held responsible for content posted by users. The sites are also protected from lawsuits if they block posts deemed obscene, violent "or otherwise objectionable, whether or not such material is constitutionally protected". The executive order argues that this immunity should no longer apply if a social network edits posts, such as by adding a warning or a label.  It also says "deceptive" blocking, including removing a post for reasons other than those described in a website's terms of service, should not be protected. Republican Senator Marco Rubio is among those arguing that the platforms take on the role of a "publisher" when they add fact-check labels to posts. "The law still protects social media companies like Twitter because they are considered forums not publishers," Mr Rubio said. "But if they have now decided to exercise an editorial role like a publisher, then they should no longer be shielded from liability."  The executive order also calls for the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to spell out what type of content blocking will be considered deceptive or inconsistent with a service provider's terms and conditions. Donald Trump promised "big action" in response to Twitter's decision to append a fact-check message to two of his posts. While his announcement of an executive order was heavy on rhetoric - accusing social media companies of being monopolies that threaten free speech - it will be a long process before the talk turns into real action, big or otherwise. Independent government agencies will have to review federal law, promulgate new regulations, vote on them and then - in all likelihood - defend them in court. By the time it's all over, the November presidential election could have come and gone. That explains why Trump is also pushing for new congressional legislation - a more straightforward way of changing US policy toward social media companies.  The real purpose of the president's order, however, may be symbolic. At the very least, the move will cause Twitter to think twice about attempting to moderate or fact-check his posts on their service.  The president relies on Twitter to get his message out without filtering from the mainstream media. If Twitter itself start blunting one of his favourite communication tools, he is sending a message that he will push back - and make things, at a minimum, uncomfortable for the company. Twitter called the order "a reactionary and politicized approach to a landmark law," adding that Section 230 "protects American innovation and freedom of expression, and it's underpinned by democratic values". Google, which owns YouTube, said changing Section 230 would "hurt America's economy and its global leadership on internet freedom." "Our platforms have empowered a wide range of people and organizations from across the political spectrum, giving them a voice and new ways to reach their audiences," the firm said in a statement to the BBC. In an interview with Fox News on Wednesday, Facebook's chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, said censoring a social media platform would not be the "right reflex" for a government concerned about censorship.  "I just believe strongly that Facebook shouldn't be the arbiter of truth of everything that people say online," said Mr Zuckerberg.  The long-running dispute between Mr Trump and social media companies flared up again on Tuesday, when two of his posts were given a fact-check label by Twitter for the first time. He had tweeted, without providing evidence: "There is no way (zero) that mail-in ballots will be anything less than substantially fraudulent." Twitter added a warning label to the post and linked to a page describing the claims as "unsubstantiated". Then on Wednesday, Mr Trump threatened to "strongly regulate" social-media platforms. He tweeted to his more than 80 million followers that Republicans felt the platforms "totally silence conservatives", and that he would not allow this to happen.  In an earlier tweet, he said Twitter was "completely stifling free speech". Twitter's chief executive, Jack Dorsey, responded to criticism of the platform's fact-checking policies in a series of posts, saying: "We'll continue to point out incorrect or disputed information about elections globally." Twitter has tightened its policies in recent years, as it faced criticism that its hands-off approach allowed fake accounts and misinformation to thrive.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Strip the format of RuPaul's Drag Race back to its most basic and you might think it's a TV show about people competing to see who's the best at dancing around while pretending to sing a song. But the 12th season has urged its US viewers to register to vote every week and made no secret of its political agenda. This weekend, finalists Gigi Goode, Jaida Essence Hall and Crystal Methyd will compete (on a Zoom call) to be crowned the next drag superstar of the world. Season 12 has been a bumpy ride for viewers though and negative press about the behaviour of contestants - as well as host RuPaul - threaten to overshadow its message. In one episode, contestants Jackie Cox and Widow Von Du performed a lip-sync to Katy Perry's Firework - Jackie in a hijab based on the American flag, Widow in a gown inspired by the Black Panther Party. When Democratic politician Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez appeared on the show as a guest judge, Jackie spoke about her Iranian mum's experiences in the US as an immigrant. "People would tell her to go back to where she came from," explained a tearful Jackie. "When I was young, I hid this part of my heritage for so long. She's an American citizen now. Seeing you standing up for people like my mum gives me so much hope."  I'm here and I deserve to be in America just as much as anyone else. 💙🇺🇸❤️ @rupaulsdragrace #DragRace UPDATE:  I am truly overwhelmed by the amount of love I’ve been shown the last 24 hours regarding my runway interpretation of the “Stars and Stripes” Runway.  I’ve also seen a lot of debate about this look and whether I should or should not have worn this, or said what I said on the runway. To clarify my intentions, this look was meant to honor my Muslim family and friends and also stand up against the Islamophobia they have faced.  As for my personal relationship with Islam: I am agnostic, and my immediate family has their own, somewhat secular, interpretation of the Islamic faith. Growing up, my mother spoke to me a lot about her thoughts on Islam and her belief that it was something I shouldn’t be afraid of. It was her opinion that both the western media interpretation, and the hardline mullahs who took over Iran were the ones who were misinterpreting the faith.  She instead, chose to focus her beliefs on love and charity and made a pilgrimage to Mecca in her youth. She, and her sisters, wear headscarves while in public in Iran as that is the law. In their personal lives, as seen depicted in the photographs of my aunt and mom in the US on the show, they do not wear headscarves.  However; I support their freedom and choice to wear or NOT wear a headscarf, a right that I am grateful is granted here in the United States... but brings Islamophobia. I think it’s important to clarify the importance of freedom of religion versus the religious law imposed in Iran and many other countries.  But freedom of religion only works when people can live without fear of losing their job, hearing racial slurs, or worse. I am proud that this runway is opening up conversations around that issue. Though I have sometimes lost faith in the US, this moment has given me hope. ❤️ ❤️ Swipe through to see the sketches from my amazing designer and friend, @travis_oestreich . And also my original inspiration for this look, which was the “We The People” series by @obeygiant ❤️💙 My photo is once again by the incredible @prestonburford ! A post shared by  Jackie Cox (@jackiecoxnyc) on Apr 25, 2020 at 10:02am PDT End of Instagram post  by jackiecoxnyc One episode included a challenge where contestants took part in a fake rally to become the first-ever drag President of the United States - a format that hasn't been seen on Drag Race since 2012. And every episode has ended with contestants dancing on stage carrying signs reading "register to vote". There's political bias on Drag Race, no doubt. It's a left-wing show with a strong anti-Trump message, one that's been ramped up ahead of the US election in November 2020. Since coming to power in 2016, President Donald Trump has introduced, or tried to introduce, a number of measures which have stripped rights from LGBT people in America. "Drag Race is a show that appeals to queer people, to women, to the groups that need to get out and vote," says Kevin O'Keefe, a US journalist who covers Drag Race for LGBT publication Xtra Magazine and considers himself a Drag Race "herstorian". "It's mentioning politics more and more." In the 2016 US election, only 50% of the population turned out to vote. "Young people don't vote. That's a generalisation but the exit polls bear it out. A simple weekly reminder is useful," Kevin adds. "Seeing those placards at the end of every episode, people may think it's showmanship, but that kind of repeated messaging actually does work." Season 12 isn't the first season where politics has played an obvious part. Democrat Nancy Pelosi (the Speaker of the House of Representatives) made a brief appearance in the 2018 series of All Stars.  Contestants in 2016 had to produce smear campaigns against each other in season eight and in 2011 there were messages of support for US troops in season three. But some Drag Race experts say the very nature of the show is political, even when it's not directly referencing what's going on in Washington. "Drag Race has always shown that people come for the drag, but you stay because you fall in love with these queer people," says Mikelle Street, digital director of Out magazine.  "They always talk about issues that this community is dealing with." In previous series', contestant Dusty Ray Bottoms spoke about their experience of conversion therapy, Nina West revealed they were threatened with murder by a far-right hate group while at college, Latrice Royale talked about spending time in prison. "I don't know if season 12 is a return to politics, because I'm not sure the show ever left that," Mikelle adds. Kevin says that just because politics has been mentioned more doesn't make it the most political season. "There's part of me that just wants to say that season one was the most political because it presented drag in this very rough around the edges way, something the show has shied away from since," he says. "To me, letting drag queens be their messiest selves and presenting Cameroonian drag in BeBe Zahara Benet and pageant drag in Shannel - that to me will always seem more political than holding up a 'register to vote' sign." Despite grand political ambitions for the 12th season of Drag Race, it's also been the most troubled. A contestant was disqualified before the series started when sexual misconduct allegations were made against them, leading to a hasty re-edit of every episode to remove them from the show. Comments made by Jeff Goldblum about Islam's stance on homosexuality were widely criticised and even RuPaul faced their own controversy when it was revealed they lease part of their 60,000 acre Wyoming ranch to oil companies for fracking. "The reality is that people like Ru were progressive when they were coming up," says Mikelle.  "But what happens with some of them - like Ru, like Ellen - is that they were progressive for their time when they were first coming in, and the movement continued to progress and they didn't necessarily move with it." But even if this is at odds with the left-wing stance the show has, the negative press didn't seem do any damage to viewing figures. Drag Race was the most-watched show for 18 to 34-year-olds in the US on Friday nights. The show has also been affected by coronavirus, with its finale and reunion shows being filmed online due to social distancing measures. Season 12's big political storyline ended just before the final when Jackie was eliminated in the last of the episodes filmed in 2019. Kevin believes her time on the show will resonate with many LGBT viewers on a personal level. "All of the stuff about her mum's experience as an immigrant, about her challenges with her former faith being Muslim, that all is a genuine weight on Jackie," he says.  "I think a small push opens the floodgates, a lot of queer people wear that stuff on their sleeve and it doesn't take much for that to come out." End of Youtube post  by VH1 Going into the final, both Kevin and Mikelle are backing the same contestant to win: Jaida Essence Hall. "Jaida represents something we haven't seen since Tyra Sanchez won season two," says Kevin.  "She is a polished, gorgeous pageant girl. We've seen Asia O'Hara falter, we've seen Akeria Chanel Davenport falter - and I would be really bummed if it happened to Jaida." But with the political agenda of season 12, RuPaul and the producers of Drag Race seem to want viewers to think about more than just who should become the world's next drag superstar when they watch the show. "We're thinking about this administration, we're thinking about the election that's coming up," says Mikelle.  "Those are the things that we're all thinking about and the ways in which the policies or lack of policies from the administration are affecting our daily lives." Follow Newsbeat on Instagram, Facebook, Twitter and YouTube. Listen to Newsbeat live at 12:45 and 17:45 weekdays - or listen back here.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The US, UK, Australia and Canada have issued fresh condemnation of Beijing's new security law for Hong Kong, which they say has "flourished as a bastion of freedom". They say the international community has a "significant and long-standing stake" in its prosperity and stability. China's move to impose the new law during a global pandemic risked undermining trust in governments and international co-operation, they said. China has rejected foreign criticism. The law - approved by China's parliament on Thursday - has already sparked a new wave of anti-mainland protest in Hong Kong. On Wednesday, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said developments in Hong Kong meant it could no longer be considered to have "a high degree of autonomy" from mainland China. This could lead to Hong Kong being treated the same as mainland China under US law, which would have major implications for its trade hub status. The UK on Thursday said visa rights for 300,000 British National (Overseas) passport holders in Hong Kong would be extended into a "pathway to future [UK] citizenship" if China did not suspend its security law plans. Direct imposition of the security law by Beijing rather than through Hong Kong's own institutions would "curtail the Hong Kong people's liberties" and "dramatically erode Hong Kong's autonomy and the system that made it so prosperous", the statement says. It would also conflict with China's international obligations within the Sino-British declaration, under which Hong Kong was returned to China, and would both undermine the "one country, two systems" principle and "raise the prospect of prosecution in Hong Kong for political crimes". The allies also say they are "deeply concerned" that the new law will deepen divisions in Hong Kong, which has seen repeated waves of protests and clashes over the territory's relationship with the mainland. "Rebuilding trust across Hong Kong society by allowing the people of Hong Kong to enjoy the rights and freedoms they were promised can be the only way back from the tensions and unrest that the territory has seen over the last year," the statement says. The US and its allies urge China to work with Hong Kong's government and people to find a "mutually acceptable accommodation". In other reaction, Japan said Hong Kong was an "extremely important partner" and that democracy and stability there must be maintained. China's parliament has backed the security legislation, which would make it a crime to undermine Beijing's authority in Hong Kong. The resolution - which now passes to China's senior leadership - could also see China installing its own security agencies in the region for the first time. Full details about exactly what behaviour will be outlawed under the new security law are not yet clear. It is due to be enacted before September. However it is expected to criminalise:  Experts say they fear the law could see people punished for criticising Beijing - as happens in mainland China. For example, Nobel Laureate Liu Xiaobo was jailed for 11 years for subversion after he co-authored a document calling for political reform. China's foreign ministry in Hong Kong said it "firmly opposed and refuted" Mr Pompeo's assertion that Hong Kong had lost its autonomy and urged the US to "immediately stop meddling" in China's internal affairs. It described US criticism of the new draft law as "utterly imperious, unreasonable and shameless". Hong Kong's leader Carrie Lam has denied that the law would curtail the rights of Hong Kongers and said it was a "responsible" move to protect the law-abiding majority. Clashes broke out on Wednesday as Hong Kong's parliament debated a different proposed law, which would make it a crime to disrespect the Chinese national anthem. Hundreds of people were arrested in protests over that and the security law. Security remained high on Thursday, as a tense debate in the Legislative Council continued.  At least two pro-democracy legislators were ejected from the council on Thursday. One lawmaker, Ted Hui, threw rotten plants on to the floor of the chamber, saying it symbolised the decay of Hong Kong's political system.  "I want the speaker to feel what is meant by rotten," he said. The speaker deemed the package to be an "unknown dangerous object", and called police and fire crews. Hong Kong was handed back to China from British control in 1997, but under a unique agreement - a mini-constitution called the Basic Law and a so-called "one country, two systems" principle. They are supposed to protect certain freedoms for Hong Kong: freedom of assembly and speech, an independent judiciary and some democratic rights - freedoms that no other part of mainland China has. Under the same agreement, Hong Kong had to enact its own national security law - this was set out in Article 23 of the Basic Law. But its unpopularity meant it has never been done - the government tried in 2003 but had to back down after protests. Then, last year, protests over an extradition law turned violent and evolved into a broader anti-China and pro-democracy movement. China is keen to avoid a repeat of that unrest. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump is expected to sign an executive order redefining the legal protections given to social media platforms. It means platforms such as Facebook and Twitter could be sued if they are judged to "deceptively" block posts. The draft of the executive order says social networks are engaged in "selective censorship". Mr Trump has regularly accused social-media platforms of stifling or censoring conservative voices. On Wednesday, Mr Trump accused Twitter of election interference, after it added fact-check links to two of his tweets. "Big action to follow," he tweeted. The order sets out to clarify the Communications Decency Act, a US law that offers online platforms such as Facebook, Twitter and YouTube legal protection in certain situations. Under Section 230 of the law, social networks are not generally held responsible for content posted by their users but can engage in "good-Samaritan blocking", such as removing content that is obscene, harassing or violent. And the draft of the executive order points out this legal immunity does not apply if a social network edits content posted by its users. It also says "deceptive" blocking of posts, including removing a post for reasons other than those described in a website's terms of service, should not be offered immunity. Republican senator Marco Rubio is among those arguing the platforms take on the role of a  "publisher" when they add fact-check labels to specific posts. "The law still protects social media companies like Twitter because they are considered forums not publishers," Mr Rubio said. "But if they have now decided to exercise an editorial role like a publisher, then they should no longer be shielded from liability and treated as publishers under the law."  The draft of the executive order also calls for: Twitter, which is repeatedly named in the draft of the executive order, declined to comment. YouTube, owned by Google, has not yet responded. In an interview with Fox News on Wednesday, Facebook's chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, said censoring a social media platform would not be the "right reflex" for a government concerned about censorship.  Fox said it would play its full interview with Mr Zuckerberg on Thursday. One think tank warned the executive order could have unintended consequences. "In the long run, this conservative campaign against social media companies could have a devastating effect on the freedom of speech," Matthew Feeney, of the Cato Institute, said.  And changing the Communications Decency Act to "impose political neutrality on social media companies" could see the platforms filled with "legal content they'd otherwise like to remove" such as pornography, violent imagery and racism. "Or they would screen content to a degree that would kill the free flow of information on social media that we're used to today," he said. Mr Feeney said the draft of the executive order was a "mess" but could prove politically popular in the run-up to a presidential election. The long-running dispute between Mr Trump and social-media companies flared up again on Tuesday, when two of his posts were given a fact-check label by Twitter for the first time. He had tweeted, without providing evidence: "There is no way (zero) that mail-in ballots will be anything less than substantially fraudulent." Twitter added a warning label to the post and linked to a page describing the claims as "unsubstantiated". Then, on Wednesday, Mr Trump threatened to "strongly regulate" social-media platforms. He tweeted to his more than 80 million followers Republicans felt the platforms "totally silence conservatives". And he would not allow this to happen.  In an earlier tweet, he said Twitter was "completely stifling free speech". Twitter's chief executive, Jack Dorsey, responded to criticism of the platform's fact-checking policies in a series of posts, saying: "We'll continue to point out incorrect or disputed information about elections globally." Mr Trump wrote a similar post about mail-in ballots on Facebook, on Tuesday, and no such warnings were applied. Twitter has tightened its policies in recent years, as it faced criticism its hands-off approach allowed fake accounts and misinformation to thrive. Analysis by Christopher Giles, BBC Reality Check Twitter says it enforces its rules "impartially for all users, regardless of their background or political affiliation". But there is no publicly available list of which accounts have had fact-check labels or been suspended. Twitter told BBC News it had previously added fact-check labels to two tweets by Chinese government spokesman Zhao Lijian, who had speculated back in March coronavirus may have originated in the US.   The company said the tweets had contained "potentially misleading content about Covid-19 and have been labelled to provide additional context to the public". But these labels were added retrospectively, after Twitter had been scrutinised for placing them on President Trump's posts. Twitter says common reasons for suspending accounts are abusive tweets and spam - not the censoring of political opinions. But critics say Twitter's decision-making process is opaque. And these criticisms don't just come from conservatives.  Human rights groups have previously claimed Twitter has censured dissident voices and activists. In 2018, Mr Dorsey said its staff were "more left-leaning". But he added: "We do not look at content with regards to political viewpoint or ideology."Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A white woman who called the police after a black man asked her to put her dog on a leash in New York City's Central Park has been fired from her job with an investment firm. Franklin Templeton announced on Twitter on Tuesday it had sacked an employee, "effective immediately". "We do not tolerate racism of any kind at Franklin Templeton," the tweet said. Christian Cooper, a bird watcher, asked the woman to leash her dog because he feared it could endanger wildlife. Mr Cooper and the woman, identified as Amy Cooper (no relation) were in a part of Central Park called the Ramble, a popular area for bird watchers where dogs must be leashed at all times, according to the rules. Mr Cooper said their exchange began when he noticed Ms Cooper's dog "tearing through the plantings" in the area. "Ma'am, dogs in the Ramble have to be on the leash at all times. The sign is right there," Mr Cooper said he told her, but she refused to restrain her dog.  When he began filming, Ms Cooper told him she would phone police and tell them "there's an African-American man threatening my life".  She then called the emergency operator and repeated, "He's African-American", before pleading for them to send an officer. A video filmed by Mr Cooper and posted on social media went viral on Monday, drawing tens of millions of views and prompting discussions about the high number of killings of black men by police in the US. Ms Cooper later apologised, saying she had "overreacted". "I sincerely and humbly apologise to everyone, especially to that man, his family," she told NBC News. Ms Cooper also faced accusations of animal cruelty, after she appeared to choke the animal with its leash while restraining it to call the police. After the video went viral she returned the dog to a shelter. "The dog is now in our rescue's care and he is safe and in good health," the organisation wrote on Facebook. Her now-deleted LinkedIn and Instagram profiles suggested she might be Canadian. Franklin Templeton initially suspended Ms Cooper while it investigated the incident, before announcing her sacking. Speaking to NBC News, Mr Cooper raised the recent high-profile shooting of Ahmaud Arbery, a 25-year-old black man who was out jogging when he was killed by two white men in February.  "We live in an age of Ahmaud Arbery, where black men are gunned down because of assumptions people make about black men, black people, and I'm just not going to participate in that," he said.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Twitter, under intense scrutiny for its use of fact-checking warnings, has added them to tweets from China's foreign ministry spokesperson. The warning has been added to tweets from spokesman Lijian Zhao, in which he warned: "It might be US army who brought the epidemic to Wuhan." Twitter added the warning more than two months after the tweets were posted. It comes amid a row with the White House, after similar warnings were added to tweets from President Trump. Mr Trump is now poised to sign an executive order targeting social-media firms, the White House said, in a significant escalation of the dispute.  Earlier this week, after Twitter added its fact-checking links to President Trump's tweets, he threatened to "shut down" social networks for alleged anti-conservative bias. The warnings on Lijian Zhao's tweets were added after the US developments. One tweet, from 12 March, criticised the US Centers for Disease Control for a lack of clarity before alleging that it "might be" that the US army was somehow involved in the Wuhan outbreak. In another tweet the following day, he linked to an article claiming to have evidence that the virus originated in the United States, encouraging people to read and retweet it - which thousands did. Both tweets now contains a bright blue exclamation mark urging readers to "Get the facts about Covid-19".  Clicking it directs the user to a page of tweets about the World Health Organization's research that suggests the virus originated in animals, and downplays theories about deliberate human involvement in its spread. The New York Post, which broke the story, said Twitter had added the warning only after its reporters put pressure on the company over alleged "double standards" between the Chinese official and Mr Trump. A Twitter spokesperson would not confirm whether that was the case, saying only that Mr Zhao's tweets "contain potentially misleading content about Covid-19" and were labelled to "provide additional context". Twitter founder Jack Dorsey meanwhile, appealed to users to "please leave our employees out of this" as the row with the White House erupted. Yoel Roth, Twitter's head of site integrity, has been blamed by many Conservatives as the man behind the effort to fact-check the president. Many prominent Republican voices on Twitter pointed to old tweets by Mr Roth which refer to "Nazis in the White House" and other insults about the president and his allies. Kellyanne Conway, a senior White House aide with the job title of counsellor to the president, appeared to encourage supporters to contact Mr Roth online, saying on Fox News that someone should "go wake him up and tell him he's about to get more followers".  Twitter, however, insists that no one person is responsible for its fact-checking decisions. "There is someone ultimately accountable for our actions as a company, and that's me," Mr Dorsey tweeted, promising to continue to "point out incorrect or disputed information". "Our intention is to connect the dots of conflicting statements and show the information in dispute so people can judge for themselves. More transparency from us is critical so folks can clearly see the why behind our actions," he said. The approach differs from that of Facebook. Sir Nick Clegg, a prominent former UK politician turned Facebook's vice-president of communications, said the company doesn't believe "a private tech company like ours should be in the business of vetting what politicians say about each other", the Telegraph reports. "We think people should be allowed to hear what politicians say so they can make up their own mind and hold the politician to account," he said.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window There have been clashes between police and protesters in Minneapolis after the death on Monday of an unarmed black man in police custody in the US city.  Police fired tear gas and protesters threw rocks and sprayed graffiti on police cars. Video of the death shows George Floyd, 46, groaning "I can't breathe" as a white policeman kneels on his neck. Four police officers have been fired, with the mayor saying that being black "should not be a death sentence". Mayor Jacob Frey also called on prosecutors to file criminal charges against the policeman who was filmed holding Mr Floyd. The incident echoes the case of Eric Garner, who was placed in a police chokehold in New York in 2014. His death became a rallying call against police brutality and was a driving force in the Black Lives Matter movement. They began in the afternoon on Tuesday, when hundreds of people came to the intersection where the incident had taken place on Monday evening. Organisers tried to keep the protest peaceful and maintain coronavirus social distancing, with demonstrators chanting "I can't breathe," and "It could've been me". Protester Anita Murray told the Washington Post: "It's scary to come down here in the middle of the pandemic, but how could I stay away?" A crowd of hundreds later marched to the 3rd Precinct, where the officers involved in the death are thought to have worked. Squad cars were sprayed with graffiti and protesters threw stones at the police building. Police fired tear gas, flash grenades and foam projectiles. One protester told CBS: "It's real ugly. The police have to understand that this is the climate they have created." Another said: "I got on my knees and I put up a peace sign and they tear-gassed me." Police said one person had suffered non-life-threatening injuries after being shot away from the protest area but gave no further details. Officers responding to reports of the use of counterfeit money had approached Mr Floyd in his vehicle. According to police he was told to step away from the vehicle and physically resisted officers. A police statement said: "Officers were able to get the suspect into handcuffs and noted he appeared to be suffering medical distress." The video taken at the scene does not show how the confrontation started. It shows a white officer using his knee to pin Mr Floyd to the ground by the neck. Mr Floyd groans "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me" as bystanders urge officers to let him go.   He ceases to move and an ambulance arrives to take him to hospital where he later died. Mayor Frey said it was the "right call" to fire the officers. He said: "Being black in America should not be a death sentence. For five minutes we watched as a white police officer pressed his knee into the neck of a black man. For five minutes. When you hear someone calling for help, you are supposed to help." The FBI is investigating the incident and will present its findings to the Minnesota state's attorney for possible federal charges. Minnesota Senator Amy Klobuchar urged a thorough outside investigation, saying: "Justice must be served for this man and his family, justice must be served for our community, justice must be served for our country." There have been calls from some for the officers to be charged with murder. The Minnesota police handbook states that officers trained on how to compress the neck without applying direct pressure to the airway can use a knee under its use-of-force policy. This is regarded as a non-deadly-force option. By Jessica Lussenhop in Minneapolis The most surprising thing about the response to the in-custody death of George Floyd was the swiftness with which the four police officers involved were sacked. This is almost always the first demand made by protesters - a demand that is often never met.  While Minneapolis is a very liberal city, it is also very segregated and the region has seen several controversial police killings.  In 2017, Justine Damond was killed after she called to report a possible sexual assault in her alley. The officer was tried for murder and sentenced to 12.5 years in prison. During a 2016 traffic stop, Philando Castile was shot and killed by a police officer who was tried and acquitted of manslaughter. Jamar Clark was killed by Minneapolis officers in 2015, and charges were never brought.  All three incidents sparked large protest movements. It seems plausible that city officials hoped their decisive action would prevent mass protests in the middle of the pandemic, but thousands took to the streets. Demonstrators later smashed a police precinct door, and police used tear gas and non-lethal rounds, making it all but certain that these demonstrations will continue. Allegations of police brutality have been constantly highlighted since the start of the Black Lives Matter movement. It began after the acquittal of neighbourhood watchman George Zimmerman in the shooting death of African-American Trayvon Martin in February 2012. The deaths of Michael Brown in Ferguson and Eric Garner in New York in 2014 sparked huge protests. "I can't breathe" became a national rallying cry as Garner, an unarmed black man, uttered the phrase 11 times after being detained by police in a chokehold on suspicion of illegally selling loose cigarettes. The New York City police officer involved in Garner's arrest was fired five years later, but no officer was charged. Recent allegations of police wrongdoing include the shooting of a black woman in her home in Louisville by three white Kentucky policemen and the shooting of a man by an officer in Maryland. Police in Georgia are also accused of trying to cover up the killing of black jogger, Ahmaud Arbery, allegedly by the son of a retired law official. Paige Fernandez of the American Civil Liberties Union, said of the latest case in Minnesota: "This tragic video shows how little meaningful change has emerged to prevent police from taking the lives of black people."Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump will sign an executive order targeting social media firms, the White House has said. It comes after he threatened to shut down social media platforms he accused of stifling conservative voices. The latest dispute emerged after Twitter added fact-check links to his tweets for the first time. The order's details have not been shared and it is unclear what regulatory steps the president can take without new laws passed by Congress. White House officials gave no further information on what is expected in the executive order which is set to be signed on Thursday. Before leaving Washington for Florida to watch a space launch that was postponed due to bad weather, Mr Trump again accused Twitter and other social media of bias, without offering evidence. Mr Trump also continued his criticism of social media platforms on Twitter, ending a tweet with: "Now they are going absolutely CRAZY. Stay Tuned!!!" The long-running dispute between Mr Trump and social media companies flared up again on Tuesday when one of his posts was given a fact-check label by Twitter for the first time. He had tweeted, without providing evidence: "There is NO WAY (ZERO!) that Mail-In Ballots will be anything less than substantially fraudulent." Twitter added a warning label to the post and linked to a page that described the claims as "unsubstantiated". On Wednesday Mr Trump threatened to "strongly regulate" or even "close down" social media platforms. He tweeted to his more than 80 million followers that Republicans felt the platforms "totally silence conservatives" and that he would not allow this to happen. In an earlier tweet, he said that Twitter was "completely stifling free speech". Twitter's chief executive Jack Dorsey responded to criticism of the platform's fact-checking policies in a series of posts, saying: "We'll continue to point out incorrect or disputed information about elections globally." Mr Trump wrote a similar post on Facebook about mail-in ballots on Tuesday, and no such warnings were applied. In an interview with Fox News on Wednesday, Facebook's chief executive Mark Zuckerberg said censoring a social media platform would not be the "right reflex" for a government concerned about censorship. Fox said it would play its full interview with Mr Zuckerberg on Thursday. Twitter has tightened its policies in recent years as it faced criticism that its hands-off approach was helping fake accounts and misinformation to thrive. Some of America's biggest technology companies have also been accused of anti-competitive practices and violating their users' privacy. Apple, Google, Facebook and Amazon face antitrust probes by federal and state authorities and a US congressional panel. Shares in both Twitter and Facebook fell in Wednesday's trading session in New York. Facebook, Twitter and Google did not immediately reply to requests from the BBC for comment.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Hundreds of fake or hijacked social media accounts have been pushing pro-Chinese government messages about the coronavirus pandemic on Facebook, Twitter and YouTube, a BBC investigation has found. The network of more than 1,200 accounts has been amplifying negative messages about those critical of China's handling of the outbreak, while praising Beijing's response. Although there is no definitive evidence that this network is linked to the Chinese government, it does display features similar to a state-backed information operation originating in China that Facebook and Twitter removed last year.  The accounts uncovered by the BBC also share similarities with a resurgent pro-Chinese network spotted by the social media analytics firm Graphika earlier this year. Dubbed "Spamouflage Dragon", that network both pumped out political messages and targeted Chinese authorities' critics with spam.  China and the US have been involved in a war of words over the origin of Covid-19 and their response to it.  Government officials, senior politicians and media outlets in both countries have used traditional and social media to exchange accusations and unverified claims.  Having increased its activity over the past few months, the network uncovered by the BBC continues to grow and add new accounts. But despite posting content prolifically, it has relatively low impact. Many of the accounts failed to gain a significant following.  After BBC News reported its findings to all three social networks, the majority of the accounts, pages and channels were removed. At first look, "Joker1999" might look like any other account on Twitter - it has a profile photo, a short biography and it retweets messages about politics.  But upon closer inspection, it's clear the account is fake. Its profile image has been taken from a TikTok celebrity and, while it claims to be a blogger from Russia, the account tweets about politics mainly in Chinese. "Joker 1999" is one of hundreds of fake accounts amplifying Chinese government messages across Twitter, Facebook and YouTube. The majority were created between January and May this year.   The accounts criticise the US handling of the coronavirus outbreak, post negative messages about the Hong Kong pro-democracy movement and specifically target Guo Wengui, an exiled Chinese property tycoon in the US who has been an outspoken critic of the Chinese government, including for its handling of Covid-19.  Some accounts focus on only one topic while others post on a range of themes or go dormant and then switch topics. Chinese authorities have previously accused Mr Guo of financial crimes and rape, which he denies. He has business ties to Steve Bannon - President Donald Trump's former chief strategist - and he's behind a website that published unproven claims about the origin of the virus.  The BBC identified more than 1,000 Twitter accounts, 53 Facebook pages - with just under 100,000 combined followers - 61 Facebook accounts, and 187 YouTube channels with a total of around 10,000 subscribers. While not insignificant, the follower counts were nowhere near levels that would be considered highly influential.  On Twitter the network of automated accounts - otherwise known as "bots" - largely focused on criticising Mr Guo. They would retweet, like and comment on posts to attempt to make them trend, using tags such as #GuoWengui and his name in Chinese. Similar to "Joker1999", the accounts often used stolen or hijacked profiles of Russian speakers and featured fake profile pictures. Many of them were also created on the same day, a further clue indicating they are part of an automated network. On Facebook, the network focused strongly on the coronavirus pandemic and in particular on spreading criticism of the US handling of the outbreak, although some accounts also promoted negative messages about Mr Guo and the Hong Kong independence movement.  Although the network largely sprung up in early 2020, a few accounts also had a longer history, and posted criticism of anti-Chinese government protests in Hong Kong last summer.  The BBC found evidence that at least some of the Facebook pages and accounts originally belonged to users from Bangladesh before they were either hijacked or sold and repurposed to post in Chinese. These accounts had multiple personal pictures on their timelines, listed users predominantly from Bangladesh among their Facebook friends and sometimes even exchanged comments in Bengali on their timelines, before abruptly changing their language and identity overnight. A few accounts also used Russian or English names, although at times they confused genders, for instance using a male name alongside a female profile picture.  On YouTube, the network focused on videos about coronavirus fatalities in the US, and Mr Guo. Channels uploaded the exact same videos over a short period of time, liked and commented on each other's videos, and created playlists of their content. The network had a core of uploaders with dozens of videos, while some channels only uploaded one or two and mostly focused on boosting the videos of channels with more subscribers.  The operation was closely coordinated, with dozens of accounts posting the same memes and videos in Chinese and English multiple times, often within minutes of each other.  Some of the pages and accounts mixed highly political messages with softer content: animal videos, clips of video games, shots of Asian models, and pictures of nature and food. This mix was most likely an attempt to build large followings while hiding the coordinated and political nature of the main content. Even before most of its accounts were taken down, the network struggled to gain much traction outside of its bubble. Most engagements - shares, likes, retweets, comments, views and mentions - come from inside the network, rather than from genuine users. "In this case, it looks like the network is trying to generate a high volume of pro-Chinese government content, and then to hide it by surrounding it with spammy content," says Ben Nimmo, the director of investigations at Graphika.  The intention is to attract the attention of genuine users to the messaging, Mr Nimmo says, "but it's being done in an unsophisticated and relatively amateurish way".  He says the purpose of networks like this is to create the impression that a lot of social media users support a particular narrative or group; in this case, the Chinese government. "The problem is that this sort of large-scale frontal assault is too crude to convince many people. It is art imitating reality, but badly."  The set of accounts uncovered by the BBC appears to be a larger part of the "Spamouflage Dragon" network exposed by Graphika, Mr Nimmo said. "If it is the same network, it went through a batch of takedowns in autumn 2019, and there was another batch of takedowns this spring," he told BBC News. The network scaled down its activity late last year and mostly posted spam content in November, December and January. "It kicked into higher gear once the coronavirus outbreak became a major public relations problem for China," Mr Nimmo said. Despite the repeated takedowns, the network continued to create, buy or rent fake or hijacked accounts and repurpose them to post Chinese content, albeit at a lower rate than earlier in the year.  "This is a pattern we see with the more persistent threat actors: they keep trying to come back, but the repetitive effect of being exposed and taken down squeezes the space they have to operate in, and forces them to try to hide instead of trying to build an audience," Mr Nimmo said. A Twitter spokesperson told BBC News: "Platform manipulation is a violation of our policies and we will take strong enforcement action on any account engaging in these behaviours, regardless of the content they Tweet. If and when we can reliably attribute these permanently suspended accounts to a coordinated state-backed operation, we disclose all content to our public archive - the only such example in the industry." A Facebook spokesperson said: "We are grateful to the BBC for reporting these accounts and pages, the majority of which we had already removed under our inauthentic behaviour policies. We are investigating the remaining accounts."  A spokesperson for YouTube said: "As part of our ongoing efforts to combat coordinated influence operations, over the past several weeks we removed more than a thousand channels that violated our spam policies. Channels in these clusters behaved in a coordinated manner while primarily uploading spammy non-political content, although a small subset posted primarily Chinese-language political content, similar to those described in a recent Graphika report." Additional reporting by Wanyuan Song and Flora Carmichael Graphics by Simon Martin Is there a story we should be investigating? Email us Follow us on Twitter @BBCtrending or on Facebook.  Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window It's an uncanny and almost tragically perfect piece of symmetry. The number of US servicemen and women killed in Korea, Vietnam, Iraq and Afghanistan - over an aggregate 44 years of fighting - is almost exactly the same as the number of Americans who've now lost their lives to coronavirus in just three months of America's war against the hidden enemy, as Donald Trump likes to refer to Covid-19.  He also calls it the Chinese virus, but we'll come to that. Now I know you could replace the Covid-19 deaths with US cancer deaths or road crash victims and come up with similarly stark or perhaps even more dramatic statistics. But sadly, fatal car accidents and terminal tumours have always been with us. A global pandemic has not. And out of nowhere 100,000 American families are this spring mourning loved ones, whose lives have been cut short by this virus. 1.5m Americans have been infected. Many millions more have lost their jobs. One of Donald Trump's first acts when he moved into the Oval Office in 2017, was to restore to a central position the bust of Winston Churchill that Barack Obama had moved out in favour of a bronze of Martin Luther King Jr.  And in this fight against coronavirus, Donald Trump does see himself as a war leader; the property tycoon who could work a shovel on a Manhattan building site was also going to be shown to be a man of destiny -  the untried field-marshal, with a baton in his knapsack ready to command the troops to get the job done. But also keeping the home fires burning, and lifting the morale of a frightened nation. It has all been far more jagged than that.  Donald Trump is not imbued with the gift of soaring Churchillian rhetoric; there have been no "we shall fight them on the beaches" moments. Nor has he conjured the Rooseveltian calm when delivering one of his fireside chats. There have been days of infamy, but they have been invariably generated by things that the president has said, rather than what has been done to the United States.  And anyway, for a self-styled war leader he must at least face the charge of ignoring the warnings about the enemy he was confronting in the early stages, appearing more Neville Chamberlain than Winston Churchill. Korean War (1950-1953): 36,500 Vietnam War (1961-1975): 58,000 Iraq War (2003-2011): 4,500 Afghanistan (2001-today): 2,000 Covid-19 (Feb 2020- today): 100,000 The initial period of the US effort against the virus was marked by one significant action in late January, when the president stopped non-American visitors from China entering the United States. That was smart and decisive (although some have argued, to my mind unfairly, that Trump should have stopped anyone and everyone coming from China). But any tactical advantage that had given the administration was squandered in February where there was a month of inaction and incompetence.  Attempts to roll out testing were woeful (the president was badly let down by the Centers for Disease Control). Procurement of PPE was weak. The federal emergency stockpile of vital equipment was like Old Mother Hubbard's cupboard: bare. The president had also disbanded the entire global-health-security unit of the National Security Council. He also eliminated the US government's $30m (£23m) Complex Crises Fund. These were decisions that badly undermined the American ability to counter the disease.  All while he was on a determined mission to tell America that this thing from China was no biggie, and certainly was not going to upend the economy - the centrepiece of his strategy for re-election in November.  It is worth just going through the president's quotes from these critical few weeks.  Jan 22: "It's one person coming in from China and we have it under control. It's going to be just fine." Feb 2: "We pretty much shut it down coming in from China." Feb 10: "Looks like by April, you know, in theory, when it gets a little warmer, it miraculously goes away. I hope that's true. But we're doing great in our country. China, I spoke with President Xi, and they're working very, very hard. And I think it's going to all work out fine." Feb 11: "In our country, we only have, basically, 12 cases and most of those people are recovering and some cases fully recovered. So it's actually less." Feb 24: "The coronavirus is very much under control in the USA. We are in contact with everyone and all relevant countries. CDC and World Health have been working hard and very smart. Stock market starting to look very good to me!" Feb 26: "When you have 15 people, and the 15 within a couple of days is going to be down to close to zero, that's a pretty good job we've done." Crisis? What crisis?  But in March the contours became clearer, and it was not pretty. The news was all grim. Because of a lack of testing, there had been extensive community transmission - people were coming down with coronavirus, but it wasn't clear where they'd contracted it, who they'd caught it from, how they'd got it. The "track and trace" (the language of coronavirus that we've all now become so familiar with) was now impossible.  Although the first reported outbreak was out on the West Coast in Washington state, Covid-19 was playing a mean sleight of hand on us all. This pesky virus got us to look in one direction, when we really should have been focused on the other. Where Covid-19 was really letting rip was on the East Coast, especially in the biggest, richest and most densely populated city in the US, New York, with devastating consequences.  If the city was quickly to become the most worrying centre of the outbreak, the borough of Queens became the epicentre of the epicentre - the district where Donald Trump had grown up. And the visuals from there drove home to Americans - and to the president - the scale of the unfolding disaster. At Elmhurst Hospital, refrigerated container lorries were parked to store bodies that the morgue had no way of dealing with. I interviewed a young doctor from there at the height of the pandemic who painted a harrowing picture of daily life and death.  In the richest city of the wealthiest country on the planet, we saw nurses heading into intensive care units to treat Covid patients wearing bin liners as PPE, because that is all they had. We saw the ER consultant putting on his ski goggles to examine a patient, because the hospital didn't have the right face masks. We saw mass graves being dug on a small island in the Bronx to accommodate all those who'd died with no next of kin, or with no money for a funeral. Like the inscription on the tomb of the unknown soldiers in the Commonwealth war graves: "known unto God".  America, this all-mighty superpower, with enough weaponry to blow the planet to smithereens many times over, was looking ragged and not in control of events in its own backyard. It's hard to see this chapter of America's story going down as another moment of this nation's greatness. If Queens is where Donald Trump grew up, Manhattan is where he made his money - and nothing says money like Wall Street, the pulse and oxygen monitor of the US economy. And the president likes to stand over its bed to take its vitals hourly. But as it became clear that the US economy was going to have to shut down, so the Dow Jones index went diving downwards - vertiginous drops, causing circuit-breakers to kick in, and causing the president and his advisers to fret that his whole re-election strategy had gone up in flames.  But then the precipitous falls would be followed by dizzying rises as word came from Capitol Hill that lawmakers might be close to some agreement to inject gazillions into the cryogenically frozen economy.  More than 25,000 of the deaths have come from New York state, and Governor Andrew Cuomo became coronavirus's first political superstar. His daily factual and highly detailed presentation of what was happening, where it was happening, what was being done to mitigate, and what still needed to be done, became appointment-to-view television across the US. Cometh the hour and all that. This lifelong Democrat - who also grew up in Queens - was drawing admiring glances from a lot of Republicans, and with many Democrats quietly thinking: "I wish he was our candidate for president in November, and not Joe Biden." Like an old-fashioned newspaper, he delineated clearly what was fact and what was opinion. In the space of 45 highly polished minutes he would deliver the news stories of New York's descent into the abyss, and then give you his op-ed column. He admitted his response wasn't perfect, acknowledging he could have acted earlier. And he also gave praise to Donald Trump where he thought it was due; he tweaked the tail of the administration when he thought it needed a bit of a kicking. At around the same time as Cuomo was capturing the nation's attention, Donald Trump decided he would go daily with a White House briefing too. It is hard to overstate how much Donald Trump loves - and needs - the roar of the crowd. Governing is dull. Campaigning - and the adoration from his rallies - is what gives him energy. It's what gets his heart pumping and the blood circulating. And because of the lockdown, here was a president who was deprived of the two things he yearns for most - a day out playing golf, and an evening rally addressing raucous, loving crowds. There were also no heads of states visiting him, where the cameras would record his thoughts on whatever was the subject du jour. He was being starved of the oxygen of publicity, and so daily to the briefing room he would come, with us reporters playing the most unlikely role as his ventilator. Being intubated to a bunch of journalists he's never trusted was never going to end well.   Vice President Mike Pence had been given the task of heading the coronavirus taskforce. A poisoned chalice it may have been, but it's a task he's performed with aplomb. He is across the detail of everything, and was the perfect link person between the different branches of government and the White House; between the different branches of government and the governors of the 50 states. And two other things he did with considerable deftness. He never forgot to praise the president to the hilt, saluting him for his leadership. Woe betide you if you don't. And he never forgets to display empathy - talking about the suffering of the American people, expressing condolences to those who'd lost loved ones. That is something that came easily to Mr Pence and is something Donald Trump hardly ever does.  Though there would be a revolving cast of characters in the briefing room - the two other stalwarts were Dr Anthony Fauci, the independent-minded head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and Dr Deborah Birx, who used to head the fight against Aids for the Obama administration, and was made the coronavirus response co-ordinator. These were the scientists who wanted to ensure that the judgements the president made were evidence based. They had limited success.   No sooner had the US economy gone into shutdown than other, more business-minded voices were in Donald Trump's other ear telling him that the remedy his doctors were prescribing was worse than the disease. Let people go back to work. Reopen the economy. The loss of jobs, the recession, depression, the devastation of the US economy will be worse than the death toll. And you could see where the president's sympathies lay. First he advocated that the US should reopen by Easter, with churches packed. Only to have that kyboshed by doctors Birx and Fauci. When asked about this Dr Fauci gave an object lesson in disagreeing with the president without disagreeing: "You don't set the timeline, the virus does," he told reporters. Masterful. But the impetus to reopen became overwhelming. The jobless totals were soaring, and Donald Trump saw his "strong economy" election strategy disappearing down the plug-hole.  And all the while the death toll was mounting, ever, ever higher. What started as a trickle at the end of February became a gradual flow. The gradual flow then became a steady stream. And by late April the stream became a torrent.  Coronavirus was indiscriminating about who it infected, but selective with who it killed. The statistics were striking - if you were black or Latino you were much more likely to die. Longstanding health inequalities came to the fore. If you'd grown up in an impoverished background, you were more likely to have the pre-existing conditions - the co-morbidities, as they say in the US - that would prove so deadly with coronavirus: hypertension, diabetes, obesity, heart disease. And if you live in densely packed, multi-generational households, and work in factories or meat-packing plants where social distancing is impossible, then - surprise, surprise - you're more likely to contract the disease.  The US Surgeon General, Admiral Jerome Adams - himself African American - addressed this directly, and spoke powerfully about it. But he seemed to pay a price for doing so - he was not seen again at another White House news conference. Someone must have taken exception to what he said. The president's own erratic performances at these briefings were coming to be seen as counterproductive by Republican strategists. The president's poll numbers were going down. I was at a couple of the most extraordinary briefings. There was the one where the president made it all about himself. His staff had produced a lengthy campaign style video detailing how brilliantly he'd handled the outbreak - for the first 45 minutes of this over two-hour-long news conference, Donald Trump spoke about himself. He spoke about how unfair the media was to him. It was "poor me". Not once in those first 45 minutes did he talk about those who'd died, nor about those who'd been infected. Nor about the millions who were fretting about how they were going to pay the bills having lost their jobs. I was also at the briefing where the president spoke about injecting disinfectant to treat coronavirus. Dr Birx, who was sitting at the side of the briefing room, looked like she was in some kind of gastric agony as she listened to the president, but never felt she had the space to stand up and say: "This is dangerous nonsense." His performance was lampooned and ridiculed.  But as the criticism piled up against the president, so Donald Trump bristled.  And there were two culprits who'd be forced onto the perp walk of shame. The first was China. Despite his early praise for President Xi, China was now in Donald Trump's cross-hairs. China had lied and covered up. This was the Wuhan flu, the city where the outbreak originated. The Chinese had taken actions to protect themselves, but not anyone else. Worse still in Donald Trump's eyes, China had intimidated the World Health Organization, and its weak, pusillanimous leadership had allowed itself to be cowed by Beijing, and therefore had failed to warn the world sufficiently of the dangers that this new strain of virus presented. In this, sure, there was blame shifting - but President Trump had a point, both about shortcomings of the WHO, and the candour of the Chinese leadership.  All of this fired up the Trump base, but it was as nothing compared with the president shifting firmly in favour of reopening the US economy. Wild demonstrations sprang up - particularly in Democrat-run states, which the president did nothing to tamp down. In California, surfer dudes, backed by libertarian Republicans and small business owners, protested at beachside locations in a bizarre Baywatch meets the Tea Party moment. In Michigan, heavily armed men carrying assault rifles and dressed as though they were auditioning as extras for a movie about mercenaries laid siege to the State House.  A public health emergency, with a virus that is no respecter of whether you are a Democrat or Republican, Trump lover or Trump hater, had divided and bitterly polarised the country. Like everything else.  If you want the country to reopen you're with Trump (broadly); if you're wary about reopening too soon you're a Dem (broadly). If you love the fact that the president has ignored the advice of the Food and Drug Administration over the dangers of hydroxychloroquine, and decided to take it anyway, then you are firmly in his camp.  And although the president has publicly stated that everyone ought to wear a mask, the fact that he chooses not to is taken as a clear dog-whistle to his supporters that you really don't have to. In the face - so to speak - of all medical advice, the mask is being seen by some as an act of provocation, a symbol of the nanny state.  Shopkeepers who insist that customers wear a mask are being intimidated by thuggish gangs patrolling outside their premises. It is grotesque. They are being ripped up and destroyed as though a symbol of oppression by the "Deep State", rather than a small effort to halt the spread of the disease. Our film crews have been jostled and abused for wearing face masks while filming these protesters. Needless to say, these people are no respecters of social distancing.  And now that America has reached this grim milestone of 100,000 dead, what of the future?  In public opinion there does seem to be a battle going on between head versus heart. Science pitted against gut instinct. The role of the state against the rights of the individual.  If a phone app that can track and trace your movements is the vital tool to prevent a second wave of the virus, it relies on a sizeable majority of the population handing over their personal data for it to be effective. Will that happen? In a country whose founding fathers fretted about the dangers of the state becoming too mighty, I just cannot see it (and this goes far wider than pro- and anti-Trump). And what if, please God, an effective vaccine is found? You can be sure that the anti-vaxx brigade (and remember Donald Trump was once one of its advocates) will be out in force, stirring up doubts about the science, the medicine, the state, Big Brother, you name it.  Donald Trump has boasted repeatedly in the past couple of months that no country has done more coronavirus testing that then USA. "It's not even close," he says. No country has built more ventilators or supplied so much PPE to its front-line workers, he says. The president has claimed that other world leaders are jealous of what the US has managed to achieve. Really? Germany, South Korea, Taiwan, Australia, New Zealand, Greece: envious?  Hard to believe somehow.  No country has had more deaths, more infections. Anywhere else, so far, is not even close.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Two days after the US recorded its first case of coronavirus, Donald Trump said the situation was "totally under control" and assured the public it was "going to be just fine".  Fast forward four months and the virus has spread across all 50 states, leaving a death toll of 100,000 from more than 1.6 million confirmed cases.  We've taken a look at how those figures compare to other countries around the world and how the situation could develop over the next few months.  The death toll in the US became the highest in the world in early April and has risen dramatically since then.  President Donald Trump initially said "50 to 60,000" people could die during the outbreak but in May he said he was hopeful the toll would be lower than 100,000. That benchmark has now been hit though and there are still about 1,000 deaths a day on average.  Rather than focus on deaths, Mr Trump has preferred to cite the mortality rate - that is the number of people that have died relative to the country's population - as evidence that the US has dealt with the virus more effectively than some other nations. The chart below shows the countries with the highest death tolls and, to the right, their mortality rate. You can see that by that measure there are several countries where a greater proportion of the population has died during the coronavirus outbreak.  Belgium, with a population of 11.5 million, has seen 82 people in every 100,000 die during its coronavirus outbreak while the US, with a population of around 330 million, has seen nearly 30 people in every 100,000 die.  But if you look at New York - the worst-hit state in the US - the mortality rate there is close to 150 people in every 100,000, which shows that there is a lot of variation across the US.  One of the problems with comparing countries is that many of them report deaths in different ways. Belgium, for instance, includes deaths where coronavirus was suspected of being present but was never confirmed with a test. Some US states record deaths this way, but not all.  There have also been questions over whether official data from some countries can be trusted. Critics of China in particular have accused it of under-reporting the scale of its outbreak.  Another issue is that countries could be at different stages of an outbreak. In many European countries it's clear that daily cases numbers are coming down significantly and they are past the peak. But you can't say the same for the US at the moment.  Several countries in Europe had outbreaks around the same time as the US and all of them have seen the number of deaths grow quickly, peak and then fall away. The US has not.  One of the reasons the number of daily deaths in the US has plateaued rather than fallen is the sheer size of the country - rather than one large outbreak, there have been multiple centres of infection that developed at different times and spread at different rates.  In New York, the virus struck early, spread quickly and peaked in early April. In the rest of the US, however, the number of daily deaths has been slow to fall. Some other states that were badly affected early on, like Louisiana and Michigan, have also seen a substantial drop in the number of daily deaths like that in New York. But as the situation in those states has improved, others have worsened. About a third of all states saw more deaths last week compared to the week before, with Rhode Island, Mississippi and Ohio seeing some of the largest percentage increases.  In recent weeks, President Trump has been keen to talk about the number of tests being done in the US. The most recent data says the US has carried out about 15 million so far.  That figure puts the US way ahead of other countries, but when it comes to using testing to try to control the virus, there is more to it than the total number you've conducted. Countries that did a lot of testing early in the pandemic, and followed it up by tracing the contacts of anyone who was infected, have been most successful in slowing the spread.  In South Korea, for example, they ramped up testing early on in the outbreak and managed to contain the virus. Less than 300 people have died with coronavirus in the country, which has a population of about 50 million.  But as the chart above shows, it wasn't until several weeks after the first death in the US that officials really stepped up testing.  The top US health official for infectious diseases, Anthony Fauci, admitted in early March that the testing system was "currently failing" and that the US was not able to supply tests "easily, the way people in other countries are doing it". The number of daily tests shows the US is well past those initial problems, but progress can still be made. If the 15m figure is accurate, that would still only be 4.5% of the population.  The death toll is still rising, albeit at a slower rate, and one model that has been cited by the White House predicts it could be at nearly 150,000 by August - although its projections have come in low in the past.  One of the issues with making projections is that no one is quite sure what effect the gradual reopening of the US economy will have on the spread of the virus. At one point, more than 90% of the US population was under mandatory lockdown orders, but the majority of states have now begun to loosen their stay-at-home restrictions. The White House has outlined a set of criteria for states to meet before they begin reopening, including seeing a downward trajectory of case numbers for two weeks. But a group of public health experts say only a couple of states are hitting the targets.  Dr Fauci has warned states that they will see "little spikes that might turn into outbreaks" if they reopen before getting the virus under control.  But his advice has contradicted that of President Trump, who is keen to get the US economy restarted ahead of his re-election campaign. The latest figures show that nearly a quarter of the American workforce have lost their jobs since the outbreak began.  Asked earlier this month whether lives would be lost to reopen the country, Mr Trump said: "Will some people be affected badly? Yes. But we have to get our country opened and we have to get it open soon." Even if states continue to ease restrictions, it's unclear whether the American public will be eager to return to shops and restaurants just yet. A recent poll by the Pew Research Center found that 70% of Americans were concerned that states would reopen too quickly. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A Canadian court has ruled that the case of senior Huawei executive Meng Wanzhou, who is fighting extradition to the United States, can go forward. A judge found that the case meets the threshold of double criminality - meaning the charges would be crimes in both the US and Canada. The US wants Ms Meng to stand trial on charges linked to the alleged violation of US sanctions against Iran. Her case has created a rift between China and Canada. Her lead defence lawyer, Richard Peck, has argued in court that Canada is effectively being asked "to enforce US sanctions". But Associate Chief Justice Heather Holmes ruled Wednesday in British Columbia's Supreme Court in Vancouver that the crimes she is charged with in the US would also have been crimes in Canada in 2018.  The approach taken by Ms Meng's lawyers, if upheld, "would seriously limit Canada's ability to fulfil its international obligations in the extradition context for fraud and other economic crimes," she added. The US has charged Ms Meng with fraud over a Huawei-owned company's alleged dealings with Iran. Relations between the US and China have already been strained by disputes over trade and the future of Hong Kong. Washington has been lobbying its allies - including the UK - to not use Huawei's 5G technology services in critical communications infrastructure, alleging it could be a security threat. Following Wednesday's ruling, Reid Weingarten, a US lawyer for Ms Meng, said his client should "not be a pawn or a hostage" in the China-US relationship. "Today's ruling in Canada is only the opening salvo in a very long process ... we are confident that ultimately justice will be done," he added. Meanwhile, a spokesman for Huawei, Benjamin Howes, said the company was "disappointed" in the ruling. "We have repeatedly expressed confidence in Ms Meng's innocence. Huawei continues to stand with Ms Meng in her pursuit for justice and freedom." China has repeatedly called for Ms Meng to be released, and on Tuesday Beijing warned the case would cause "continuous harm to China-Canada relations". Following the ruling, a Chinese embassy spokesperson in Canada told CBC news: "The purpose of the United States is to bring down Huawei and other Chinese high-tech companies, and Canada has been acting in the process as an accomplice of the United States. The whole case is entirely a grave political incident." China is believed to have arrested two Canadians  - Michael Kovrig, a former diplomat, and Michael Spavor, a businessman -  in retaliation for Ms Meng's arrest. Canada's Prime Minister Justin Trudeau calls their continued detention "arbitrary".  "Canada has an independent judicial system that functions without interference or override by politicians," Mr Trudeau said last week. "China doesn't work quite the same way and doesn't seem to understand that."  On Wednesday, Mr Kovrig's former employer called on China to release him. "Ruling was not about our colleague Michael Kovrig & ought have no bearing on his case," tweeted Robert Malley, president and CEO of International Crisis Group. "He shouldn't be held as a pawn."  Analysis by Zoe Thomas, Technology Reporter, BBC News This case was just the first step in Ms Meng's fight against US extradition. Still, it is a blow to Huawei and the Chinese government. A ruling in Ms Meng's favour would have helped China portray the US as a bully, and given Huawei a leg up as it pushes for a larger role in global 5G networks. The US has not shied away from throwing its weight around to prevent the Chinese telecoms giant from being involved in other countries' creations of the high-speed internet networks.  Even though this case isn't directly about 5G, it does give the US leverage to paint Huawei's chief financial officer as a bad actor. It's not all bad news for Ms Meng or Huawei. Her case now moves to another round of hearings - this time about whether the Canadian police who arrested her violated her rights.   If she is successful in that case she could be sent home, perhaps a little later than hoped but with just as much freedom. Ms Meng is the chief financial officer of Huawei and the daughter of its founder Ren Zhengfei. She has been out on bail but under house arrest in Vancouver, where she owns property, since shortly after she was detained in December 2018. Not long after her arrest, China detained two Canadian nationals - Mr Kovrig and Mr Spavor - and has accused the pair of espionage. The move by Beijing is widely viewed as "hostage diplomacy" - a tactic to put pressure on Canada to release the Huawei executive.  "The Government of Canada's top priority is and remains securing the release of Michael Kovrig and Michael Spavor, who have been arbitrarily detained for over 500 days. We will continue to advocate for their immediate release," said Foreign Affairs Minister François-Philippe Champagne after Wednesday's ruling.   Ms Meng's arrest also led to a trade row between Canada and China. A second hearing, focusing on allegations of abuse of process and whether Canadian officials followed the law while arresting Ms Meng, is currently scheduled for next month. Even if a Canadian court eventually recommends extradition, it is the federal justice minister who makes the ultimate decision. It is highly likely the overall process could be lengthy. Ms Meng has avenues to appeal throughout the process and some extradition cases have dragged on for years.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Poor weather has forced SpaceX to call off the launch of Nasa astronauts Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken to the International Space Station (ISS). The two men were due to go up from the Kennedy Space Center in what would have been the first orbital mission from the US in nine years. But unfavourable atmospheric conditions prompted controllers to call a stop just 16 minutes before lift-off. The next opportunity for SpaceX and Nasa will come on Saturday. If that's no good, there would be a third opportunity on Sunday. The frustration was that conditions just an hour after the designated launch time of 16:33 EDT were probably acceptable. But this was an instantaneous launch window where the SpaceX Falcon rocket and its Dragon crew capsule had to leave on time or they wouldn't be able to catch the space station.  It meant everyone had to stand down, including President Donald Trump and First Lady Melania Trump, and VP Mike Pence and his wife, Karen. They'd all flown in to watch the historic launch. "I know there's a lot of disappointment today. The weather got us," reflected Nasa Administrator Jim Bridenstine.  "But this was a great day for Nasa and for SpaceX. Our teams worked together in a really impressive way, making good decisions all along. So, let's go; let's go get this done. Saturday is going to be a great day." There is great interest in this mission. Not since the retirement of the shuttles in 2011 has America been able to launch its own astronauts into space - a big gap in which the US has had to rely on Russian Soyuz vehicles. But Hurley's and Behnken's mission is about more than just pride. Nasa is giving up its past practice of owning and operating the space systems it uses in low-Earth orbit and intends in future simply to buy crew transport services from the private sector - much like a company might outsource its payroll or HR needs.  SpaceX is the first of these new service providers. Mr Bridenstine believes the approach will save his agency money that can then be spent on missions to the Moon and Mars. "We envision a future where low-Earth orbit is entirely commercialised, where Nasa is one customer of many customers, where we have numerous providers that are competing on cost, on innovation and safety," he said. "We are proving out a business model that ultimately will enable us to go to the Moon, this time sustainably. In other words, we're going to go to the Moon to stay." Wednesday's launch attempt went ahead against the background of the coronavirus crisis. Crowds were encouraged not to assemble near the Kennedy complex, and Nasa itself severely limited the number of guests invited on to the site. As for the astronauts, they would ordinarily observe a quarantine before flight. But again Nasa reduced the number of people the men could come into contact with, and those that had to get close were instructed to wear masks. Saturday's opportunity, if taken, will be at 15:22 EDT. Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Attacks on East Asian people living in the US have shot up during the pandemic, revealing an uncomfortable truth about American identity. Though she was not born in the US, nothing about Tracy Wen Liu's life in the country felt "un-American". Ms Liu went to football games, watched Sex and the City and volunteered at food banks.  Before the Covid-19 pandemic, the 31-year-old didn't think anything of being East Asian and living in Austin, Texas. "Honestly, I didn't really think I stood out a lot," she says.  That has changed. With the outbreak of the pandemic that has killed around 100,000 people in the US, being Asian in America can make you a target - and many, including Ms Liu, have felt it. In her case, she says a Korean friend was pushed and yelled at by several people in a grocery store, and then asked to leave, simply because she was Asian and wore a mask. In states including New York, California, and Texas, East Asians have been spat on, punched or kicked - and in one case even stabbed. Whether they have been faced with outright violence, bullying or more insidious forms of social or political abuse, a spike in anti-Asian prejudice has left many Asians - which in the US refers to people of east or southeast Asian descent - wondering where they fit in American society. "When I first came here five years ago, my goal was to adapt to American culture as soon as possible," says Ms Liu. "Then the pandemic made me realise that because I am Asian, and because of how I look like or where I was born, I could never become one of them." After her friend's supermarket altercation, she decided to get her first gun.  "I hope the world never comes to a day when we have to use that," she says, adding: "That would be a very, very bad situation, something I don't even want to imagine." Authorities in New York City and Los Angeles say that hate incidents against people of Asian descent have increased, while a reporting centre run by advocacy groups and San Francisco State University says it received over 1,700 reports of coronavirus-related discrimination from at least 45 US states since it launched in March.  Police in at least 13 states, including Texas, Washington, New Jersey, Minnesota and New Mexico, have also responded to reported hate incidents.  Critics say those at the very top have made things worse - both President Donald Trump, and Democratic hopeful Joe Biden have been accused of fuelling anti-Asian sentiment to varying degrees with language they've used while talking about China's role in the outbreak.  And for many Asian Americans, it can feel as though, in addition to being targeted, their identity as Americans is being attacked. Large numbers of Asian Americans, and Asians in the US - have described a sharp change in their experiences following the outbreak. Kimberly Ha, 38, says she noticed the difference in February, after a stranger began shouting at her as she walked her dog in New York. "He yelled: 'I'm not scared of radioactive Chinese people' and started pointing at me, shouting 'you people shouldn't be here, get out of this country, I'm not scared of this virus that you people brought over,'" the Chinese Canadian, who has lived in New York for over 15 years, said. In the weeks that followed, she also noticed that "about one in 10" people she encountered in public appeared angry when they saw her. "I've never felt that level of hostility before," she says. On the opposite side of the US in California, Madison Pfrimmer, 23, had heard about anti-Asian attacks, but "didn't think it was as prevalent as everyone made it seem". Then, in April, she helped translate for an elderly Chinese couple in a supermarket in Los Angeles when they were confronted by an angry woman who swore at them at length, threw water at them and sprayed them. "She yelled 'how dare you come to this store where my family shops, how dare you come and ruin my country. You are why my family is not able to make money,'" Ms Pfrimmer, who is half-Chinese, recalls. Ms Pfrimmer says she tried to reason with the woman, who berated her for translating for the couple and hurled water from a bottle at her, soaking her legs and feet.   The woman walked by them again when they were waiting for the cashier, spraying them with something that appeared to be air freshener or disinfectant - and then followed the elderly couple to their car, where she took photos of them while shouting "it's your fault", and directing expletives at "China", "all those dirty people" and "communism". "I ran to the couple, told them in Mandarin to just get in their car, and loaded their groceries for them - I handed the man the eggs through his window," says Ms Pfrimmer. The woman followed her in her car - until Ms Pfrimmer purposefully drove near a police station. Asian rights groups and San Francisco State University teamed up to start the STOP AAPI HATE database, which records reports of Covid-19 discrimination directed at Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders in the US. They received examples from 45 states, with California and New York making up the bulk of cases. The incidents recorded fall on a broad spectrum. Verbal harassment is by far the most common, but shunning, physical assault, workplace discrimination, being barred from establishments, and vandalism also feature in the database - with women more likely to be targeted than men. Russell Jeung, a professor of Asian American studies at San Francisco State University who has been running the database, says he found so many incidents of people "being coughed or spat upon" that he added it as an additional category.  That's what happened to Ted Nghiem, a Vietnamese American in Philadelphia. He says in March, a man swore at him, yelling "get out of here, you caused coronavirus" - but it didn't particularly bother him. However, later that month a man spat at him as he walked past, which got him "really down for a day or two".  "I did inform the cops but I don't know if anything happened… luckily I didn't catch anything," says Mr Nghiem, 37. The STOP AAPI HATE database is based on online self-reporting. A separate BBC analysis of interviews and US media reports found coverage of more than 100 alleged incidents since January that appeared to target Asians.  About 70% of those incidents had a clear link to the pandemic, and about 40% of cases were reported to police. Some incidents reached the bar of hate crimes. New York City police say they have investigated 14 hate crimes related to Covid-19, involving 15 Asian victims. There have been at least nine physical attacks in the state. In California, an elderly man was attacked with an iron bar, and a teenager was taken to hospital after being physically assaulted.  In Texas, an Asian family, including a two-year-old and six-year-old, were stabbed in a supermarket. An FBI report obtained by ABC news said that "the suspect indicated that he stabbed the family because he thought the family was Chinese, and infecting people with the coronavirus". The family was Southeast Asian. Sources: Ipsos, STOP AAPI HATE, New York City Commission on Human Rights, New York City Police, Los Angeles County Commission on Human Rights, Seattle Police, Network Contagion Research Institute, BBC research Some Asians have also reported being refused service from hotel rooms, or Uber rides, as a result of their ethnicity.  Matt (not his real name), a Chinese American emergency room doctor in Connecticut, noticed that several patients asked to be admitted to hospital because they said an Asian person had coughed near them. He experienced what appeared to be anti-Asian bias more personally, when he tried to treat a patient thought to have Covid-19. "I had my protective equipment on, walked in and introduced myself. Once they heard my surname, they were like 'don't touch me, can I see someone else - can you just not come close to me'." Many other minorities face more "overt types of discrimination which are worse", Matt says - but he fears that incidents such as what he experienced would be demoralising for medical workers. "This is a pretty stressful time - we're working a lot more, wearing very uncomfortable equipment all the time, and a lot of us are getting exposed to Covid-19." The virus originated from Wuhan, China, and much of President Trump's rhetoric has focused on what he calls the country's failings to contain the outbreak. Earlier this year, he regularly referred to the coronavirus as the "Chinese virus" - a term that critics said did not distinguish between China, the Chinese government, and people of Chinese ethnicity. He later called for Asian Americans to be protected, saying "the spreading of the virus is not their fault in any way shape or form". But that hasn't stopped Chinese Americans from being blamed - or other East Asians from being targeted. Prof Jeung says about 40% of the reports he received were from ethnic Chinese people - but a majority of cases were from people of other East Asian ethnicities. "That's an example of racial profiling - that 'if he looks Chinese, he gets attacked'." Back in February - before cloth masks were recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention - Dahyung Oh, 23, remembers a woman staring at her in a hostile manner on a New York subway platform. "She started approaching me, pointing at me and saying 'Why aren't you wearing a mask, you should be wearing a mask'," the university student, from South Korea, says. The woman did not wear a mask herself, and Ms Oh felt "singled out, because there were literally 10-20 people around us who weren't wearing masks". "I felt really angry at the situation, as if I was singled out because I'm Asian, and a small sized woman that could be easier for someone to target." That incident didn't end in violence - but Ms Oh was lucky. In two separate incidents in New York in March, Asian women were physically attacked for not wearing masks. Many others have been harassed while wearing masks. Prof Jeung says face masks can be a lose-lose situation for Asians when it comes to discrimination, because "if they wear a mask, they are suspected of being infected - and if they don't wear a mask, they're suspected of being infected but negligent".  It's not just in the US either - there have been several high profile cases of physical attacks against East Asians in the UK and in Canada. Vancouver's police department has said that 20 anti-Asian hate crimes have been reported in 2020 so far. Meanwhile, in China, there has been discrimination of African residents - with reports of people being forced into quarantine, and a McDonald's barring African people from entering.  Many say they have been singled out for multiple Covid-19 tests, or been evicted, following online rumours that two Nigerians who had tested positive for the virus escaped.  "I think it is very consistent with past times of crisis, where typically one group is scapegoated," says Carmelyn P. Malalis, head of the New York City Commission on Human Rights. She cites the HIV/Aids crisis and Ebola as past examples.  In the US, there has been "underlying anti-Asian discrimination" even before the pandemic, but little awareness of it, because there are typically lower levels of reporting, and "people often think of racism as a black-white thing, not realising that racism exists in many forms," she adds.  Asians in the US come from a wide range of ethnicities, countries and backgrounds, and often have different political beliefs and identities.  Some 20 million US residents - or about 6% of the US population - are Asian, according to census data. The figure includes Asian Americans, as well as people from South and East Asia living, studying or working in the US.  Some Asian residents, such as Bhutanese Americans, are more likely to be immigrants born abroad, while others, such as Japanese Americans, are most likely to come from families that have been in the US for generations. About three million tourists from China alone visit the US each year.  But race-based prejudice against Asians in the US is indiscriminate, whether one identifies as Asian American, hopes to become American, or is simply visiting.  Asian Americans have described some common experiences - including that they've been seen as "perpetual foreigners" even before the pandemic. "Race, like many social categories, [is a] thing that says you're part of this category [that is] plainly visible for everybody to see," says Debbie Ma, a psychology professor at California State University, Northridge.  "Because of that," she adds, "it's very easy to quickly label and assign stereotypes and associations with those categories" - that an East Asian person is foreign, even if they are not, for example. A 2008 study she co-authored found that respondents - US university participants of various racial backgrounds and ages - were more likely to implicitly think of Kate Winslet, the English actress, as "American", than Lucy Liu, the New York-born star of Chinese heritage.  Matt says he is regularly told "you speak great English", and asked where he is actually from, even when he explains he was born in the US. Meanwhile, Prof Jeung says: "Even though my family's been in the US for five generations, I'm still seen as a foreigner." Dr Ma notes that these are "specific burdens" that Asian people in America experience differently from other minorities. For example, "nobody is surprised when a black American speaks English really well," though African Americans face other sets of prejudices, she says. This has made a person's Asian appearance - something "we wear so apparently", as Dr Ma puts it - a reason to target them amid the outbreak. Nor is it the first time race has been used as cover to marginalise or act against East Asians in the US.  Asian Americans were interned en masse in the US following attacks on Pearl Harbour in World War Two, and sweeping caricatures of East Asians were used as racist propaganda to exclude immigration from China and other eastern countries in the 19th Century. Today, some Asian Americans still describe feeling "on probation", and needing to prove their status as US citizens - a situation that has significantly worsened amid the outbreak. Andrew Yang, a former Democratic candidate for president, wrote in April in the Washington Post: "Some level of background disdain or alienation has grown into outright hostility and even aggression."  He called on Asian Americans to "show our American-ness in ways we never have before" by helping neighbours and wearing "red white and blue". However, he was also accused of victim-blaming for appearing to internalise the notion that Asian people, by virtue of their ethnicity, are not American enough.  Both the Trump and Biden campaigns have also come in for criticism. An advert for the Trump campaign described Mr Biden as soft on China, and showed a montage of video clips of him with Chinese officials.  The montage included a shot of Gary Locke - the Chinese American former Washington governor who served as the US ambassador to China - leading to accusations that the ad was implying Mr Locke was a foreign official.  The Biden campaign came under fire after an attack ad emphasised that "Trump let in 40,000 travellers from China into America" after announcing a travel ban - even though many of those would have been American citizens.  Both campaigns have denied any xenophobia or targeting Chinese Americans.  For some, the rise in anti-Asian sentiment has felt clear and dangerous. There is no comprehensive data on race and gun purchases in the US, but reports from gun shop owners suggest that many have seen more Asian buyers amid a general rise in sales. Chinese American Donghui Zang, 49, has started organising neighbourhood patrols in Queens, New York, where the group's more-than-200 members take turns driving around and reporting suspicious activities to the police. A dozen of members in the patrol group, including Mr Zang, have recently applied for firearms permits. Mr Zang, who describes himself as socially conservative, believes Chinese Americans should arm themselves "in case of social turmoil and skyrocketing crime".  The view is not shared by everyone. Max Leung, a co-founder of the San Francisco Peace Collective, says his group conducts patrols in Chinatown to help stop cases of vandalism and theft. "Although I do believe and am a huge advocate of self-defence, we do not promote our members bearing arms while on patrol," Mr Leung, 49, says. "The culture I want to create within our group is that of promoting peace, not perpetuating violence." Artists and comedians have also been inspired to speak out - including hip hop artist Jason Chu, who helped start the campaign Hate is a Virus, and wrote a rap about anti-Asian incidents. He says the rap aimed to show "the ridiculousness of people targeting Asian Americans", and also "emphasise the fact that Asian Americans belong here". "We're not guests in America - we were born here - this is where our parents raised us. We're saying that hate has no place in our country."  More generally, there are hopes that this new awareness of discrimination will lead to stronger Asian communities in the US - and more solidarity with other ethnic minorities. Matt recalls hearing negative comments about the African American community as he grew up - including from Asian Americans.  By contrast, "now I see a lot of Asian Americans standing up for Ahmaud Arbery", the black jogger shot dead in a Georgia suburb by two white men now charged with murder. Matt believes that Asian American communities have become more vocal in recent years about politics and representation.  "A lot of my friends have seen this anti-Chinese rhetoric going on, and become more interested in talking about the discrimination that other communities face" as a result.  Prof Jeung says he has seen examples of Asian Americans "recognising their common interests, and mobilising as a political group and community". Asians from different walks of life now "find themselves having a common experience" due to discrimination related to the pandemic. "We're all facing this process, of racial profiling, together. So hopefully, we'll come together to fight the racism, and develop empathy with other people who are racially profiled."  Additional reporting by the BBC's Xinyan Yu  . All pictures copyrightShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Elon Musk's SpaceX has launched people to the space station. But why is a private company sending astronauts into space for Nasa? To understand the background to this historic launch with the Crew Dragon spacecraft, we need to go back almost 20 years to a tragic accident. On 1 February 2003, the space shuttle Columbia broke apart while re-entering the Earth's atmosphere. All seven astronauts aboard perished in the disaster. The loss of Columbia and its crew was the trigger for a dramatic shift in direction for America's human spaceflight programme. On 14 January 2004, President George W Bush announced that the space shuttle would be retired after completion of the International Space Station (ISS). In its place, America would build a new vehicle capable of returning astronauts to the Moon. The following year, then-Nasa chief Mike Griffin announced that the completion of the ISS would, for the first time, open up commercial opportunities for the routine transportation of cargo and astronauts to low-Earth orbit.  This, Griffin reasoned, was required to free up enough funds to achieve a Moon return. Nasa established a Commercial Crew & Cargo Program Office (C3PO) to oversee the effort. At the time, SpaceX, the company started by South African-born entrepreneur Elon Musk was just a few years old. Musk had lofty ambitions about bringing down the cost of spaceflight by re-using space hardware and settling humans on Mars. He also had many doubters. But SpaceX, along with Virginia-based Orbital Sciences, would eventually win contracts to fulfil the first part of Nasa's commercial vision - ferrying supplies and other cargo to the space station. SpaceX's Dragon cargo spacecraft could not carry humans, but it was a major milestone for the company. In 2008, Barack Obama became president. His administration kicked off a review of the human spaceflight programme, which led to the cancellation of his predecessor's plan to return to the Moon (known as Constellation).  However, the Obama administration favoured the continued commercialisation of space, backing the development of private crew vehicles. But it would take time and, after the space shuttle was retired, Nasa had to fill the gap by paying Russia tens of millions of dollars per seat to fly its astronauts to the ISS on the Soyuz vehicle, which launches from Baikonur in Kazakhstan. Congress was initially sceptical about the Commercial Crew Program and did not provide sufficient funds at first. But Charles Bolden, the former astronaut who took over from Griffin as Nasa chief under Obama, persisted and eventually secured the support he needed. From their initial $50m investment in the programme in 2010, the space agency whittled several competing companies down to two - SpaceX and Boeing - in 2014. Since then, they have been refining and testing their spacecraft designs.  In March 2019, SpaceX performed a triumphant launch of the Crew Dragon without astronauts. Using automated procedures, the capsule successfully approached and docked with the space station.  It was carrying a mannequin called Ripley - after Ellen Ripley, the protagonist in the Alien movies - decked out with sensors to measure the G forces experienced during flight, particularly the launch and return phases.  Despite this success, and others along the way, it hasn't always been plain sailing for SpaceX. In 2016, a Falcon 9 rocket blew up on the launch pad. And in April 2019, a Crew Dragon capsule exploded during a so-called static fire test on the ground. No one was hurt in either event.  The spacecraft was also having problems with the parachute system designed to bring it back safely to Earth.  These mishaps, along with earlier funding shortfalls for the Commercial Crew Program, had introduced delays to an original timeline that would have seen SpaceX launch crew to the ISS in October 2016.  Frustrated by the hold ups and the time SpaceX was spending on its Starship project to build a super heavy-lift launch vehicle, Nasa administrator Jim Bridenstine tweeted: Bridenstine sent the tweet the night before a major Starship media event where Musk was due to speak. The next day, Musk shot back with a quip aimed at the agency's own timelines. Asked about the tweet by CNN, Musk answered: "Did he (Bridenstine) say Commercial Crew or SLS?" The SpaceX founder was referring to Nasa's Space Launch System rocket - designed to launch humans to the Moon - which has also been hit by delays and cost overruns. Musk's company wasn't alone in experiencing challenges, however. A timing anomaly prevented Boeing's spacecraft - the CST-100 Starliner - from docking with the space station during an uncrewed test flight last year. However, a successful in-flight test of the Crew Dragon's launch abort system in January 2020 helped clear the way for the historic flight from Florida's Kennedy Space Center on 30 May. In the post-launch press conference, both Bridenstine and Musk struck more conciliatory tones, in contrast to the tensions over the Starship project. "If you would have told me then (eight months prior, when he sent the tweet) that we would be right here today, I don't know that I would have believed it," said Bridenstine. "Since that day, Elon Musk and SpaceX have delivered on everything Nasa has asked them to deliver on - and at a speed that we never would have guessed." The Nasa chief also congratulated SpaceX on its safety culture. Musk replied: "Nasa made us way better than we would otherwise have been - and of course, we couldn't even have got started without Nasa." Follow Paul on Twitter.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A Canadian province has launched an investigation into five Ontario elder care homes following the release of a "deeply disturbing" report.  The Canadian armed forces report found instances of insect infestations, poor hygiene practices, and neglect, among other concerns. In one home, patients who had tested positive for Covid-19 were able to wander the premises. Ontario Premier Doug Ford said the document was "gut-wrenching". Prime Minister Justin Trudeau called it "deeply disturbing".  Mr Ford said a full investigation has been launched into the allegations, which included claims that facilities smelt of rotten food, infested with cockroaches and flies, and that elderly people were left for hours "crying for help with staff not responding".  One death has also been referred to the provincial coroner for investigation. Results of the inquiry will be shared with police in case results lead to criminal charges, Mr Ford said.  "There are things in there that are extremely troubling and we need to take action," he told journalists during his regular coronavirus briefing on Tuesday.  Canada's military has been assisting in a number of elder care homes that have been overwhelmed by outbreaks of the virus.  Government statistics suggest that as much as 80% of all the coronavirus-related deaths in Canada are linked to long-term care homes and residences for the elderly.  On Wednesday, a day after the Ontario report was released, Quebec released the military's report on their long-term care homes. The report found there was inadequate staffing and personal protective equipment, and that in some homes coronavirus patients were kept in rooms with people who did not have the disease. There are currently 150 long-term care homes in Ontario experiencing an outbreak, out of over 620 homes. Some 1,675 troops have been assisting in five care homes in the province, and a further 25 in Quebec, according to CBC News. People of all ages can be infected by the virus. But it is especially dangerous for older people and elder care homes in many parts of the world have been especially hard-hit by the pandemic. Mr Ford said that the pandemic has "exposed the deep, deep cracks in long-term care homes". Officials have spoken of overworked and poorly paid staff in many facilities across Canada.  Canadian military personnel had been in the five care homes - amongst the hardest hit in Ontario with Covid-19 outbreaks - since 22 April.  The report raised numerous concerns about conditions in the homes based on observations taken over two weeks.  It compiled cases of re-use of unsterile equipment like catheters, of use of expired medications, patients with Covid-19 allowed to interact with healthy residents, abusive behaviour,  improper use of personal protective equipment, insect infestations, the delayed changing of soiled or incontinent patients, and forced feedings.  It also documented instances where patients were left calling help with no response for up to two hours.  At one facility, the Eatonville Care Centre, patients who had tested positive for Covid-19 were left to wander the facilities, the military report said. The care centre has seen at least 42 deaths from Covid this year, according to Canadian media. Mr Ford said the situation in the five care homes in the military report is stabilising with the support of soldiers and other personnel.  A class action lawsuit was brought against one of the facilities, Orchard Villa, on Monday, alleging deficiencies dating back to 2017 and contributing to the current conditions. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Trump has taken the extraordinary step of threatening to close down social media platforms. The threat came after Twitter added fact-check links to his tweets for the first time. The battle between the president and the social-media companies has been brewing for a time. But now it feels as though an all-out war is looming between Donald Trump and Twitter ahead of the US presidential election, in November. Last night, a couple of Trump tweets raging about "fraudulent" postal ballots in US elections featured - for some users but not all - a strapline linking to what Twitter called "facts about mail-in ballots."  This then led to a page debunking the president's claims but featuring articles from two organisations he regards as his sworn enemies, CNN and the Washington Post. It took him no time to fight back, tweeting: "Twitter is completely stifling free speech, and I, as President, will not allow it to happen."  Then, on Wednesday morning, the president woke up and raised the temperature even further with this two-part tweet:  "Republicans feel that social-media platforms totally silence conservatives voices.  "We will strongly regulate, or close them down, before we can ever allow this to happen.  "We saw what they attempted to do, and failed, in 2016.  "We can't let a more sophisticated version of that... happen again - just like we can't let largescale mail-in ballots take root in our country.  "It would be a free-for-all on cheating, forgery and the theft of ballots.  "Whoever cheated the most would win.  "Likewise, social media. "Clean up your act, now." So does he mean any of this?  It is very hard to see Congress passing laws to strongly regulate or close down social-media platforms.  The president refers to free speech.  But as a private company, Twitter is free to police its platform as it sees fit. Nevertheless, for Twitter's chief executive, Jack Dorsey, this is undoubtedly just the start of a clash that will continue right up until the November election.  In recent days, he has been under huge pressure to do something about President Trump's tweets. Now, he has acted but not in a way that might have been expected. There has been a furore over the way the president has used Twitter seemingly to endorse a baseless conspiracy theory about one of his critics, the TV presenter and former Republican Congressman Joe Scarborough.  President Trump has repeatedly suggested the death in an accident, in 2001, of one of the Congressman's aides, Lori Klausutis, is a "cold case" that deserves to be reopened by the police. And that led the widower of Ms Klausutis to write to Jack Dorsey, pleading with him to remove the president's tweets because of the pain they were causing her family. So far, Mr Dorsey has refused, apparently convinced the president's Twitter feed has protected status because it is part of the public record.  Nor was there any attempt to correct the inaccuracies in the tweets. Adding a fact-check to the tweets about mail-in ballots appears to fit in with a new Twitter policy on protecting elections.  It warns users they may not post or share content that may interfere in elections or might suppress participation. Last night, another baseless conspiracy theory - this time about a made-up crime involving Donald Trump in 2000 - was posted by an account called TheTweetofGod.  It too has neither been removed nor fact-checked, perhaps because Twitter realises it would be accused of inconsistency. The president's Facebook page also features his diatribes about mail-in ballots and Joe Scarborough, with no sign of any fact-checking or limits on sharing such material.  But that's not to suggest it will escape his ire. Last week, the president tweeted: "The radical left is in total command and control of Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Google."  And he intended to "remedy this illegal situation". There have since been reports the White House might set up a special commission to investigate the claim. Whatever the social-media companies do about their most famous and controversial user is bound to cause anger on one side or another.  They can look forward to a long hot summer.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A post by US President Donald Trump has been given a fact-check label by Twitter for the first time. Mr Trump tweeted, without providing evidence: "There is NO WAY (ZERO!) that Mail-In Ballots will be anything less than substantially fraudulent." Twitter put a warning label in the post and linked to a page that described the claims as "unsubstantiated". Mr Trump on Wednesday threatened to "strongly regulate" or even "close down" social media platforms. He tweeted to his 80 million followers that Republicans felt the platforms "totally silence conservatives" and that he would not allow this to happen. In an earlier tweet, he said that Twitter was "completely stifling free speech". Later on Wednesday he said that Twitter "has now shown everything we have been saying about them... is correct" and vowed "big action to follow". It is unclear what regulatory steps the president could take without new laws passed by Congress. The White House has yet to offer further details. For years, Twitter has faced criticism for not acting on the president's controversial tweets, which include personal attacks on political rivals and debunked conspiracy theories.  This month the platform introduced a new policy on misleading information amid the coronavirus pandemic. But recent posts in which Mr Trump - who has more than 80 million followers on Twitter - promoted a conspiracy theory about the death of political aide Lori Klausutis, blaming a high-profile critic, have not received the same treatment. The notification on Mr Trump's tweet shows a blue exclamation mark and a link suggesting readers "get the facts about mail-in ballots". It directs users to a page on which Mr Trump's claims are described as "unsubstantiated", citing reporting by CNN, the Washington Post and others. The pandemic is putting pressure on US states to expand the use of postal voting because people are worried about becoming infected at polling stations. In a "what you need to know" section, Twitter writes that Mr Trump "falsely claimed mail-in ballots would lead to 'a Rigged Election'."  "Fact-checkers say there is no evidence that mail-in ballots are linked to voter fraud," it continues. The company had pledged to increase the use of warning labels about false or misleading information on its site, but has been slow to take steps against the US president. Mr Trump posted the same claim about mail-in ballots on Facebook, but it is not fact-checked on that platform. Mr Trump then accused Twitter of interfering in the US presidential election scheduled for 3 November 2020, saying the company was "completely stifling free speech, and I, as president, will not allow it to happen". His tweet on Wednesday told social media to "clean up your act now" and that he would not let a "more sophisticated version" of what they had "attempted to do, and failed, in 2016" happen again. He did not elaborate. With more than 52,000 tweets currently to his name, Mr Trump is a prolific tweeter and relies on the platform to disseminate his views to millions of people. He has used Twitter to launch attacks on opponents, with targets ranging from North Korean leader Kim Jong-un to his political rivals in the US. In 2017 he used anti-Muslim tweets aimed at London Mayor Sadiq Khan to serve a domestic political purpose of warning about immigration, BBC North America reporter Anthony Zurcher reported. On Tuesday Mr Trump's presidential campaign manager Brad Parscale also criticised Twitter's decision. "Partnering with biased fake news 'fact checkers' is a smoke screen to lend Twitter's obvious political tactics false credibility. There are many reasons we pulled all our advertising from Twitter months ago, and clear political bias is one of them," Mr Parscale tweeted. They are voting bulletins that are distributed and returned by post. In a recent opinion survey conducted by the Pew Research Center, 66% of Americans said they would not be comfortable going to a polling place to cast their ballot during the coronavirus outbreak. Such concerns have increased pressure on states to expand the availability of mail-in ballots for all voters in order to minimise the risk of viral exposure from in-person voting. While every state provides some form of remote voting, the requirements to qualify vary greatly. Five states in the western US, including Washington, Oregon and Colorado, conduct their elections entirely via mail-in ballot.  Others, like California, provide a postal ballot to anyone who requests it. On the other end of the spectrum, 17 states require voters to provide a valid reason why they are unable to vote in-person in order to qualify for an absentee ballot.  The move comes on the heels of Twitter's decision not to remove a comment President Trump made about the death of Lori Klausutis in 2001.  The president has tweeted several messages promoting a conspiracy theory that Ms Klausutis was murdered by MSNBC host Joe Scarborough.  Her widower Timothy Klausutis asked Twitter to remove the post, saying it included "horrifying lies". The company told Mr Klausutis it was "deeply sorry" about the pain caused by the president's statements, but said the tweets did not violate their policies.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Andy Byford has been appointed the new commissioner of Transport for London. Mr Byford, 54, who was previously president and chief executive officer of New York City Transit Authority, will begin his role on 29 June. He said he was delighted to be appointed to the role following an international recruitment process. The mayor of London said Mr Byford's experience would help London's transport industry to recover following the impact of Covid-19.  Mr Byford, who has spent 30 years in the transport industry, including as director of operations at Southern Railway, said his new role would be a "huge challenge" but that Transport for London (TfL) had "some of the best people in the world". What a time for a transport commissioner to be taking over. So is Andy Byford the man for a crisis? He's just left the New York Subway which he started to improve and upgrade.  He picked up the nickname "The Train Daddy" and it seems he was well respected. Very much a transport man, Mr Byford began his career as a graduate at London Underground. But he now faces challenges bigger than those in the Big Apple:  "In the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic, all transport authorities around the world will need to reimagine how their services and projects contribute to the safe and sustainable re-start of the social and economic lives of the cities they serve," Mr Byford said. "We will meet these challenges and will together help build an even better city for everyone." The current commissioner, Mike Brown MVO, will stay on until 10 July. Mr Brown is to begin a role overseeing the renovation of the historic Houses of Parliament.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A cinematographer on TV show Criminal Minds was allowed to grope male crew members by employers who condoned his conduct, a US legal action alleges. Gregory St Johns is accused of touching multiple men and retaliating against those who spurned his advances. The Disney Company, CBS and Mr St Johns are among the defendants being sued by California's Department of Fair Employment and Housing (DFEH). Mr St Johns was fired in 2018 after crew members' complaints became public. According to court documents published by the Deadline website, Mr St Johns engaged in a pattern of "sexual harassment, discrimination and retaliation" for 14 years. He is accused of touching, kissing and caressing "numerous men". It is alleged that his employers had "actual and constructive knowledge" of Mr St Johns' "abusive" conduct yet allowed it to continue "unchecked". "No necessary steps to prevent sex-based harassment and discrimination were taken over the years, nor were appropriate corrective actions," the legal action continues. "Instead, the executives fired anyone who resisted or who tacitly evaded St Johns' advances or abuse." The legal case says more than a dozen men were fired at Mr St Johns' request. The DFEH is seeking damages for any victims in a legal action that names several individual producers as defendants. CBS, Disney and Mr St Johns have yet to comment, while the Disney-owned ABC Signature Studios said it would "defend the asserted claims vigorously". Criminal Minds, a police procedural about the workings of the FBI's Behavioural Analysis Unit, was a CBS-ABC co-production that first aired in 2005. Mandy Patinkin, Joe Mantegna and Jennifer Love Hewitt were among the many actors to appear in the show prior to its cancellation earlier this year. Follow us on Facebook, or on Twitter @BBCNewsEnts. If you have a story suggestion email entertainment.news@bbc.co.ukShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Four Minnesota police officers have been fired after the death of a black man who was taken into custody and seen on video being pinned down by his neck. Minneapolis Police Chief Medaria Arradondo said the four officers were now "former employees".  Footage shows the man, George Floyd, groaning and repeatedly saying "I can't breathe" to the white officer. The incident echoed that of Eric Garner, a black man who died being arrested in New York City in 2014. The FBI has said it will investigate the Minneapolis incident, which took place on Monday evening. Minnesota police said 46-year-old Mr Floyd, who had worked providing security at a restaurant, died after a "medical incident" in a "police interaction".  On Tuesday afternoon, Mayor Jacob Frey confirmed the four officers involved in the incident had been "terminated". "This is the right call," he tweeted. At a press conference earlier, Mr Frey had described the incident as "completely and utterly messed up".  "I believe what I saw and what I saw is wrong on every level," he said.  "Being black in America should not be a death sentence." It is the latest accusation of US police brutality against African Americans. Recent high-profile cases include an officer in Maryland who fatally shot a man inside a patrol car. The incident in Minneapolis began with a report of a customer attempting to use a counterfeit $20 bill at a store. The officers located the suspect in his car, police said in a statement. They were told the man, who has not been identified, was "sitting on top of a blue car and appeared to be under the influence". After being ordered to step away from the vehicle, the man physically resisted officers, according to police. "Officers were able to get the suspect into handcuffs and noted he appeared to be suffering medical distress," the statement added. In the 10-minute video filmed by a witness, the man is kept on the ground by the officer and, at one point, says: "Don't kill me." Witnesses urged the officer to take his knee off the man's neck, noting that he was not moving. One says, "His nose is bleeding", while another pleads, "Get off his neck." The man then appears motionless before he is put on a stretcher and into an ambulance. Police said no weapons were used during the incident and that body camera footage had been handed to the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension (BCA), which is investigating the case. On Tuesday evening, officers used tear gas to disperse a mass protest outside a police precinct in Minneapolis, according to local media. A journalist for the Star Tribune newspaper tweeted that he had been struck by a rubber bullet fired by police. A reporter for local KTSP-TV tweeted that demonstrators had smashed glass at the precinct building and sprayed graffiti on a police patrol car. Police said in a statement earlier about the death of George Floyd: "As additional information has been made available, it has been determined that the Federal Bureau of Investigation will be a part of this investigation." Speaking to US media on Tuesday, Chief Arradondo said the force's policies "regarding placing someone under control" will be reviewed as part of the probe.  According to the Associated Press news agency, Minneapolis police officers are allowed under the department's use-of-force policy to kneel on a suspect's neck as long as they do not obstruct the airway. Asked about the FBI's involvement, Chief Arradondo said he made the decision to include the agency after receiving "additional information" from a community source "that just provided more context".  In a statement, a spokesperson for the FBI Minneapolis division said the agency's investigation woud focus on whether the police officers involved "willfully deprived the individual of a right or privilege protected by the Constitution or laws of the United States". When completed, the agency will present its findings to the Minnesota state's attorney for possible federal charges. The Minnesota BCA, which investigates most in-custody deaths, will continue to conduct its own investigation, focusing on possible violations of state laws.  Minnesota Senator Amy Klobuchar - who has reportedly been shortlisted as Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden's running mate - issued a statement calling for a "complete and thorough outside investigation". "Justice must be served for this man and his family, justice must be served for our community, justice must be served for our country," she said.  "I can't breathe" became a national rallying cry against police brutality in the US after the July 2014 death of Eric Garner.  Garner, an unarmed black man, uttered the phrase 11 times after being detained by police on suspicion of illegally selling loose cigarettes. They were the final words of the 43-year-old, who died after a police officer placed him in a chokehold.  A city medical examiner ruled the chokehold contributed to Garner's death. The New York City police officer involved in Garner's deadly arrest was fired from the police force more than five years later, in August 2019.  No officer was charged in that case.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Scottish design engineer Ross Hunter has made it to the finals of a global competition to create low-cost ventilators for Covid-19 sufferers. His achievement is all the more remarkable because his prototype is based on a commercial coffee machine. Ross Hunter is used to thinking outside the box. As chief executive of a company that specialises in designing accommodation pods, he has constantly sought innovative solutions to help keep his business ahead of the competition. In his spare time over the years, he has also enjoyed "tinkering" with design concepts.  They include a prototype for a commercial coffee machine - an idea that sprang from a visit to his best friend's coffee shop in Edinburgh.  "I became very interested in the complexity of speciality coffee machines," he recalls. "People in the industry are forever looking to find ways of improving the pressure and temperature profiles of the machines in order to extract every bit of flavour they can from a coffee bean."  That invention was eventually put on the back burner as his day job became ever more demanding. But all that was to change when the coronavirus pandemic took hold. With his business near Edinburgh under lockdown, Mr Hunter learned of a global challenge set by a group of doctors at Massachusetts General Hospital who were concerned at a potential shortage of ventilators to help seriously ill Covid-19 patients. The CoVent-19 Innovate2Ventilate challenge called for innovators around the world to create a low-cost, rapidly-deployable mechanical ventilator within 90 days. Mr Hunter quickly realised that he already had the makings of a ventilator in his coffee machine concept and decided to adopt an alternative approach to a traditional "bellow" ventilator system. He says: "It struck me that I could easily change a few components in my coffee machine prototype to make a ventilator. "My coffee machine idea uses a drive system instead of a traditional pump. It is similar in concept to a lever coffee machine, but with a drive system that can be easily controlled. "To get the ventilator prototype working I needed to make a few modifications to the coffee machine design - replace the plunger system with bellows and re-programme it to work." Working on his own, Mr Hunter took just three weeks to develop a prototype and 3D models for his CORE Vent design.  "I focused on creating the simplest ventilator possible that could be built anywhere and didn't require specialist parts or equipment," he explains. Despite his unconventional approach, the CoVent-19 judges were impressed. Mr Hunter has made the final seven out of well over 200 entries from more than 40 countries. He is the only individual left in the competition and the only contestant who is not based in North or South America. But he is taking nothing for granted, knowing that the remaining competitors include a large team from Stanford University. "I'm still taking in the news that I've reached the finals of the challenge up against such strong international competition," says Mr Hunter. He has assembled a small team of employees from his Bonnyrigg-based firm, Armadilla, to refine his prototype ahead of the finals deadline of 21 June. The winner, who will be selected by the end of next month, will not receive any financial reward but will get to name the ventilator. "I never expected to generate income from this idea," says Mr Hunter, whose company was recently  granted the Queen's Award for Enterprise in the Innovation category. "I just want to help in any way I can, especially those countries which do not have a lot of resources to pay for ventilators which can be extremely expensive." Although the United States and other countries have increased their production of ventilators, many nations, particularly developing ones, face a serious shortage. For example, the World Health Organization has reported that 41 African countries have fewer than 2,000 functional ventilators in public health services between them. Emily Blatter Boyer, one of the organisers of the CoVent-19 Challenge, says: "Our goal in this competition is to increase the supply of low-cost mechanical ventilators for heavily burdened modern medical facilities that provide pipeline oxygen within their facility.  "We remain hopeful that our competition will make a difference in the battle against Covid-19.  "Without a vaccine, which will not come for quite some time, the virus will continue to spread, and according to epidemiologists, has the ability to come back as an even stronger strain over the next year.  "$30,000 to $50,000 ventilator contracts may provide excess ventilators to major urban centres in the US, but will not be enough to meet the needs of this global crisis." The competition organisers say they are in discussions with manufacturers, distributors and the public sector to deliver the final winning ventilator around the world.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window NBC's Tonight Show host Jimmy Fallon has apologised for wearing blackface in a Saturday Night Live skit from 2000. The clip went viral on Monday, and led to calls for Fallon to quit the show. In his apology on Tuesday, Fallon said there was "no excuse" for his actions, and thanked the public "for holding me accountable". Several politicians and media figures, as well as Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, have been embroiled in recent blackface scandals.  In the skit, Fallon wore blackface to impersonate fellow Saturday Night Live cast member Chris Rock, who is African American, depicting him as making a joke about crack cocaine. As the hashtag #JimmyFallonIsOverParty trended on Twitter on Tuesday, Fallon released a statement apologising for the 20-year old skit. "In 2000, while on SNL, I made a terrible decision to do an impersonation of Chris Rock while in blackface," he wrote.  "There is no excuse for this. I am very sorry for making this unquestionably offensive decision and thank all of you for holding me accountable." Chris Rock has not yet made any public statement about the sketch. Saturday Night Live, which has been on air since 1975, has a history of having non-black actors portray African-Americans. The LA Times reports other famous black figures impersonated by non-black actors include former President Barack Obama, civil-rights activist Jesse Jackson, Michael Jackson's doctor Conrad Murray and musician Sammy Davis Jr. The controversy also drew some social media commentators to point out that other comedians, such as late night host Jimmy Kimmel and Sarah Silverman have also performed televised comedy sketches in blackface. NBC, the network that employs Fallon, fired news anchor Megyn Kelly in 2018 after she made controversial comments defending the use of blackface. More recently, the Canadian prime minister and Virginia Governor Ralph Northam have both successfully resisted calls to resign for wearing blackface when they were younger. Blackface has a history of perpetuating offensive and racist stereotypes of African Americans dating back more than 200 years in the United States. "It's a tradition rooted in racism which is very much about the fear of black people and the laughing at black people," Dr Kehinde Andrews, Associate Professor in Sociology at Birmingham City University told the BBC in 2017.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Twitter has refused to delete tweets by US President Donald Trump after a widower publicly implored the company to remove "horrifying lies" about his wife's death, amplified by Mr Trump.  Twitter did not comment on Timothy Klausutis' emotional letter, but said it was "deeply sorry" about the pain caused by the president's statements.  Mr Trump has baselessly suggested Lori Klausutis was murdered in 2001 by her boss, MSNBC host Joe Scarborough. But her death was ruled accidental.  "We are deeply sorry about the pain these statements, and the attention they are drawing, are causing the family," a Twitter spokesperson said. The statement added: "We've been working to expand existing product features and policies so we can more effectively address things like this going forward, and we hope to have those changes in place shortly."  The social media giant has a series of rules regulating content on the platform, including policies barring the promotion of violence and "targeted harassment".  The outlined "enforcement options" include requiring the removal of tweets and the permanent suspension of offending accounts.  Last week, Mr Scarborough's wife and co-anchor Mika Brzezinksi furiously rebuked Mr Trump for his tweets on the matter, calling the president "sick". She also asked Twitter to remove the incendiary tweets.  In a first on Tuesday, Twitter added a "get the facts" tab to another of Mr Trump's tweets about absentee ballots that are sent to voters through the mail. In the tweet, Mr Trump claimed that mail-in ballots are "fraudulent".  Twitter placed a warning label under that message and a subsequent tweet. At a Rose Garden news conference on healthcare on Tuesday afternoon, Mr Trump was asked if he had seen the widower's letter. "Yeah, I have," he said. "I'm sure that ultimately they want to get to the bottom of it and it's a very serious situation." He added: "It's a very suspicious thing and I hope somebody gets to the bottom of it. It would be a very good thing.  "As you know there's no statute of limitations." White House spokesperson Kayleigh McEnany said earlier on Tuesday when asked about Mr Klausutis' appeal: "I don't know if [Mr Trump] has seen the letter, but I do know that our hearts are with Lori's family at this time."  Mr Klausutis wrote in a letter to Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey late last week: "Conspiracy theorists, including most recently the President of the United States, continue to spread their bile and misinformation on your platform disparaging the memory of my wife and our marriage.  "My request is simple: Please delete these tweets."  He added: "In certain past cases, Twitter has removed content and accounts that are inconsistent with your terms of service.  "I'm asking you to intervene in this instance because the President of the United States has taken something that does not belong to him - the memory of my dead wife - and perverted it for perceived political gain. "My wife deserves better." In July 2001, Klausutis was found dead in the Florida office of Mr Scarborough, then a Republican congressman.  Authorities determined the 28-year-old died after losing consciousness from an abnormal heart rhythm, before collapsing and striking her head.  Police found no evidence of foul play. A medical examiner established she had suffered an acute subdural hematoma, or blood clot, and ruled her death an accident. Mr Scarborough was in Washington, DC at the time of her death.  The MSNBC presenter, his network and Ms Brzezinksi have been highly critical of the president's handling of the US coronavirus outbreak.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Toronto-area police have laid nearly 200 charges, including murder and arson, in relation to a violent turf war in the breakdown lorry industry. Police allege competition for control of the towing market has resulted in a "scene of violence" in the region. Rival lorry companies were allegedly fighting over not just the profits of towing vehicles, but subsequent insurance frauds.  Police say the turf war was connected to several organised crime groups. "Their fraudulent billing, fraudulent repairs, [and] fraudulent physiotherapy claims have earned them millions in illicit income,"  said York Regional Police Superintendent Mike Slack said on Tuesday, when announcing the charges. "And when these profits were not enough they staged collisions using drivers they recruited". "As the profits increased, so has the demand for the territory, and the need to control that territory through violence," he said. The region has seen at least 30 arson attacks believed to be connected to the towing industry over the past year, and multiple drivers have been shot at or killed, according to newspaper the Globe and Mail. The crime spree caught the attention of Ontario Premier Doug Ford. "We're coming for you, and we're going to catch you. The party's over," he said last March. The investigation, which was dubbed Project Platinum because of the high-end lorries being used by the companies, involved law enforcement from three police agencies and the Canada Revenue Agency. The public learnt of the turf war last summer, when Toronto Police announced they had arrested seven drivers for gun and drug offences. But Project Platinum, led by York Regional Police, sheds more light on the inner workings of the industry. The investigation found that the towing companies worked with complicit auto repair shops, car and truck rental companies, and physiotherapy clinics to defraud insurance companies.  Tow truck companies would hire fake drivers to stage accidents on roads and in parking lots, police claim. When a group of insurance companies tried to fight the fraudulent claims in court, their law firm, Carr Law, became the target of violence, threats and extortion, according to police. Police searched locations in several cities and towns in the Greater Toronto Area, including Hamilton, Brantford, Vaughan, Richmond Hill, Markham, Oakville, Toronto and the towns of Aurora and East Gwillimbury. Twenty people have been arrested and 191 charges brought forth, including one count of first-degree murder, three counts of attempted murder, and multiple counts of fraud, arson and property damage. Eight of those arrested remain in custody, including Mohamad El-Zahawi, 38, of Toronto, who was just charged with first-degree murder in connection to the death of Soheil Rafipour in 2018. Mr El-Zahawi's next court appearance is on 21 July.  A first-degree murder conviction carries a mandatory minimum sentence of 25 years to life in prison. Police also seized over 40 firearms, 11 tow trucks, and illegal drugs including cocaine, fentanyl and crystal methamphetamine, worth $1m Canadian dollars (£590,000). "With the accused facing charges and their assets seen, we expect the extreme level of violence we have seen in our community to diminish," Superintendent Slack said.  Police expect more arrests to follow in the coming months, and they have called on governments to pass regulations for the towing industries. Currently, only 17 of Ontario's 444 municipalities require towing to be licensed, according to the Globe and Mail. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The US military has accused Russia of sending fighter jets to Libya to support Russian mercenaries there.  There was no immediate response from the Russian Defence Ministry to the US Africa command (Africom) allegation.  Earlier this month a leaked UN report spoke of hundreds of mercenaries from the shadowy Wagner Group operating in Libya. Russia backs renegade Gen Khalifa Haftar's army. The country has issued a new call for a Libya ceasefire and political talks. Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov discussed the conflict with an ally of Gen Haftar by phone on Tuesday, the foreign ministry said.  He told Aguila Saleh Issa, a parliament speaker, that "there needs to be a constructive dialogue involving all the Libyan political forces" and "an immediate ceasefire". Russia has not confirmed the presence of Wagner mercenaries in Libya. There have been many reports - though not from Russian officials - about Wagner deployments in Syria, eastern Ukraine and other hotspots, including the Central African Republic. The Russian government denies any state involvement in the militant group. On 18 May forces of the UN-recognised Tripoli government, fighting Gen Haftar's army, were photographed at a captured airbase, al-Watiya, just south of the Libyan capital.  According to the UN-recognised Government of National Accord (GNA), more than 1,000 Wagner fighters fled an area south of Tripoli aboard Russian transport planes, having been pushed back by GNA troops.  That evacuation was not confirmed by Gen Haftar's eastern-based Libyan National Army (LNA), nor by Russia. The US Africom statement on Tuesday said: "Moscow recently deployed military fighter aircraft to Libya in order to support Russian state-sponsored private military contractors (PMCs) operating on the ground there." "Russian military aircraft are likely to provide close air support and offensive fires for the Wagner Group PMC that is supporting the Libyan National Army's fight," it said.  "The Russian fighter aircraft arrived in Libya, from an airbase in Russia, after transiting Syria where it is assessed they were repainted to camouflage their Russian origin." Turkey is supporting the GNA in Tripoli, and Turkey's Sabah newspaper earlier reported that eight Russian MiG-29 and Su-24 warplanes had flown from Syria to Libya to help the LNA. That report quoted GNA Interior Minister Fathi Bashagha. US Army Gen Stephen Townsend, commanding Africom, said: "Russia is clearly trying to tip the scales in its favour in Libya... using government-supported mercenary groups like Wagner". "We watched as Russia flew fourth generation jet fighters to Libya - every step of the way. Neither the LNA nor private military companies can arm, operate and sustain these fighters without state support - support they are getting from Russia."Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The European Space Agency has asked the aerospace company Airbus to build another service module for the Americans' Orion crew capsule. This contract, worth around €250m (£225m), is particularly noteworthy, however. That's because the hardware will be part of the mission that returns astronauts to the Moon's surface for the first time in 52 years. The European Service Module (ESM) can be thought of as the back end of Orion. It pushes the capsule through space, is responsible for its power supply and temperature control, and holds all the water and gases needed to sustain those riding onboard. The US space agency (Nasa) asked Esa to source Orion service modules to cement their ongoing partnership at the International Space Station (ISS) and to pull Europe into the missions that are planned to go beyond low-Earth orbit. Nasa has initiated what it calls the Artemis programme to go back to the lunar surface. The Esa/Airbus collaboration has already supplied a service module for the first of this project's missions, Artemis I. This will be an uncrewed test of Orion and its launch rocket, and is likely to take place in 2021. Artemis II will see astronauts board Orion for a loop around the Moon. An ESM for this flight is already under contract and in assembly.  Artemis III will be the mission that attempts to make a landing. At the moment this is scheduled for 2024, and the newly contracted service module will be a key piece of mission hardware.  The ESM's role will be to get Orion to the vicinity of the Moon and bring it safely back to Earth. Other components will be required for the descent and ascent phases of the surface operation.  Airbus assembles the service modules at its Bremen facility in Germany. The design borrows heavily from the uncrewed cargo truck Europe used to run to the space station called the Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV). At one time, Europe thought of adapting this truck into a human transportation system of its own, but ultimately baulked at the cost. Nonetheless, the performance and reliability of the ATV made it an ideal template for Orion's service module. Cylindrical in shape, the ESM is about 4m wide and tall, and weighs just over 13 tonnes. Airbus is now able to produce it at a substantially reduced cost. The contract for the very first module, signed in 2014, was valued at €390m. ESMs are given to the Americans as an in-kind contribution to cover the cost of European operations at the space station. But the clear hope from the European perspective is that the integral relationship built up on the capsule will eventually lead to an Esa astronaut being part of an Orion crew that goes to the Moon. The American capsules are developed by Lockheed Martin. Their procurement is separate to the commercial arrangement Nasa has with SpaceX and Boeing who are now contracted to ferry astronauts to and from the ISS. The agency merely purchases seats in these two US companies' vehicles, Dragon and Starliner. Orion, on the other hand, will be purchased, owned and operated by Nasa. Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A top Canadian official has said this is a "great time" to build a pipeline because coronavirus-related restrictions ban large public protests. Alberta's Energy Minister Sonya Savage said people needed jobs and "ideological protests" would not be "tolerated" by ordinary Canadians. She was referring to the Trans Mountain oil pipeline, opposed by indigenous groups and environmentalists. It runs from Edmonton in Alberta to Burnaby, British Columbia. Construction started in December and the project, an expansion of a 67-year-old pipeline, is expected to triple the current capacity from 300,000 barrels per day to 890,000 per day. The pipeline has become a hot-button political issue for Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, who has said the project is in the national economic interest. It has faced numerous legal and regulatory hurdles. "Now is a great time to be building a pipeline because you can't have protests of more than 15 people," Ms Savage said on a podcast of the Canadian Association of Oilwell Drilling Contractors, when asked about the project. "Let's get it built." "People are not going to have tolerance and patience for protests that get in the way of people working," she said. "People need jobs, and those types of ideological protests that get in the way are not going to be tolerated by ordinary Canadians." Both Alberta and British Columbia have a ban on outdoor gatherings of more than 50 people imposed to curb the spread of the coronavirus. Ms Savage belongs to the United Conservative Party (UCP) of Alberta Premier Jason Kenney. Kavi Bal, a spokesman for Ms Savage, said in an email to Canadian media: "We respect the right to lawful protests." Irfan Sabir, from the opposition New Democratic Party, was quoted by CBC broadcaster as saying: "The UCP have already used the pandemic as an excuse to suspend environmental monitoring. When combined with the minister's latest comments, this will harm the reputation of Alberta's energy industry and inhibit our ability to attract investment and get our product to market." The Trans Mountain project faces fierce opposition from the government of British Columbia, environmental campaigners and some First Nations along the route. They are concerned about oil spills, climate change, and the threat to the killer whale population off the coast. Supporters see it as a necessary boost for Canada's struggling energy sector which will help fuel the economy for years to come. A lack of pipeline capacity in the landlocked province of Alberta has forced the provincial government to curtail production to reduce a glut in storage.  Mr Trudeau's federal Liberals took the rare step in 2018 of buying the pipeline for C$4.5bn ($3.4bn; £2.6bn) from energy infrastructure giant Kinder Morgan in a bid to ensure the project's survival."Take one big-ass step backwards." The five words that helped win an Olympic gold medal. Tianna Bartoletta rubs her hands together. Back goes the right leg, left arm outstretched. She pushes forward off her left foot, arms flying, legs getting faster, knees pounding, arms pumping. That same left foot lands on the board and propels her into the air, her body still as she takes off before the arms and legs are pushed forward, every sinew straining for that extra inch, that extra something that will be the difference between gold and silver. She lands. 7.17m. A personal best on the biggest stage of all, enough to crown her as Olympic long jump champion at Rio 2016. "It did feel like things were wrapped up nicely in a bow at that moment," Bartoletta says, four years after winning the gold medal. "I probably could have walked away from the sport then and been extremely happy." But that's not how it goes. Slowly, Bartoletta would break down. The relationships she built fell apart. The mind that dreamt success began to play against her. The body which had served her so well started to break down. All the warning signs were there, unnoticed. Then she listened, and this is what it said.  Tianna Maddison was a low-key kid from Elyria, Ohio; book smart, slightly nerdy, quiet. "I was too smart for my own good," Bartoletta reflects. "I was still competitive so I would find things to be competitive about. I would sing or dance or perform for anyone on demand. I don't do that so much anymore but being dramatic and musical is very much in my blood." Her mum was a dancer and a choreographer. Her dad was everything from a track athlete to a boxer. Bartoletta followed in their footsteps, playing basketball and volleyball at high school, as well as running track, but the girl who loved science was not dreaming of being an Olympic champion. Bartoletta's dad told her she had to go to college, but he and her mum would not pay the fees. She was an honours student but she wanted to make sure she would have a place, and an athletic scholarship would shore that up. It was a case of eeny-meeny-miny-mo between sports - and track won by default. She studied and she ran and she jumped and by 2005, aged 19, she was in the World Championships long jump final. Helsinki was Bartoletta's first major international trip. "It was really hard for a girl from Elyria to treat spending the summer in Europe and Helsinki as no big deal," she says. In her free time she played ping-pong and air hockey with her coaches and team-mates, went to the cinema, made playlists to keep her energy up.  She knew she faced a difficult task. The distance for qualifying alone was set at her personal best. "To even get out of this round, I'm going to have to jump the best I've ever jumped," she remembers thinking. "Once I got that in my head, that was the face and the intensity I had on day one." Bartoletta jumped a personal best 6.83m in qualifying, 18cm further than any other competitor. Two days later, she listened to her coach tell her room-mate about how her life would change when she won her final. Eager to find out what would happen to her if she won, Bartoletta asked:  "Coach, how will my life change?" The coach's reply? "You won't, but go out there and do what you can, buddy!" Bartoletta was angry. So angry. She called her mum, who told her to watch Rocky IV, where Balboa avenges the death of his friend in the boxing ring.  She took all her anger out onto the track with her. She didn't just jump; she jumped further than the qualifying distance that had so intimidated her. She walked away as world champion. Her coaches sat her down straight away and tried to devise a plan for the future, about becoming a professional athlete.  But Bartoletta had something else on her mind. "I was trying to convince my coach that I had earned French fries!" she laughs. "I wanted to get back to the Village because anyone who wins a medal gets to have this little informal ceremony with the rest of the team where they toast you. And I wanted those two things - I wanted my fries and I wanted my sparkling juice, because I was not old enough to drink." Bartoletta got her fries, but not the Village party. Suddenly, it was all business. However, a loss of form and bankruptcy threatened to derail her career. She returned to the world stage to lead off the victorious US women's 4x100m relay team at the London 2012 Olympics, and finished fourth in the individual event. She then competed for the US in the bobsleigh later that year. By the time the Rio Olympics came around in 2016, Bartoletta was like a robot. She deliberately fouled her first jump in order to show her coach, Rana Reider, how fast she was running.  "I'm going to run as fast as I'm going to run all night, and it's your job to get me on the board," she told him.  As one of the favourites, there was an audible gasp as she missed the board by a metre on her first attempt, but she and her coach knew what she was doing. Reider gave her the immortal advice. She took a big-ass step backwards. She won. The overwhelming feeling was relief. "You're just grateful that you're the person that gets to have all of that struggle validated," she says.  "And then it turned into oh my gosh - I went from basically choosing my event by eeny-meeny-miny-mo to being Olympic champion. I just thought it was the most ridiculous, amazing story." The photographs from the Rio Games show Bartoletta looking at her coach in amazement, hand over her mouth, as she realises she has secured the gold medal. On the podium, she is all smiles, tears of joy streaming down her cheeks as she raises her arms, then a clenched fist, to the stadium.  A year later, she was on the podium once again. There were tears. But this time, there were no smiles. "The London World Championships were in August 2017. In May that year, I had filed for divorce and basically ran from home. I was escaping what I believed was a toxic and, at times, abusive, situation," Bartoletta explains.  "When I got to London, I still had all of this dialogue in my head that I'd been hearing over the last several years; that I wouldn't be able to do it without this person, or without doing it exactly their way. "To win that medal - of course, it wasn't gold, but to be there at all, to have given the effort I gave, knowing how I was feelingâ€¦ I was on that runway with zero to give, emotionally. I think physically, I was the most prepared, but mentally and emotionally, I was on empty." Speaking to the BBC in 2017, Bartoletta said she had contemplated "walking off a train platform" after her win in Rio. "I felt that I became a stranger to myself. It felt like I was just getting broken down and I just couldn't take much more of the negativity. My relationship with my mum wasn't very close to start with, so we were already at arm's length, but when this situation started to happen, I withdrew. "Asking for help was the thing that required the most strength for me. It was one of the hardest calls I had to make because I had to ask people I didn't think were necessarily going to be there for me, because they hadn't been in the past." Three months before London, Bartoletta left the marital home. Her best friend was coaching in Alabama, so it was arranged that she would go there on 1 May, the start of the professional track circuit season. From there she went on to China and Japan, hopping from one Airbnb to another, before returning to Arnhem, Netherlands, where she is based during the summer. She describes the break-up of the marriage and the impact of the relationship as being like "the app you didn't realise was open that was draining your battery".  The divorce is now close to being finalised, which will allow both parties to move on. In a statement to BBC Sport in 2017, John Bartoletta said he would be "forever grateful" for being a part of his wife's success, adding he was proud of her and wished her the very best. It has been a tough journey for Bartoletta since she became Olympic long jump champion. She has struggled with what she calls disordered eating in the past, her science background mixing with her athletics in a damaging way. She describes athletics as a sport governed by physics, with body mass a variable that affects performance.  "Maybe at home it wasn't talked about in a healthy way," she says of her weight. "It wasn't coming from my coach but from people who were close to me, like pinching my arms, saying 'I don't know, it looks like you're going the wrong way' or showing me pictures of other athletes bodies, like, 'why can't you look a little more like this?' It's a very unhealthy situation to be in. "There's some people who will just treat you like you're always an athlete but to me, it's a job. So at home, those people who claim to love and support you are continuing on, like, 'are you sure about that? Is that a good choice? Maybe you should only eat half of it? Are you sure? It just becomes too much. Way too much." Luckily for Bartoletta, her team broke down the physics behind it, appealing to her inner science nerd. She knows what her optimal weight is and how to attain that goal in a healthy way. "I've only got to a better place about my weight in the last year and a half - probably [better] than I have been for the entire duration of my career." In an ideal world, this would have been the start of her fairytale comeback, banishing the demons of her past to return to the top of the sport. But in 2018, a sprain in her left ankle ended her season early, and in 2019 it didn't fare much better. Bartoletta jumps off her left leg. This was the ankle that had propelled her to Olympic gold, and it was getting weaker. So she made the decision to switch to take-off from her right foot. It was a huge change - and it did not pay off. Bartoletta arrived at her national championships ready to compete off her new foot. Her competitors were mostly college students. The reigning Olympic champion finished 17th out of 17 jumpers. "It was really awkward and uncomfortable and embarrassing, to be honest. Once that happens, your season is over," she says.  It gave her time to get her left ankle sorted out, so she travelled to the US Olympic training centre in Colorado Springs. And then she passed out in reception. In late 2018, Bartoletta had noticed that her period had changed. It had gone from a predictable, four-or-five-day long event that was, as she says, "mildly inconvenient," to seven days, then "14 heavy, heavy days and only getting an hour out of a super plus flow tampon, then coming off of that and going right back into another cycle".  She first put it down to the stress of her divorce, and then to other factors. "The fact that I did some of my workouts so early, before breakfast, so was I hungry? Was I eating enough red meat? It was really hard to narrow down." A few months before nationals, Bartoletta had received an email from the World Anti-Doping Agency (Wada), who had noticed that her iron levels had been decreasing with each test she had taken. They had told her to see a doctor - Bartoletta remembers 'as soon as possible' being written in capital letters - but she was in Europe at the time and focused on competing. She put it off and off, until collapsing in the reception finally forced her to address the issue. "It turned out I was severely anaemic," she said. "One of the specialists in Colorado said, I don't remember the exact number, but it was a solid number fewer pints of blood than the average person. He was like, where did the blood go? And I'm sitting there thinking wow, that's crazyâ€¦ and then it dawned on me and I said, you know what, I know where it went!" The majority of female athletes will have to deal with periods but the effect it has on their performance is rarely discussed. Bartoletta has begun to train smarter, with an increased awareness of what is going on in her body.  "The difference between what I'm able to do the week before, versus the week of, is drastic," she said. "I don't believe we're any weaker for having periods. I do believe it's important to be aware of it." Now based in the San Francisco Bay Area, Bartoletta is a volunteer coach at the University of California.  Her medals and trophies are on a bookshelf "over there somewhere," she says, waving her hand into the middle distance. "It is not something I actually need to look at or ruminate on. They're a representation of things that I have had to do before and I now understand, as an adult, that you don't win medals the same way twice." She is "absolutely aiming" to defend her Olympic title at the postponed Tokyo Games next year.  "I now believe I no longer have to just give my title away, but I can fight to defend it," she says. She feels brand new; "like that saying about the caterpillar. Just when the caterpillar thought the world was over, it became a butterfly". "I'm so many things. I'm the multiple choice answer that's all of the above. Athlete, obviously, but also writer, and I would call myself a low-key advocate. There's a little bit of a rebel. I'm also a yogi. It's a fun line for me to walk - going from meditations, watching flowing water and relaxing to like, screaming in a gym trying to get the snatch off the ground. I love that. "I'm still me, but different. Better."Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has threatened to relocate the Republican National Convention if restrictions are placed on the crowd size due to the coronavirus pandemic. The event is due to take place in North Carolina from 24-27 August. On Monday, however, Mr Trump said he would move the site of the convention if "full attendance" is not guaranteed. Almost 100,000 people have died with coronavirus in the US. Many states have enacted measures to stop its spread. In a series of tweets posted early on Monday, Mr Trump said that North Carolina's Democrat Governor Roy Cooper was "still in shutdown mood" and was "unable to guarantee" that the event would take place at full capacity in Charlotte as originally planned. "In other words, we would be spending millions of dollars building the arena to a very high standard without even knowing if the Democrat governor would allow the Republican party to fully occupy the space," said Mr Trump. Republicans planning to attend the convention "must be immediately given an answer by the governor as to whether or not the space will be allowed to be fully occupied", the president said, otherwise another site would be selected. A spokesman for Governor Cooper said North Carolina was "relying on data and science to protect our state's public health and safety". "What you hear the president saying today is just a very reasonable request of the governor of North Carolina," Vice-President Mike Pence told Fox & Friends in response to Mr Trump's tweets.  "We all want to be in Charlotte, we love North Carolina," he continued. "But having a sense now is absolutely essential because of the immense preparations that are involved, and we look forward to working with Governor Cooper, getting a swift response and if need be moving the national convention to a state that is further along on reopening and can say with confidence that we can gather there." Presidential hopefuls do not become official candidates until each party's nominees for president and vice-president are announced at their national convention, and so the events are a key part of the election process ahead of voting on 3 November. Mr Trump is seeking a second term in office and there are no other Republicans standing. The Democrats moved their convention back a month to mid-August because of the coronavirus outbreak. Former Vice-President Joe Biden is the Democratic presumptive nominee after Senator Bernie Sanders became the last candidate to leave the race in April.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden has made his first public appearance after more than two months in quarantine amid the Covid-19 crisis. Wearing a black face mask, the former vice-president laid a wreath at a ceremony in his home state of Delaware. It was part of an event for Memorial Day - an annual holiday held on the last Monday of May in honour of those who died serving in the US military. The date also marks the unofficial start of summer. "It feels good to be out of my house," Mr Biden told reporters from a distance, and through his mask, adding: "Never forget the sacrifices that these men and women made. Never, ever, forget." Standing alongside his wife Jill, the 77-year-old then presented a wreath of white roses at Delaware's War Memorial Plaza, before observing a moment of silence to commemorate the military personnel who fought in World War Two and the Korean War. Mr Biden has not made an official public appearance since he cancelled a rally in Cleveland on 10 March.  Then, after defeating his Democratic rival Bernie Sanders in primary elections in Florida, Illinois and Arizona, the presidential candidate gave a webcam speech appealing for Mr Sanders' supporters from his home in Wilmington, Delaware, where he has continued his virtual campaign.  Meanwhile, US President Donald Trump and his wife Melania also took part in a wreath-laying ceremony as part of Memorial Day commemorations.  The president visited Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia and then the historic Fort McHenry in Baltimore. Mr Trump, who has been reluctant to wear a face mask but said recently he would do so "where it's appropriate", appeared without any face coverings at both events on Monday.  The US has more coronavirus cases than anywhere in the world. It has over 1.6 million known infections and is nearing 100,000 deaths linked to the virus. All 50 US states have now partially reopened after a two-month shutdown. However, remaining restrictions vary across the country.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Sir Richard Branson's Virgin Orbit company has tried unsuccessfully to launch a rocket over the Pacific Ocean. The booster was released from under the wing of one of the UK entrepreneur's old jumbos which had been specially converted for the task. The rocket ignited its engine seconds later but an anomaly meant the flight was terminated early. Virgin Orbit's goal is to try to capture a share of the emerging market for the launch of small satellites. It's not clear at this stage precisely what went wrong but the firm had warned beforehand that the chances of success might be only 50:50. The history of rocketry shows that maiden outings very often encounter technical problems. "Test flights are instrumented to yield data and we now have a treasure trove of that. We accomplished many of the goals we set for ourselves, though not as many as we would have liked," said Virgin Orbit CEO Dan Hart.  "Nevertheless, we took a big step forward today. Our engineers are already poring through the data. Our next rocket is waiting. We will learn, adjust, and begin preparing for our next test, which is coming  up soon." The company is sure to be back for another attempt pretty soon - depending on the outcome of the post-mission analysis. The second rocket is undergoing final integration at the company's Long Beach factory in California and could be ready to fly within weeks. Most publicity about Sir Richard's space activities has focussed on the tourist plane he is developing to take fare-paying passengers on joy rides above the atmosphere.  His satellite-launch venture is entirely separate.  Orbit is chasing the growing interest in small spacecraft that are being designed for telecommunications and Earth observation.  New manufacturing techniques, often involving "off-the-shelf" components from the consumer electronics industry, mean these satellites can now be turned out for a fraction of their historic cost. But they need matching, inexpensive means of getting into space - and the air-launched system from Virgin Orbit is intended to meet this demand. Sunday's flight illustrated the basic launch concept.  The 747, known as Cosmic Girl, left Mojave Air and Space Port to the north of Los Angeles shortly before midday Pacific time (19:00 GMT / 20:00 BST), carrying the rocket, dubbed LauncherOne, under its left wing.  At 35,000ft (10km), just west of the Channel Islands, the jet unlatched the liquid-fuelled booster to let it go into freefall. LauncherOne ignited its NewtonThree engine four seconds later to start the climb to orbit. But it seems it didn't get very far. "LauncherOne maintained stability after release, and we ignited our first-stage engine, NewtonThree. An anomaly then occurred early in first-stage flight. We'll learn more as our engineers analyse the mountain of data we collected today," the company's Twitter feed reported. Sir Richard was not in attendance, but he was following events very closely, Orbit executives said.  Although his space start-up is headquartered in California currently, he is keen to bring it to the UK also. Orbit is working through the possibilities with the US and British governments, the UK Space Agency and the local authorities in the southwest of England. Newquay Airport in Cornwall has been identified as an ideal location from which to base operations. Britain's enthusiasm is tied closely to that of its satellite manufacturing sector. The country is one of the biggest producers in the world of compact spacecraft.  Will Whitehorn is president of the trade body UKSpace. He also initiated early design work on an air-launched rocket system when working for Sir Richard in the late 2000s. "Everyone's attention right now is on the astronauts launching this week on a SpaceX rocket, but from an industrial perspective [Virgin Orbit] is just as significant," he told BBC News.  "If the coronavirus has taught us anything it is that our world is changing and space is going to be a big part of that. We could put so much industry outside the atmosphere. Take just the example of server farms. We know we could put them in space to harness solar power. It all comes down to the cost of access to space and that will be revolutionised by this kind of system."Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Testing of the malaria drug hydroxychloroquine as a possible treatment for coronavirus has been halted because of safety fears, the World Health Organization (WHO) says. Trials in several countries are being "temporarily" suspended as a precaution, the agency said on Monday. It comes after a recent medical study suggested the drug could increase the risk of patients dying from Covid-19. President Donald Trump has said he has taken the drug to ward off the virus. The US president has repeatedly promoted the anti-malarial drug, against medical advice and despite warnings from public health officials that it could cause heart problems. Last week, a study in medical journal The Lancet said there were no benefits to treating coronavirus patients with hydroxychloroquine, and that taking it might even increase the number of deaths among those in hospital with the disease. Hydroxychloroquine is safe for malaria, and conditions like lupus or arthritis, but no clinical trials have recommended its use for treating Covid-19. The WHO, which is running clinical trials of various drugs to assess which might be beneficial in treating the disease, has previously raised concerns over reports of individuals self-medicating and causing themselves serious harm. On Monday, officials at the UN health agency said hydroxychloroquine would be removed from those trials pending a safety assessment.  The Lancet study involved 96,000 coronavirus patients, nearly 15,000 of whom were given hydroxychloroquine - or a related form chloroquine - either alone or with an antibiotic. The study found that the patients were more likely to die in hospital and develop heart rhythm complications than other Covid patients in a comparison group. The death rates of the treated groups were: hydroxychloroquine 18%; chloroquine 16.4%; control group 9%. Those treated with hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine in combination with antibiotics had an even higher death rate. The researchers warned that hydroxychloroquine should not be used outside of clinical trials.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Americans have flocked to beaches and lakes for Memorial Day weekend, often flouting restrictions imposed to tackle the coronavirus outbreak. In Florida, state police dispersed an unauthorised gathering of hundreds of people in Daytona Beach on Saturday. In Missouri, bars at the Lake of the Ozarks were packed with revellers, who violated social-distancing rules.  US coronavirus task force chief Dr Deborah Birx said she was "very concerned" after seeing such scenes. "We really want to be clear all the time that social distancing is absolutely critical. And if you can't social distance and you're outside, you must wear a mask," Dr Birx said on ABC's This Week on Sunday. Lyda Krewson, the mayor of St Louis, Missouri, said: "It's irresponsible and dangerous to engage in such high risk behaviour just to have some fun over the extended holiday weekend.  "Now, these folks will be going home to S. Louis and counties across Missouri and the Midwest, raising concerns about the potential of more positive cases, hospitalisations, and tragically, deaths. Deeply disturbing." In Florida's Tampa area, the crowds were so big that authorities closed parking lots because they were full, the Associated Press reports. In California, big crowds were seen enjoying beaches over the weekend. State officials said most people were covering their faces and keeping their distance on beaches and parks. On Monday, US Vice-President Mike Pence said that some people "would do well to be reminded about the importance of social distancing and the importance of continuing regular hygiene".  However, he added: "We have every confidence that as restrictions are loosened in the days ahead, the American people are going to step forward and put this country back to work in a safe and responsible way." Memorial Day - an annual holiday held on the last Monday of May - honours all those who have died serving in the US military. It marks the unofficial start of summer. The US has more coronavirus cases than anywhere in the world. It has over 1.6 million known infections and is nearing 100,000 deaths linked to the virus. All 50 US states have now partially reopened after a two-month shutdown. However, remaining restrictions vary across the country. Wide discrepancies also remain between states in terms of infection rates and the pace of their economic restart. Some of the hardest-hit areas, including New York, New Jersey and Washington state are now showing the sharpest declines, while majority of states have reached plateaus.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The US has imposed travel restrictions on foreign nationals who have been to Brazil in the last 14 days.  The South American nation recently became the world's second major hotspot for coronavirus cases. Brazil has recorded more than 360,000 cases, the country's health ministry announced on Sunday, while over 22,000 people have died with the virus. A White House spokeswoman said the restrictions would help ensure new cases are not brought into the US.  "Today's action will help ensure foreign nationals who have been in Brazil do not become a source of additional infections in our country," White House Press Secretary Kayleigh McEnany said in a statement. Non-Americans who have been in Brazil in the two weeks before they request entry to the US will be denied that entry. The restriction will not affect trade between the two countries.  The suspension is to take effect on 28 May at 23:59 EDT (03:59 GMT).  The travel ban will not apply to US citizens, or to the spouse, parent, legal guardian, or child of a US citizen or lawful permanent resident, and most siblings under the age of 21.  "The potential for undetected transmission of the virus by infected individuals seeking to enter the United States from [Brazil] threatens the security of our transportation system and infrastructure and the national security," said the suspension order published by the White House on Sunday.   Earlier on Sunday, White House National security adviser Robert O'Brien told CBS "Face the Nation" that travel restriction for Brazil were expected shortly.  "We hope that'll be temporary, but because of the situation in Brazil, we're going to take every step necessary to protect the American people," Mr O'Brien said. He added that "we'll take a look at the other countries on a country-by-country basis for sure".  US President Donald Trump suggested earlier this week that he was considering imposing a ban on travel from Brazil. The US currently leads the world in coronavirus cases. It has over 1.6 million known cases and is nearing 100,000 deaths linked to the virus.  Sunday's announcement is the latest travel restriction imposed by the US in a bid to combat the spread of the virus.  Foreign nationals who have recently visited China, Iran, the European Schengen area, the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland are already barred from entry to the US. Canada and the US also recently agreed to extend the closure of their shared border to non-essential travel.  Brazil recently overtook Russia with regards to known cases of the virus. President Jair Bolsonaro has repeatedly dismissed the risks posed by the virus. The number of deaths in Brazil has been doubling roughly every two weeks, compared to about every two months in the UK, four months in France, and five months in Italy. Experts have warned that the real figure may be far higher due to a lack of testing. The rising death toll and infections in Brazil are clearly worrying the rest of the world, but President Jair Bolsonaro shows no signs of treating it seriously. On Sunday, he was out once again, mingling with hundreds of supporters in Brasilia - and once again he was not wearing a mask. President Bolsonaro seems more caught up in fighting political battles - he's facing accusations of political interference to protect his family - than looking at how to rein in the country's spiralling health crisis. These past few days have revealed some ugly truths here. Not only has Brazil become one of the epicentres of the coronavirus crisis, but it's clear that the president and his team are unable - or even willing - to lead the country out of it.  There's no doubt this decision by President Trump, a man whom President Bolsonaro has always openly admired, will sting - but the question is, will it do anything to change the Brazilian leader's approach? Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The first of five Iranian oil tankers has entered Venezuela's waters carrying more than a million barrels of fuel.  The Iranian tankers are being escorted by the Venezuelan navy and air force.  The US, which has imposed sanctions on both countries, says it is monitoring the convoy. Both Venezuela and Iran have warned Washington not to interfere with the delivery.   Venezuela is suffering a shortage of refined fuel, despite having the world's largest oil reserves. Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro thanked Iran for its support, describing the two countries as "two revolutionary peoples who will never kneel down before North American imperialism". "Venezuela and Iran both want peace," he said in a televised state address. "We have the right to trade freely." The United States has imposed sanctions prohibiting trade with both Iran and Venezuela. US State Department spokeswoman Morgan Ortagus said on Sunday: "Venezuelans need free and fair presidential elections leading to democracy and economic recovery, not Maduro's expensive deals with another pariah state."  The five Iranian tankers - Fortune, Forest, Petunia, Faxon and Clavel - are carrying about 1.5m barrels of fuel and passed through the Suez Canal earlier this month, according to shipping data on Refinitiv Eikon. "The ships of the sister Islamic Republic of Iran are in our exclusive economic zone," Venezuelan oil minister Tareck El Aissami wrote on Twitter after the arrival of the first tanker, named Fortune. On Saturday, Iran's President Hassan Rouhani repeated a warning that the country would retaliate if the tankers were blocked. A flotilla of US Navy and Coast Guard vessels is patrolling the Caribbean Sea on a mission to counter illicit drug trafficking. But US officials have not announced any plan to stop the Iranian tankers. The US reinstated economic sanctions on Iran after President Donald Trump abandoned a landmark nuclear deal in May 2018. Meanwhile, its sanctions on Venezuela are aimed at increasing pressure on President Maduro to step down. The US recognises opposition leader Juan Guaidó as the country's legitimate leader. Venezuela has been mired in a political and economic crisis for years. Inflation hit 800,000% last year and 4.8 million people have fled the country. Its problems have been exacerbated by a recent drop in world oil prices as well as the coronavirus pandemic. For months, Venezuela's government has circumvented a long list of refinery problems - including power failures and accidents - by delivering crude oil in exchange for gasoline to its customers, mainly the Russian company Rosneft. But the Trump administration launched two rounds of sanctions in February and March against Rosneft affiliates for trading Venezuelan crude in international markets. In late March, Rosneft announced its surprise departure from Venezuela, reports the BBC's Guillermo D Olmo in Caracas. Since then, petrol has had to be strictly rationed, with people queuing up through the night to fill up no more than 30 litres. Doctors and nurses are among those forced to queue, at a time when the country's health system is collapsing and there are concerns over the spread of Covid-19. Official coronavirus cases in the country are relatively low - about 1,000 infections - but there is a fear among doctors that should the virus escalate, it would be catastrophic.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window After spending 17 years underground, millions of cicadas will be emerging in parts of the United States.  Periodical cicadas are expected to come out in early summer across southwest Virginia, parts of North Carolina, and in West Virginia. The last time the cicadas emerged in many of those regions was in 2003 and 2004, though some areas saw an emergence in 2013. As many as 1.5 million of the insects can emerge per acre of land.  While they are some of the longest-lived insects in the world, periodical cicadas spend almost their entire lives underground as what entomologists call "nymphs".   They live in the soil and feed on tree roots for periods of either 13 or 17 years depending on the species, according to Virginia Tech university. The species make up 15 separate "broods", with Brood IX (nine) emerging this year as part of their 17-year cycle.  When the nymphs are ready, they build mud tubes - called a cicada hut - in the soil and crawl out to find a place to moult into their winged adult form and to mate.  They are not harmful to humans and can be a food source for animals and birds.  They only live for two to four weeks as adults but during that time can cause significant damage to young trees - including apple, dogwood, peach, hickory, cherry, and pear - as well as to vines and saplings where females lay their eggs. The male cicadas are also very loud, "singing" by vibrating membranes on their abdomen to court females. The sound is described by Virginia Tech as like a "field of out-of-tune car radios". Why the insects emerge on those specific intervals remains unclear, though some researchers think it could help them avoid predators.  There is also a species of cicada that emerges every year, called dogday or annual cicadas. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Afghanistan's President Ashraf Ghani has announced the release of up to 2,000 Taliban prisoners, after the Islamist group proposed a ceasefire. The announcement came shortly after the Taliban agreed the surprise three-day truce with Mr Ghani's government for the Muslim festival of Eid al-Fitr. The president said their release was a "goodwill gesture" designed "to ensure the success of the peace process". Mr Ghani also said his government was ready to hold further peace talks. "President Ghani today initiated a process to release up to 2,000 Taliban prisoners... in response to the Taliban's announcement of a ceasefire," a presidential spokesman wrote on Twitter. The issue of Taliban prisoners has proved a contentious one during the peace talks between Mr Ghani's government and the hardline Islamist group. Last month, historic face-to-face talks broke down over a prisoner swap - part of a US-Taliban deal signed in February without the involvement of the government. Arguments over the swap - involving thousands of Taliban fighters and 1,000 pro-government forces - delayed the start of further peace talks. But the latest announcement is likely to raise hopes among Afghans and international observers of a longer-term reduction in violence as well as possible progress in any future talks. On Saturday, the Taliban announced a three-day truce which was to begin on Sunday. Both sides have so far respected the ceasefire, which followed a rise in attacks by the Taliban against government troops. Afghans and international observers had hoped for a reduction in violence between the two sides following the signing of a troop withdrawal agreement between the Taliban and the US in February. It was designed to bring peace to Afghanistan, ending 18 years of war since US-led forces ousted the Islamist group from power. Under the deal, US President Donald Trump announced 5,000 US troops would leave the country by May and he would meet leaders of the Taliban in the near future. US and Nato troops will withdraw from the country within 14 months, as long as the Taliban uphold their side of the deal. But US officials also agreed to the prisoner swap as a first step in talks between the Afghan government and the Taliban - who are still technically at war.  Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window China's foreign minister has accused the US of spreading "conspiracies and lies" about the coronavirus, ratcheting up tensions between the two nations. The US has been infected by a "political virus" that compels some politicians to repeatedly attack China, Wang Yi told reporters on Sunday. He urged the US to "stop wasting time and stop wasting precious lives" in its response to the Covid-19 outbreak. Tensions between Washington and Beijing have escalated as the virus has spread. US President Donald Trump, who faces re-election this year and has been criticised for his handling of the pandemic, has blamed China for trying to cover up the outbreak. But on Sunday, Mr Wang repeated China's assertions that it had acted responsibly to safeguard global public health since the virus first emerged in December. Speaking at an annual news conference during China's parliamentary session, Mr Wang said that "some political forces in the US are taking China-US relations hostage". He did not specify what those forces were, but said they were trying to "push our two countries to the brink of a new Cold War". "Aside from the devastation caused by the novel coronavirus, there is also a political virus spreading through the US," he continued. "This political virus is the use of every opportunity to attack and smear China," he said. "Some politicians completely disregard basic facts and have fabricated too many lies targeting China, and plotted too many conspiracies." But he called for co-operation between Washington and Beijing in tackling the outbreak. "Both of us bear a major responsibility for world peace and development," he said. "China and the United States stand to gain from co-operation, and lose from confrontation." President Trump and Beijing have traded repeated barbs in recent weeks, on issues from the World Health Organization (WHO) to potential lawsuits against China over its alleged cover-up of the outbreak. The two world powers have experienced longstanding friction over issues such as trade and human rights, but tensions have risen dramatically amid the pandemic. On Sunday, Mr Wang said the suggestion that US states could bring legal action against China was "a daydream" and lacked any precedent. He also defended the WHO and its head Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, who has been the target of recent US criticism. Last week, President Trump accused the WHO of being a "puppet of China" that had let Covid-19 spin "out of control" at the cost of "many lives". He then shared a letter he had sent to Dr Tedros, which outlined specific issues the US had regarding the WHO's Covid-19 response. Dr Tedros has agreed to a review over the agency's handling of the pandemic. But Mr Wang told reporters on Sunday that China fully backed the organisation. "To support the WHO is to support saving lives. This is the choice any country with a conscience should make," he said. He did not say whether international scientists would be permitted to enter China to investigate the outbreak. The WHO has called on Beijing to allow it access to investigate the source. The coronavirus outbreak first emerged in the Chinese city of Wuhan late last year and was widely reported to have originated in a food market. Since then, however, some senior US politicians have suggested that the source was a research facility in Wuhan that had been carrying out research on bat coronaviruses. China has dismissed the idea. Mr Pompeo said earlier this month that there was "a significant amount of evidence" that the virus came from a laboratory in Wuhan. He later appeared to step back, saying "we know it began in Wuhan, but we don't know from where or from whom". And on Saturday, the director of the Wuhan Institute of Virology told state media that claims that the virus could have leaked from the facility were "pure fabrication". Wang Yanyi said the centre had "isolated and obtained some coronaviruses from bats" but stressed that these were sufficiently different to Covid-19. Last month, senior Chinese diplomat Chen Wen told the BBC that demands for an investigation into the source of the outbreak were politically motivated and that such a move would only divert attention and resources away from fighting the virus.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Nasa astronauts Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken have completed their dress rehearsal for Wednesday's flight to the International Space Station. The mission, the first crewed outing from American soil in nine years, will see the pair ride to orbit in a SpaceX Falcon rocket and Crew Dragon capsule. It's a demonstration of the new "taxi" service the US space agency will be buying from the Californian firm. Lift-off on Wednesday is timed for 16:33 EDT (20:33 GMT / 21:33 BST). The weather around the Kennedy Space Center in Florida may have other ideas, however.  A forecast released on Saturday by the US Space Force 45th Space Wing Weather Squadron predicted just a 40% chance of favourable conditions come launch time. There is a strong possibility the Kennedy complex could see thick cloud, rain and even thunder. If controllers are forced to scrub, everyone will come back on Saturday for a second try. Hurley and Behnken are now all but done with their preparations.  The weekend "Dry Dress" rehearsal saw the pair don their made-to-measure spacesuits, walk out to a Tesla, and then make a 6km drive down to Kennedy's famous Launch Complex 39A. Their SpaceX Falcon-9 rocket has been sitting erect on the pad since Thursday. The men then got in the service tower lift to go up to the access arm gantry and climb into the capsule. The run-through gave all launch personnel - not just Hurley and Behnken - the opportunity to remind themselves of what's to come. There is huge focus on this mission. Not since the space shuttles were retired in 2011 has America been able to launch its own astronauts. Getting crews to the ISS these past nine years has been a task entrusted solely to Russia and its Soyuz rocket and capsule system. Nasa has contracted both SpaceX and aerospace giant Boeing to pick up where the shuttles left off. The difference this time is that the agency will not own and operate the vehicles. It will merely be buying "tickets to ride".  SpaceX and Boeing will be free to sell their services to other space agencies, other companies and even individuals. Hurley and Behnken have named their Dragon in the tradition of all previous American crewships. They'll reveal that name on Wednesday. Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The California company SpaceX is launching a mission to the International Space Station (ISS). It's something the firm has done many times before, taking cargo to the sky-high laboratory. But on this occasion, the firm will be transporting people. It's one of those seminal moments in the history of spaceflight. When Nasa astronauts Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken lift off atop their Falcon-9 rocket, inside their Crew Dragon capsule, it will mark the first time humans have left US territory to reach low-Earth orbit in almost nine years.  But more than that, it sees a shift to the commercialisation of human space transportation - of companies selling "taxi" rides to government and anyone else who wants to purchase the service.   This page details the key phases in the mission sequence. Launch will occur from the Kennedy Space Center's Complex 39A. This is the famous Florida pad from where the Apollo 11 moonwalkers and the very first shuttle, Columbia, also began their missions. Timing is precise. The Falcon must leave the ground at 15:22 EDT (19:22 GMT / 20:22 BST), or the astronauts won't be able to catch the ISS which passes overhead at 27,000km/h (17,000mph).  Falcon-9 is a two-stage rocket. Its lower-segment will fire for 2.5 minutes before shutting down and separating. This will leave the second stage to burn for a further six minutes to get Dragon into orbit. Once detached, the capsule will then make the rest of the journey to the ISS using its own thrusters. The second stage of the rocket will be commanded to burn up in the atmosphere. The lower-segment of the booster aims to touch down on a drone ship in the Atlantic. This is a SpaceX speciality that sets its Falcon apart from all other orbital rockets in use today. It seems remarkable but Nasa astronauts have not had the use of a brand new spaceship design for 39 years. Not since John Young and Bob Crippen climbed aboard the Columbia orbiter. Their shuttle had dials, switches and a control stick. Dragon is all touchscreen.  It's an automated vessel so it plots a path to ISS by itself, but Hurley and Behnken must practise manual flying in case there is some sort of anomaly. The Dragon capsule was conceived to handle every imagined scenario, including a failure of the rocket on the pad or in flight. If this happens, the ship will use a powerful in-built propulsion system to push itself to a safe distance. SpaceX has rehearsed this possibility both on the ground and in mid-air. This mission should see Dragon reach the ISS after about 19 hours of flight. The capsule will line itself up with the bow of the space station and approach at a relative speed of just a few centimetres per second. Once attached, hooks make an airtight seal. The length of Hurley's and Behnken's stay aboard the 420km-high ISS is not yet fixed.  It should be more than a couple of months but is unlikely to be longer than 120 days. Engineers say the solar cells on the Dragon degrade in orbit and so Nasa is sure to bring the crewmen home well before the hardware's performance is compromised. The descent to Earth won't be rushed. The astronauts plan a two-hour free-flight to further test onboard systems and procedures. When the de-orbit burn is eventually called, Dragon will be protected in its fall through the atmosphere by a heat shield. Four big parachutes will slow the spacecraft to a gentle splashdown in the Atlantic, just off the American coastline. SpaceX teams have gone over the process of retrieving the capsule many times. Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window New York state's daily death toll has dropped below 100 for the first time since late March. A total of 84 people died in the last 24 hours, Governor Andrew Cuomo said on Saturday, compared with 109 a day before. During the height of the outbreak in April, more than 1,000 people a day were losing their lives in worst-hit US state. "In my head, I was always looking to get under 100," Mr Cuomo said. "It doesn't do good for any of those 84 families that are feeling the pain," he said at his daily briefing, but added that the drop was a sign of "real progress". Mr Cuomo announced on Friday that groups of up to 10 people could gather "for any lawful purpose" anywhere in the state, including New York City.  But, he added: "If you don't have to be with a group of 10 people don't be with a group of 10 people." New York state was once the epicentre of the US coronavirus outbreak, with more than 28,000 deaths, according to Johns Hopkins University. The US has the biggest death toll from Covid-19 at 96,000. The UK is second with more than 36,000.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window European industry has handed over a key part of the spaceship infrastructure that will eventually take humans beyond Earth into the wider Solar System.  At a ceremony at Bremen airport in Germany, American officials accepted the first service module that will power an Orion capsule.  Orion is the next-generation vehicle that the US is developing to carry astronauts to the Moon and on to Mars.  A first flight of the trans-Atlantic spaceship combo is scheduled for 2020.  Known as Exploration Mission-1 (EM-1), this will be an uncrewed demonstration outing. Astronauts are expected to climb aboard a second flight a couple of years later. Friday's ceremony marked a significant milestone in the US-European collaboration.  This is the first time America has gone outside its shores for such an important piece of human spaceflight hardware.  The European Service Module (ESM) is essentially Orion's back end. It will provide propulsion, an electricity supply, thermal control, and all the gases and water needed to sustain any humans riding inside the capsule.  Fully loaded, an ESM will weigh 13 tonnes. Most of that will be fuel to drive the module's main engine and its 32 smaller thrusters. Bremen is home to a major manufacturing facility for European aerospace company Airbus.  The firm has led the construction of the ESM over the past four years under contract to the European Space Agency. Esa formally passed the hardware on to its American counterpart, Nasa, at the German airport. On Monday, an Antonov cargo aircraft will ship the ESM to Nasa's Kennedy Space Center in Florida. It is there that the service module and Orion will be linked together via a structure called an adaptor.  An extensive series of tests are then planned - including several months in a space environment simulator - ahead of the June 2020 mission. That flight will see the combo travel 64,000km beyond the Moon in order to demonstrate system capabilities and their readiness to support astronauts on EM-2, which is currently projected for 2022. "We're building a grand, new exploration system," said Mark Kirsasich, the manager of the Orion Program at Nasa.  "It incorporates something called the Space Launch System, which is our new rocket; it will be the largest rocket that humans have ever built. And Orion. These elements are designed to take people further into space than they've ever gone before, and the Esa service module is the powerhouse. [Orion] can't go anywhere without it. "The Airbus team has worked so hard to put this spacecraft together and it's a great accomplishment," he told BBC News.  Because the service module is an expendable component (it is dumped prior to Orion's return to Earth), a second ESM will be required for the later flight.  This unit is already under construction at Airbus in Bremen, and some long-lead items needed for EM-3 are also being procured. The US-European relationship on Orion is intended to be a long-term one. The service module represents a barter arrangement between Europe and the US; it is an "in kind payment" Europe makes to America to cover its subscription to use the International Space Station.  In the future, the arrangement will likely be extended to a project known as the Lunar Gateway. This is envisaged as a kind of space station that would operate in the vicinity of the Moon.  "We really hope that we'll build more service modules," said David Parker, Esa's director of robotics and human spaceflight. "What Nasa is looking for is one a year. This would be great; and for us to contribute to the Gateway, our basecamp for exploring the Moon. It's an exciting future for the next decade." Oliver Juckenhöfel, the head of on-orbit services and exploration at Airbus, paid tribute to all those who had got the service module ready for shipping. "Seeing ESM-1 being removed from the integration stand and moved to the transport container - it was very satisfying for all the teams who've been working in three-shift mode over the last months," he told BBC News. "They've worked so hard, and it's a really great thing, not just for Airbus but for our partners here in Europe, in Esa and in Nasa. It's a large family."   Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Elon Musk's company SpaceX is about to launch its space vehicle - the Crew Dragon - with astronauts onboard for the first time. Here, we answer some common questions about the mission. Nasa has been planning to hand over the transport of crew to the International Space Station (ISS) since the early 2000s. After the Columbia space shuttle broke up during its return to Earth in 2003, the space agency focused on developing a replacement spaceship that could travel to the Moon.  Involving private firms in the transfer of crew and cargo to the ISS was a necessary step to afford that programme. In 2014, entrepreneur Elon Musk's company SpaceX and aerospace giant Boeing were announced as winners of a Nasa contract for crew transport services. SpaceX is launching its spacecraft first; the Crew Dragon spacecraft will lift off atop a Falcon 9 rocket from Florida's Kennedy Space Center. How we got to this point SpaceX is an American company that provides commercial and government launch services on its Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy rockets. Entrepreneur Elon Musk founded the company in 2002, with the goal of reducing space transportation costs, enabling the colonisation of Mars.  SpaceX was the first private company to routinely return rocket stages to Earth under propulsive power so they could be re-flown rather than being discarded. It has been conducting regular flights of cargo to the ISS, and will now aim to begin launching astronauts. Musk's company is also developing a bigger spacecraft to carry humans - called Starship - which could begin the process of settling Mars. Born in South Africa, Elon Musk made more than $160m from the sale of online payment service PayPal to eBay. His desire to see humanity become a true space-faring civilisation was a driving factor behind the founding of SpaceX. But he has also been involved in founding a variety of other companies such as the electric car manufacturer Tesla.  He also conceived a project called Hyperloop, a high-speed transportation system using pods that travel through a system of tubes. His colourful personality and lifestyle made him the inspiration for Robert Downey Jr's interpretation of Marvel Comics character Tony Stark. Musk is no stranger to controversy: his tweets have triggered lawsuits and led to him being forced out as the chairman of Tesla (though he remained as CEO). Since the retirement of the space shuttle in 2011, Nasa has been paying Russia tens of millions of dollars to launch its astronauts on the Soyuz spacecraft. The Crew Dragon launch from Florida marks the first launch of humans from US soil in nine years. As such, it is seen as crucial for restoring American prestige in human spaceflight. This will also be the first time a private company has launched astronauts into orbit. The Crew Dragon is the spacecraft that will transport astronauts to the ISS. It is a sleek evolution of the Dragon spacecraft which was built to ferry cargo to the orbiting outpost. The Crew Dragon is designed to carry a maximum of seven passengers, but Nasa flights will carry four, with the rest of the space taken up by supplies.  It is equipped with thrusters that enable it to manoeuvre in space and will dock - or attach - to the space station under autonomous control. Unlike previous spacecraft designed for humans, the crew cabin features touchscreen controls in place of physical buttons. Bob Behnken and Doug Hurley are Nasa astronauts. They were selected in 2000 and have each flown to space twice on the space shuttle. They are among the most experienced members of Nasa's astronaut corps and both trained as test pilots - which has been critical for putting the new spacecraft through its paces. Hurley has spent a total of 28 days and 11 hours in space, while Behnken has accumulated a total of 29 days and 12 hours, including 37 hours of spacewalking time. Both men are also married to astronauts. Spacecraft designed to carry astronauts have to go through a process that ensures they can operate safely. This launch is essentially the final step in that validation process. Once in orbit, Behnken and Hurley will test the Crew Dragon's environmental control system, the displays and controls and the manoeuvring thrusters.  They will monitor the autonomous docking system during the approach to the space station and will become members of the ISS crew. At the orbiting outpost, they will continue performing tests on the Crew Dragon along with other tasks related to the space station. When it's time to return to Earth, the Crew Dragon will parachute down into the Atlantic Ocean. The capsule and crew will then be recovered by a ship called Go Navigator. The Crew Dragon has a built-in abort system, designed to save the lives of its crew in the event of an emergency. If there's a problem during lift-off, such as a rocket engine cut-off, the Crew Dragon will fire engines to propel the vehicle and its occupants free of the rocket. The capsule will then parachute down to safety. SpaceX successfully conducted a test of its in-flight abort system on 19 January 2020. The flight suits that Behnken and Hurley will wear in the capsule look very different to previous designs. In stark contrast to the bulky pumpkin-coloured suits and round helmets familiar from the space shuttle era, SpaceX's suits are slimline, white, one-piece numbers with sleek, 3D-printed helmets. Each one is custom made for the astronaut.  If they look like something from a science fiction movie, that's probably because their look was devised by Hollywood costume designer Jose Fernandez, who has worked on the Batman, X-Men and Thor movies. But the suits also have to be practical; they're designed to keep the crew alive in the event of a cabin depressurisation - where the air is lost from the inside of the spacecraft. Evolution of the spacesuit If the Crew Dragon Demo-2 mission is successful, SpaceX will proceed with the six "operational" missions to the ISS they are required to fly under their $2.6bn contract with Nasa. Boeing holds a similar deal, worth $4.2bn, to transport crew to the space station using its CST-100 Starliner vehicle. Follow Paul on Twitter.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Democratic White House candidate Joe Biden is in damage limitation mode after saying African Americans "ain't black" if they even consider voting for President Donald Trump over him.  Gaffe-prone Mr Biden made the remark in an interview on Friday with a prominent black radio host, Charlamagne Tha God, about his outreach to black voters. Mr Biden later expressed regret for the "cavalier" comment.  The black vote has been key to the Biden candidacy. Throughout the 18-minute interview, Mr Biden, 77, stressed his longstanding ties to the black community, noting his overwhelming win this year in South Carolina's presidential primary, a state where the Democratic electorate is more than 60% African American. "I won every single county. I won the largest share of the black vote that anybody had, including Barack," he said of President Barack Obama, the country's first African-American president, who picked Mr Biden as his running mate.  The presumptive nominee for November's election also "guaranteed" that several black women were being considered to serve as his vice-president. He has already committed to selecting a woman to join him on the Democratic ticket.  Toward the end of the interview, a campaign aide interrupted to say the former vice-president was out of time.  When an aide for Mr Biden tried to end the interview, Charlamagne protested, saying: "You can't do that to black media."  "I do that to white media and black media," Mr Biden replied, adding that his wife was waiting to use their home broadcast studio.  Charlamagne urged Mr Biden to return for another interview, saying he had more questions. "If you have a problem figuring out whether you're for me or Trump, then you ain't black," Mr Biden responded.  Charlamagne's nationally syndicated Breakfast Club show reaches more than 8 million listeners each month.  Joe Biden just touched a live electrical wire of racial identity in US politics. Until now his support among black voters has been rock-solid, and there's little chance Friday's line will do much by itself to dent that. The Trump campaign will be happy, however, if they can chip away even a sliver of Mr Biden's support, particularly in key electoral states like Wisconsin and Michigan, where black voter apathy hurt Democrats in 2016. Mr Biden's gaffe came at the end of an interview, as he was being pressed on whether he favoured Minnesota Senator Amy Klobuchar over a black woman as his running mate. That he responded with indignation - and then veered dangerously off-script - suggests his preference might lie with someone like Ms Klobuchar, who shares Mr Biden's pragmatic political sensibilities. If Friday's kerfuffle has staying power, however, he might feel compelled to pick a black female candidate like Kamala Harris or Stacey Abrams - if only to clean up the mess he created. Biden campaign adviser Symone Sanders defended the comments on Friday, saying they were made "in jest". "Let's be clear about what the VP was saying: he was making the distinction that he would put his record with the African American community up against Trump's any day. Period."  Mr Biden scrambled to make amends on a call later to black business leaders. "I should not have been so cavalier," he said. "I've never, never, ever taken the African American community for granted." He added: "I shouldn't have been such a wise guy."  He continued: "No-one should have to vote for any party based on their race, their religion, their background." The Trump campaign seized on the remarks, which senior campaign adviser Katrina Pierson described as "racist and dehumanising".  "He truly believes that he, a 77-year-old white man, should dictate how black people should behave," she said.  Her comment was echoed by Senator Tim Scott, a black Republican.  "That is the most arrogant, condescending comment I've heard in a very long time," he told on Fox News.  "He's saying that 1.3 million African Americans, that you're not black? Who in the heck does he think he is?" the South Carolina lawmaker said, referring to the black Americans who voted for Mr Trump in 2016.  Mr Biden's words also provoked criticism from his side of the aisle.  Keith Boykin, a former aide to Democratic President Bill Clinton, tweeted: "Yes, Biden is a much better choice for black people than racist Trump.  "But white people don't get to tell black people what is black. Biden still has to EARN our vote."  Derrick Johnson, president of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), told CBS News that Mr Biden could not "take the African-American vote for granted".  One disappointed black voter's response went viral. America knows Joe Biden as the vice-president to the first black president in history. Mr Obama endorsed him last month, saying in a video that Mr Biden "has all the qualities we need in a president right now".  A Quinnipiac University poll released this week showed Mr Biden's support among black voters at a stunning 81%, compared with 3% for Mr Trump. The remainder said they didn't know.  A former Senate aide who accuses Mr Biden of sexual assault has been dropped as a client by a prominent lawyer who has represented several #MeToo cases.  Tara Reade says Mr Biden attacked her in a Senate hallway in 1993. On Thursday, attorney Douglas Wigdor said his office's decision was no reflection on Ms Reade's credibility, and he accused the media of trying to victim-shame her. It came as questions were raised about Ms Reade's past. A spokesperson for Antioch University in Seattle told the New York Times that she did not receive a degree from the university, though she had listed one on her CV. She also claimed to have been a legislative assistant to Mr Biden. But she was actually a staff assistant - a more junior role.  However, Seattle University confirmed to Politico that Ms Reade did have a law degree from there. Lawyers in legal cases in which she testified as an expert witness on domestic violence are reportedly now seeking to reopen them on the grounds that her credentials could have been faked. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window As with global affairs, nature has its pecking order. And in a contest between the bald eagle, America's national bird, and a common loon, which is featured on Canada's dollar coin, few would bet on the latter to come out the victor. But sometimes the underdog comes out on top, as was revealed when an eagle was found dead in the water near a dead loon chick in a Maine lake. A necropsy revealed he was killed by a stab to the heart from a loon's beak. Baby loons are common prey for eagles, which are fearsome hunters. Bald eagles are protected in the US, and typically their remains are sent to the directly to the National Eagle Repository in Colorado. It is a crime in the US to kill an eagle, possess one or disturb its remains, except for special exemptions, such as in the use of Native American ceremonies.  But after seeing a dead baby loon chick so near the carcass, scientists began to wonder if the eagle could have been killed by an enraged mother loon in an avian equivalent of David and Goliath.  So they sent the eagle not to the eagle repository, but to the National Wildlife Health Center in Madison, Wisconsin where it could be examined by a loon specialist. There, a pathologist found that the eagle died by a quick stab to the heart from what appeared to be a loon beak, and the chick had eagle talon marks, indicating it had been captured by an eagle. A nearby neighbour also told wildlife investigators she heard a "hullabaloo" the night before. Wildlife biologist Danielle D'Auria, who works for the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, shared the news on the department's blog,  noting it is the first confirmed case of a loon slaying an eagle. "Who would think a loon would stand a chance against such a powerful predator?" she wrote. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A motorist who filmed the shooting of an unarmed black man in the US state of Georgia has been charged with murder. William Bryan Jr was also accused of a criminal attempt to commit false imprisonment on Thursday, said the Georgia Bureau of Investigations (GBI). Ahmaud Arbery, 25, was jogging when he was shot dead during a confrontation with a father and son in Brunswick on 23 February. Gregory McMichael, 64, and son Travis, 34, were charged with murder on 7 May. Mr Bryan will be the final person arrested in connection with Mr Arbery's death Georgia officials said on Friday. "At this point we feel confident that the individuals who need to be charged have been charged," GBI Director Vic Reynolds said at a press conference.  The GBI investigation is nearly finished, Mr Reynolds said, at which point the case will be transferred to district attorney Joyette Holmes - the fourth to be appointed since Mr Arbery was killed.  In the moments before the fatal confrontation, the McMichaels, who are white, armed themselves with a pistol and shotgun and pursued Mr Arbery in a pickup truck in the Satilla Shores neighbourhood. Gregory McMichael told police he believed that Mr Arbery resembled the suspect in a series of local break-ins. Mr Bryan's 36-second video leaked online on 5 May, generating nationwide outcry that was swiftly followed by murder charges. It was filmed by Mr Bryan from his vehicle while he was driving behind Mr Arbery. The clip appears to show Mr Arbery running down a tree-lined street as the McMichaels wait ahead for him in their vehicle. A tussle follows and the younger Mr McMichael appears to fire a gun at point blank range at Mr Arbery, who falls to the street. The Arbery family welcomed Thursday's arrest, with their lawyer Lee Merritt saying Mr Bryan's alleged involvement in the killing "was obvious to us, many around the country and after their thorough investigation, it was clear to the GBI as well". Mr Bryan is expected to be booked into the Glynn County jail, where the McMichaels are also detained as they await trial. A prosecutor said Mr Bryan had been "in hot pursuit" of Mr Arbery. He is also mentioned in the Glynn County police report of the shooting, in which officers noted that Mr Bryan had unsuccessfully tried to block Mr Arbery's path. However, Mr Bryan told a local TV station that he "had nothing to do with it" and was in "complete shock". During the interview, he did not answer questions on why he was there or why he started recording, but his lawyer Kevin Gough said: "My client was responding to what he saw, which was someone in the community he didn't know being followed by a vehicle he recognised." Mr Bryan has since taken a voluntary lie detector test which law enforcement had not requested, his lawyer had said in a statement on Monday.  He added that Mr Bryan had been in hiding with his fiancée because of death threats and accused the Arbery family lawyers of instigating them. "Contrary to speculation, the polygraph examination confirms that on 23 Feb 2020, the day of the shooting, William 'Roddie' Bryan did not have any conversation with either Gregory or Travis McMichael prior to the shooting.  "Nor did William 'Roddie' Bryan have any conversation with anyone else that day prior to the shooting about criminal activity in the neighbourhood," said Mr Gough, using Mr Bryan's nickname. In a CNN interview, Mr Bryan said he had been praying for the Arbery family and hoped his tape would help bring closure. "If there wasn't a tape, then we wouldn't know what happened," he said. "I hope that it, in the end, brings justice to the family and peace to the family." Asked on Friday how Mr Bryan could be charged for murder without pulling the trigger, GBI Director Reynolds cited state law stating that someone who committed a felony resulting in a death can be charged with murder. "We believe the evidence would indicate that his underlying felony helped cause the death of Ahmaud Arbery," Mr Reynolds said.   There are no hate crime laws in Georgia law, but the US Justice Department has said it is examining the case to see if any federal hate crime charges are warranted. Meanwhile, the FBI said on Thursday it had opened an investigation into the another case of a black American shot dead amid conflicting narratives. Breonna Taylor was fatally shot eight times on 13 March by police conducting a drug raid in Louisville, Kentucky. Police say they knocked on the door and were met by gunfire from within. But Ms Taylor's family say the officers did not knock, wore plainclothes and that Ms Taylor's partner opened fire because he thought they were burglars. The family also say the narcotics raid was targeting the wrong address.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The drug US President Donald Trump said he was taking to ward off Covid-19 actually increases the risk of patients with the disease dying from it, a study in the Lancet has found. The study said there were no benefits to treating patients with the anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine. Mr Trump said he was taking the drug despite public health officials warning that it could cause heart problems. The president has repeatedly promoted the drug, against medical advice. Hydroxychloroquine is safe for malaria, and conditions like lupus or arthritis, but no clinical trials have recommended the use of hydroxychloroquine for coronavirus. The Lancet study involved 96,000 coronavirus patients, nearly 15,000 of whom were given hydroxychloroquine - or a related form chloroquine - either alone or with an antibiotic. The study found that the patients were more likely to die in hospital and develop heart rhythm complications than other Covid patients in a comparison group. The death rates of the treated groups were: hydroxychloroquine 18%; chloroquine 16.4%; control group 9%. Those treated with hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine in combination with antibiotics had an even higher death rate. The researchers warned that hydroxychloroquine should not be used outside of clinical trials. Mr Trump says he has not tested positive for Covid-19 and is taking the drug because he thinks it has "positive benefits". A trial is under way to see whether the anti-malarial drug could prevent Covid-19. More than 40,000 healthcare workers from Europe, Africa, Asia and South America who are in contact with patients with the disease will be given the drug as part of the trial. When asked about the Lancet study, White House coronavirus taskforce co-ordinator Dr Deborah Birx said the US Food and Drug Administration had been "very clear" about concerns in using the drug as either a coronavirus prevention or as a treatment course. Dr Marcos Espinal, director of the Pan American Health Organization - part of the World Health Organization - has stressed that no clinical trials have recommended the use of hydroxychloroquine for coronavirus.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Key officials at the American space agency (Nasa) and private launch firm SpaceX have signed off next week's historic mission to the space station. Astronauts Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken will ride to orbit from Florida - the first time in nine years that humans have left Earth from US territory. A review panel has found no technical reason to delay the mission. SpaceX's Falcon-9 rocket with its Dragon capsule is set to lift off at 16:33 EDT (21:33 BST) on Wednesday. The decision of the Flight Readiness Review (FRR) panel opens the way for final launch preparations to proceed. "We did a thorough review of all the systems and all the risks, and it was unanimous on the board that we are 'go for launch'," said Stephen Jurczyk, Nasa's associate administrator, who chaired the FRR. Already, the Falcon has been rolled out to the Kennedy Space Center's Launch Complex 39A, and lifted into the vertical. The transfer on Thursday allowed SpaceX engineers to conduct a static fire on Friday. This saw the vehicle ignite briefly all nine of its engines to confirm their operational status. Clamps held the booster to prevent it moving in the test. Another important pre-launch moment occurs on Saturday with the "Crew Dry Dress". This involves Hurley and Behnken getting into their spacesuits and rehearsing all the actions they must take next Wednesday, including strapping themselves into the Dragon capsule.  The attention to detail is all about making this mission as safe as possible. "Our teams are scouring and thinking of every single risk that's out there, and we've worked our butt off to buy down the ones we know of. And we'll continue to look and continue to buy them down until we bring [Hurley and Behnken] home," said Kathy Lueders, who manages Nasa's Commercial Crew Program.  There is huge focus on this mission. Not since the retirement of the space shuttles in 2011 has America been able to launch its own astronauts to the space station - a task that has rested solely with Russia and its Soyuz rocket and capsule system. Nasa's Commercial Crew Program, initiated just prior to the end days of the famous winged orbiters, sought to incentivise a new human transportation industry in the US. The agency proposed to purchase launch services off private companies and gave them seed money to help develop their hardware. SpaceX, run by the tech entrepreneur Elon Musk, is the first of the commercial operators to deliver a working system. The aerospace giant Boeing is some way behind in its progress, but should eventually match the SpaceX milestones. For Nasa, this approach of contracting out astronaut transportation to low-Earth orbit has saved it many billions of dollars. The old way of doing things, which required the agency to purchase, own and operate its space vehicles, proved to be very expensive. From now on, Nasa will simply buy seats in what are essentially private taxi services. Cash that's freed up can then be diverted to more complex endeavours such as preparing to take astronauts back to the Moon and on to Mars.    "It's been estimated that this programme overall will have saved Nasa maybe $30bn-40bn at least," observed Benji Reed, director of crew mission management at SpaceX.   "Firm, fixed-price contracts and the kind of truly open partnership where we work together allows that kind of saving to happen and that kind of ability to allow Nasa to invest in more things and do other programmes." Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window National parks are re-opening across the US, and people are overjoyed. After weeks of staying at home, they are desperate to go outdoors. But is it safe? Judah Brass, 19, has been hunkered down in Knoxville, Tennessee, with his parents and brothers and sisters for weeks. But a few days ago, they went for a hike in the Great Smoky Mountains in a park near their house. "Standing in the breeze, I was just so thankful," he says, describing what it was like to see spring flowers and hear the croaking of frogs. "It was freeing." He was one of the first to visit the Great Smoky Mountains park after it had re-opened.  The park, along with Yellowstone National Park and many of the other national parks, had been shut because of the pandemic. Park officials were concerned about the virus, and they closed off access to many of the national parks in March. The parks are the country's treasures, showcasing beauty that ranges from the Florida Everglades to California's giant sequoias. With such impressive offerings, the parks attract crowds - last year, more than 4m people visited Yellowstone alone. But the Great Smoky Mountains, which has also reopened, is the busiest - a million visitors each month. It means people who have been cooped up for weeks can now head for the parks and enjoy the outdoors. The president celebrated the opening of the parks in a speech last month, saying that it showed the US had made progress in its effort to fight the virus.  "People are going to be very happy," he said. He's right -  hikers and others are thrilled at the prospect of returning to the great outdoors.  They know that spending time outdoors is good for one's mental, emotional and physical well-being. Science also shows that it helps people at work and allows them to find new ways to solve problems.  Shelley Carson, a psychology professor at Harvard University, explains: "Being surrounded by natural beauty helps our ability to be creative." But still hikers and nature lovers, even the most avid among them, are concerned about risks. They are worried about crowds at the park. They wonder if social-distancing guidelines will be followed, and they are not sure if it is safe to be in a place with so many people. Jon Waterman, a former park ranger and the author of a book entitled Atlas of the National Parks, clearly loves the parks. Still he thinks that this may not be the best time to visit them.  "It will be difficult if not impossible to enforce social distancing rules," he says. "Anyone thinking they can safely visit Yellowstone is not thinking clearly. Those crowded national parks are simply not going to be safe." The re-opening of the parks comes at a key moment for the nation and its fight against the pandemic. Nearly 100,000 people have died of the virus, and the health guidelines for preventing infection remain in place - people are told to wash their hands frequently, practise social distancing and wear masks in public. Still the country is now opening up. State officials across the US have modified their stay-at-home orders, allowing people to venture out and resume some of their activities. For many, that means a visit to the park. Officials have tried to minimise the danger. They are opening the parks in phases in order to limit the number of people who will visit at the same time. And visitor centres are locked. A spokeswoman for the National Park Service told the BBC people should follow the White House health guidelines when they visit all of the parks and should keep their distance from others: "Give others plenty of room whether you are on a trail, at a boat launch or in a parking lot." People have been rushing to the parks, though, making it hard to avoid the crowds.  In some parts of the Great Smoky Mountains park, it was packed, says Anna Zanetti, a director of a non-profit organisation called Friends of the Great Smoky Mountains National Park. They showed up in droves after it re-opened, and she says that led to "overcrowding". Meanwhile visitors to the other parks have flaunting the health guidelines. This week at Yellowstone, reports the Guardian, people were not wearing masks. Not all of the visitors to the parks have been cavalier.  Before Judah Brass and other members of his family headed out to the Great Smoky Mountains, they packed masks and hand sanitiser "just in case", he says. They visited during the week, and the place was not crowded. Public health experts believe the benefits of opening up the national parks outweigh the risks, so long as visitors take precautions in the way the Brass family did.  Bring masks and hand sanitiser, says Joseph Allen of the Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health. If you are near others, you should wear your mask, he says, even when you are in a forest. (If you find yourself separate from others on a wooded path, he says "it's OK to put your mask down".) For Judah Brass, the benefits are clear so the precautions are worth the effort.  "This big, beautiful view," he says, recalling what he saw, "and the field in front of the mountains. It was just gorgeous."Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A shooting at a Texas naval base that wounded one sailor and left the suspected gunman dead was "terrorism related", the FBI said on Thursday.  At about 06:15 local time, the suspect tried to drive through a gated entrance to Naval Air Station Corpus Christi before opening fire, striking a sailor.  But the sailor was able to raise a security barrier to block the vehicle, officials told the Associated Press.  There is a possible second suspect still at large, authorities said.  "We have a potential second related person of interest at large in the community, but we would encourage the public to remain calm," FBI Supervisory Special Agent Leah Greeves said at a news conference on Thursday.  The injured sailor was treated in hospital for a minor injury and has been discharged, according to authorities.  Authorities have not yet named the suspect, who died at the scene, but he has been widely named in US media as Adam Alsahli.  The FBI has determined that Thursday's shooting was terror related, Ms Greeves said, but did not elaborate on how authorities made this assessment or indicate a potential motive.  "We are working diligently with our state, local and federal partners on this investigation, which is fluid and evolving," she said.  The FBI's Houston field office has taken the lead on the investigation. Officials are still working to process the crime scene.  The Justice Department told the New York Times that "electronic media" had been found, meaning the suspect's smart phone or other device could have been recovered amid the ongoing probe.  The base was on lockdown for about five hours after the incident, but was lifted shortly before noon local time.  The facility had a similar incident in December of last year. A man pleaded guilty to destruction of US government property and possession of a stolen firearm after driving his truck into a barricade at the station, according to the Associated Press.  And Thursday's attack comes just days after the FBI announced that the member of the Royal Saudi Air Force who killed three sailors at a Florida naval station in December had worked with al-Qeaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) in planning the attack.  According to the FBI, the gunman who was killed by authorities after shooting 11 people, had been radicalised before arriving in Florida for a three-year aviation course the US navy hosts for allied foreign servicemen. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A 72-year-old man has been stabbed to death by his son in New York state during a Zoom video chat with 20 other participants, police say. Dwight Powers was attacked by his 32-year-old son, Thomas Scully-Powers, who then jumped out of a window and fled in Long Island's Amityville village. He was held within an hour after chat guests had called the police. The motive of the attack was not yet clear.  Mr Scully-Powers was later charged with second-degree murder. In a statement, Suffolk County police said further information would be provided once the suspect, who sustained minor injuries, was treated and discharged from hospital. Police said it had been alerted of the incident on Thursday afternoon after several of the chat's participants noticed the man fall, but that it took some time for them to locate the house because the guests did not know where Mr Powers lived. Some of the people may have witnessed the attack, reports said. It was not clear what type of meeting was being held.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window China will not set an economic growth goal for this year as it deals with the fallout from the coronavirus pandemic. It is the first time Beijing has not had a gross domestic product (GDP) target since 1990 when records began. The announcement was made by Premier Li Keqiang at the start of the country's annual parliament meeting. The world's second largest economy shrank by 6.8% in the first quarter from a year ago as lockdowns paralysed businesses. “This is because our country will face some factors that are difficult to predict in its development due to the great uncertainty regarding the Covid-19 pandemic and the world economic and trade environment,” Premier Li said. The country's leadership has promised to boost economic support measures amid growing concerns that rising unemployment could threaten social stability. The move comes as tensions between Beijing and Washington are becoming increasingly strained over the coronavirus pandemic, trade and Hong Kong. On Thursday, President Donald Trump stepped up his attacks on China, suggesting that the country’s leader, Xi Jinping, is behind a “disinformation and propaganda attack on the United States and Europe.” It came as Mr Trump and other Republicans have escalated their criticism of Beijing's handling of the early stages of the outbreak.  Also on Thursday, China announced plans to impose new national security legislation on Hong Kong after last year’s pro-democracy protests. The announcement was met with a warning from Mr Trump that the US would react “very strongly” against any attempt to gain more control over the former British colony. Separately, two US senators have proposed legislation to punish Chinese entities involved in enforcing the planned new laws and penalise banks that do business with them. Earlier this week, the US Senate unanimously passed a proposal to delist Chinese companies from American stock exchanges if they fail to comply with US financial reporting standards. US-listed Chinese companies have come under increasing scrutiny in recent weeks after Luckin Coffee revealed that an internal investigation found hundreds of millions of dollars of its sales last year were “fabricated”.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A former White House butler, who worked for 11 presidents in a career that spanned five decades, has died with coronavirus aged 91.  It was Jackie Kennedy who noticed Wilson Roosevelt Jerman while he was working as a cleaner in the White House. The then First Lady had him promoted, and from then on he worked as a butler. "She was instrumental in ensuring that that happened," his granddaughter, Jamila Garrett, told Fox 5. Decades later Mr Jerman was commemorated by another First Lady, appearing in a photo in Michelle Obama's memoir Becoming. Paying tribute after his death, Mrs Obama said her family were "lucky to have known him". "With his kindness and care, Wilson Jerman helped make the White House a home for decades of First Families, including ours," she said in a statement to NBC News.  "His service to others - his willingness to go above and beyond for the country he loved and all those whose lives he touched - is a legacy worthy of his generous spirit." He died with coronavirus last weekend. Mr Jerman's family members say he stood out not just to the Kennedys, who were in the White House during 1961-63, and the Obamas, who lived there from 2009 to 2017, but others he met in his roles. Mr Jerman's career began in 1957 during the Eisenhower administration. In his last position, he served as a maître d' in the Obama White House.  He left his position in 2012, and President Obama honoured him with a series of plaques, one that represented each of the presidents he had served, Mr Jerman's granddaughter Shanta Taylor Gay told CNN. He remains an important figure for those who study the history of African Americans and their role in political life.  Like other African-American men of his generation, he showed dignity while serving in one of the few positions that was available to him at the time, said Ohio State University's Koritha Mitchell, author of From Slave Cabins to the White House. She said he must have found it satisfying to end his career in the way that he did. He was working for Mr Obama, "a dignified president who was also African American", she said, adding: "That must have felt like a victory."Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A study has estimated there may have been 36,000 fewer coronavirus-related deaths had the US entered lockdown a week earlier in March. The Columbia University research also estimated that around 83% of deaths could have been avoided if measures had been taken two weeks earlier. It suggested that 54,000 fewer people would have died had cities begun locking down on 1 March. President Trump dismissed the report as a "political hit job". The study, which has not been peer reviewed yet, covers data up to 3 May, at which point there had been just over 65,300 coronavirus-related deaths in the US. There have now been more than 93,400 coronavirus-related deaths in the United States, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. The results of the study indicate that stricter measures imposed sooner could have made a dramatic impact. It said the findings "underscore the importance of earlier intervention and aggressive response in controlling" the virus. Mr Trump urged citizens to limit travel on 16 March, five days after the World Health Organization declared the coronavirus outbreak a global pandemic. Individual states then began lockdown measures at different times, with California and New York state going into lockdown on 19 March and 22 March respectively, while Georgia became one of the last to implement such measures on 3 April. Critics say the Trump administration's flawed and delayed rollout of testing meant states had limited information on the extent of the outbreak in February and early March. The president also downplayed the risk during this period.  Asked about the research on Thursday before a visit to Michigan, Mr Trump said: "I was so early - it was earlier than anybody thought." Although the president claimed the study was a political attack on him, the findings also raise questions for other politicians about when they enforced stay-at-home orders. New York was the epicentre of the US outbreak and the state has had more than 28,000 deaths and 360,000 Covid-19 cases. Although New York City schools shut on 15 March, it was another week before a total lockdown was introduced. Asked about the new research, Governor Andrew Cuomo conceded: "If this country knew more and knew it earlier we could have saved many more lives." The president was touting the surplus of ventilators during a visit to a Ford plant.  With all 50 US states now reopen to some degree, Mr Trump is keen to show that America is getting back to business. However, his trip comes as new unemployment data showed that a further 2.4m Americans sought jobless benefits last week.  The new filings brought the total number of claims since mid-March to roughly 38.6 million - roughly a quarter of the workforce. Mr Trump has clashed with Michigan Governor Gretchen Whitmer on several occasions in the past, calling the state's lockdown measures "too tough" in April and writing "LIBERATE MICHIGAN" in a tweet alongside two other states. Michigan is the state with the fourth-highest number of coronavirus-related deaths - more than 5,000 - according to data from Johns Hopkins University. The president did not wear a mask when speaking with reporters during the visit, but said he donned one while in another part of the plant.  He told journalists he wore both goggles and a mask, but not in the area where there were media cameras. He said it was "not necessary" to wear one in that section of the plant.  "I was given a choice and I had one on where they had an area [where] they preferred it," he said.  He added: "I didn't want to give the press the pleasure of seeing it." There had been questions over whether the president would wear a face mask during the visit. A spokesperson for Ford earlier said all visitors should wear PPE, but that the White House would decide whether Mr Trump complied. The president's refusal to commit to wear a mask before the visit drew criticism from Michigan attorney general Dana Nessel, who told CNN "we are just asking that President Trump comply with the law of our state". She later wrote an open letter which said the president has "not only a legal responsibility, but also a social and moral responsibility, to take reasonable precautions".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The US has announced it will withdraw from a major accord that permits unarmed aerial surveillance flights over dozens of participating countries. The Open Skies Treaty came into force in 2002 and is designed to boost confidence and assure against attacks. But senior US officials said the country was withdrawing due to repeated Russian violations of its terms. US President Donald Trump later said there was a "very good chance we'll reach a new agreement" with Russia. "I think we have a very good relationship with Russia, but Russia didn't adhere to the treaty," Mr Trump said on Thursday, adding: "Until they adhere we will pull out."  The US will formally withdraw from the accord in six months, officials said. "During the course of this review it has become abundantly clear that it is no longer in America's interests to remain a party to the Open Skies Treaty," one official told Reuters news agency. Some 35 nations are party to the treaty, including Russia, Canada and the UK.  Russia's Foreign Ministry insisted that it had not violated the treaty and that a US withdrawal would be "very regrettable", adding that the Trump administration was working to "derail all agreements on arms control". "We reject any attempts to justify a way out of this fundamental agreement," Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Alexander Grushko told Russia's state-owned RIA Novosti news agency.  "Nothing prevents continuing the discussions over the technical issues, which the US is misrepresenting as violations by Russia," he added. He said that any withdrawal would affect the interests of all of the treaty's participants, who are also members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (Nato).  In abandoning the Open Skies Treaty, the Trump Administration is not just renouncing an arms control agreement that was seen as essential for transparency during the Cold War years, but he is also ditching an agreement that many experts believe still retains huge benefits for the US.  The fact it comes at a time when the whole structure of arms control is collapsing and a new era of great power competition beckons is doubly troubling.  The Open Skies Treaty came into force in January 2002 and some 34 countries have ratified the agreement. It allows for unarmed short-notice reconnaissance flights by specially equipped aircraft, over the entire territory of another country to collect data on troop deployments, military facilities and so on.  There have been some problems in recent years and the US contends - with some justification -  that Russia has been preventing access to certain areas. But critics of the Trump administration's antipathy towards arms control say this is a reason for fixing the treaty, not abandoning it.  Mr Trump seems to be holding out at least a chance that the US could stick with Open Skies, but that is clearly going to depend upon talks with Moscow.  The Russian Foreign ministry says that a US withdrawal will affect the interests of all the participants. While the US can clearly use satellites for its intelligence gathering on Russia, Mr Trump's decision will cause tensions with Washington's European allies, few of whom have such satellite access.   Earlier this year, US Defence Secretary Mark Esper accused Russia of violating the treaty by banning flights over the city of Kaliningrad and other areas near Georgia. "I have a lot of concerns about the treaty as it stands now," he said at the time. "This is important to many of our Nato allies, that they have the means to conduct the overflights." It marks the latest effort by President Donald Trump's administration to withdraw the US from a major global treaty. Last year, it pulled out of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF) with Russia. The INF was signed by the US and the USSR in 1987, and banned the vast majority of nuclear and non-nuclear missiles with short and medium ranges.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US actress Lori Loughlin, of the sitcom Full House, and her husband, designer Mossimo Giuannulli, have pleaded guilty to college admissions scam charges. They are among 50 people charged in an alleged criminal enterprise to get their children into top US schools. The couple had initially pleaded not guilty to the fraud charges. Officials say they have agreed to serve jail time, pay a fine and do community service under supervised release. Ms Loughlin pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit wire and mail fraud to a court in Massachusetts on Friday. She will serve two months in prison under the terms of the plea deal. Mr Giannulli pleaded guilty to the same, plus one count of honest services wire and mail fraud, and will serve five months behind bars. The couple are to be sentenced on 21 August. Prosecutors had said Ms Loughlin and Mr Giannulli paid $500,000 (£408,000) in bribes to have their two daughters admitted into the University of Southern California (USC) as fake rowing-team recruits. Under the terms of the deal, Ms Loughlin will also pay $150,000 in fines, have two years of supervised release and complete 100 hours of community service in addition to jail time. Her husband's will pay $250,000 and must complete 250 hours of community service. "Under the plea agreements filed today, these defendants will serve prison terms reflecting their respective roles in a conspiracy to corrupt the college admissions process and which are consistent with prior sentences in this case," Massachusetts US Attorney Andrew Lelling said in a statement on Thursday. "We will continue to pursue accountability for undermining the integrity of college admissions."  The pair will bring the total number of parents pleading guilty in the scam to 24. The couple were among the most high-profile suspects to be caught up in the national cheating scandal.  Desperate Housewives actress Felicity Huffman was also charged and pleaded guilty within one month. She ultimately served 11 days of a two week sentence in a San Francisco-area prison. Prosecutors in Massachusetts had publicly warned Ms Loughlin that the longer her case dragged on, the longer her sentence would be if she was eventually found guilty at trial rather than plead guilty. "If she's convicted, I don't think I'm giving her any state secrets by saying we would probably ask for a higher sentence for her than we did for Felicity Huffman,"  Mr Lelling told WCVB-TV in Boston in October. The development comes only two weeks after the couple again moved to have the case dismissed.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Americans have praise for South Korea and Germany's handling of the coronavirus pandemic but give poor marks to Italy and China.  What other attitudes do Americans hold when it comes to the global response to the outbreak?  The Washington-based Pew Research Center, a public opinion polling and research organisation, took the temperature on how Americans think other countries have handled the pandemic.  Pew surveyed 10,957 US adults from 29 April to 5 May for the poll.  Here are some key takeaways.  When it comes to the response to the global coronavirus pandemic, a majority of Americans give high marks to South Korea and Germany - in fact higher marks than they gave their own country.  A majority of respondents gave both those countries a rating of either "good" or "excellent" for their efforts. Just under 50% of respondents said the same about the US response.  South Korea's rapid ability to react to the virus spread and to set up a testing network has made the country a role model as other nations look to battle their own coronavirus outbreaks - though officials have had to respond to recent outbreaks linked to nightclubs and bars.  Germany has also won praise for its response to the outbreak.  Mass testing and effective lockdown restrictions have helped keep the death toll far lower than in other European countries, though infection rates have increased since its lockdown measures were eased.  Americans placed the UK in the middle of the pack, roughly divided over its response.  In contrast, a majority of Americans say China and Italy have not handled the outbreak well.  In March, Italy was the worst-hit country by the pandemic after China. The US, which now has over 1.5 million known cases, overtook Italy's death toll in mid-April.  An overwhelming majority of Americans say the US can learn from other countries about ways to slow the spread of the virus.  "The American public is paying attention to how countries around the world are dealing with [the outbreak]," Richard Wike, Pew's director of global attitudes research, told the BBC.  The World Health Organization (WHO) "is an organisation that probably wasn't on the radar for most Americans a few weeks ago", says Mr Wike.  Now, Pew research indicates a sharp divide when it comes to the American public's attitudes towards it.  WHO drew strong partisan reactions from respondents, with 62% of Democrats believing the agency has done either an excellent or good job of dealing with the pandemic - with just 28% of Republicans agreeing.  There was also a divide when it came to trusting information on the virus coming from the WHO.  About one-third of Republicans said they trusted WHO information versus 80% of Democrats.  That division was even more stark when researchers polled liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans.  Of those more left-leaning Democrats, 86% indicated they trusted the WHO. That fell sharply to 27% among more conservative Republicans.  US President Donald Trump is not the WHO's only critic - other countries have raised questions about the agency's handling of the pandemic - but he has been the most vocal.  This week he accused the agency of having "consistently ignored credible reports of the virus spreading in Wuhan in early December 2019 or even earlier" and of failing "to adequately obtain, vet and share information in a timely and transparent fashion".  He has also halted funding to WHO, which he has labelled a "puppet of China". WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus has defended the agency's response. He has agreed to an independent evaluation, which would look at what lessons could be learned and put forward any recommendation.  Beijing has also defended its actions during the outbreak, saying the country has acted with openness and transparency. The pandemic has worsened relations between Donald Trump's America and Xi Jinping's China. The President has repeatedly chosen to call the coronavirus the "Chinese virus", a term that has caused offense in Beijing.  Mr Wike says negative views towards China  among the American public are the highest since Pew began asking the question in 2005.  He notes there has been a consistent partisan divide over the issue but that the numbers have been steadily trending towards unfavourable among both Democrat and Republican voters over the past few years.  Americans have long had concerns about China in matters like trade and jobs, he says, and more recently on matters like cyber security and human rights.  "The mix of issues [of concern] has gotten more diversified," he says. "Now coronavirus is part of the mix as well."  Currently, 66% of Americans hold an unfavourable view of China.  They are also distrustful of information coming from Chinese officials on the virus, with 84% of respondents saying they place "not too much or no trust" in Beijing's claims.  And they are sceptical of China's handling of the virus, with 64% ranking the response as fair or poor.  Those numbers skew slightly higher among Republicans and older Americans, who are more likely to say China has not handled the crisis well.  Americans aren't just watching the foreign response to the contagion, the survey indicates. They are also weighing how their own country is handling the challenge.  Just over half - 52% - are critical of the US response. In comparison, 47% say the US has done either an excellent or a good job in dealing with the outbreak.  Respondents were not asked whether they reserved their criticism the federal or state government. They were surveyed on how good of a job the US has done in dealing with the coronavirus outbreak. In the US, it's up to states to maintain public order and safety and it has been state governors who have issued lockdown or shelter-in-place orders - and who have since eased restrictions to varying degrees.  The federal government has coordinated the overall response, dealing with matters like fiscal aid packages, testing, and equipment.  A number of states have seen  protests against the lockdown orders aimed at limiting the spread of Covid-19. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A couple whose 50th anniversary trip to New York was cancelled because of the coronavirus outbreak were given an "incredible" virtual holiday instead. Ed and Barbara Higgins, from Norfolk, had been due to fly on out 9 May and sail back on the Queen Mary 2. However, their family did not want them to miss out, so, as the EDP reported, they sent an itinerary, online tours, special dinners and mocked-up photos. The couple said their virtual trip "brought tears of joy to our eyes". Mr Higgins said the trip, which they booked 18 months ago, was supposed to be the "holiday of a lifetime". "The day we were due to fly, we got an email from our daughter with a link to an itinerary and films and videos of the places we ought to have been visiting in person," Mrs Higgins told the BBC. Alex Ozansoy and her sister Anna Griffiths recreated the trip for their parents to enjoy at their Aylsham home. "It had instructions about where we would go each day and links to virtual tours so we could walk through Times Square, watch a Broadway musical or have a special meal," Mrs Higgins said. "Mum had been so excited, she'd bought new dresses and everything, so we told our parents to dress up at home, and that meals would be delivered, including afternoon tea which they were to take on board the cruise ship," said Mrs Ozansoy. Coronavirus: East of England live updates She even superimposed pictures of her parents on to various locations on the ship. The Higginses described the virtual trip as "very unexpected, but quite incredible". Mrs Ozansoy added: "It broke my heart when they couldn't go, but Dad said, because of what we had done, it was probably more memorable than if they had actually been there."Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Nasa astronauts Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken have flown into the Kennedy Space Center in Florida to prepare for their historic mission next week. The pair's trip to the International Space Station (ISS) will be made in a rocket and capsule system provided by a commercial company, SpaceX.  Nasa has traditionally always owned and operated its space vehicles. But that is a capability it gave up in 2011 when it retired the last of the space shuttles. The agency now intends to contract out all future crew transportation to low-Earth orbit.   Hurley and Behnken flew into Florida from the agency's human spaceflight headquarters in Texas where they have been in quarantine.  They'll continue protecting their health at Kennedy as they get ready for next Wednesday's planned lift-off. Thursday will see teams from SpaceX and Nasa hold a flight readiness review to confirm all preparation activities are good to proceed. The astronauts' rocket, a Falcon-9, and capsule, known as Dragon, will be wheeled out to the spaceport's famous launch pad - complex 39A - shortly for its static fire test.  This will see the Falcon ignite briefly all nine of its first-stage engines to check they are fit to go.  Hurley and Behnken, together with ground-support staff, will also conduct a "crew dry dress" rehearsal. This will involve the men suiting up, riding out to the pad and even climbing into their capsule as a dummy run to ensure everyone understands their role. Of the Dragon, Hurley said: "It's just an amazing vehicle. It's definitely not the space shuttle. It's much smaller; it's a capsule. It's state-of-the-art from a technology standpoint, and we are so excited to be in a real spaceship and not the simulator here in just a week." Behnken said the pair felt the weight of history. This is only the fifth time American astronauts will have flown to orbit in a brand new spacecraft design. "We certainly take inspiration from all those who've come before us. Whenever we've had a chance to speak with the astronauts who had those opportunities - the thing they've emphasised is, in the moment, being as prepared and ready for whatever may come your way as possible," he told reporters at Kennedy. Next week's launch is key moment in Nasa's strategy to change the way it conducts its space activity.  Its commercial crew programme, initiated in 2010, selected both SpaceX and aerospace heavyweight Boeing to develop crew transportation services. The arrangement with the companies means they can also sell seats in their vehicles to other space agencies, companies or indeed wealthy individuals. "We are on the cusp of launching American astronauts on American rockets from American soil yet again," explained Nasa Administrator Jim Bridenstine.    "This time we're doing it differently than we've ever done it before. We are partnering with commercial industry with the intent that they would go get customers that are not Nasa, and drive down our costs and increase the access to space." For the moment, this model only covers flights to a few hundred kilometres above the Earth, to the ISS. But eventually the aim is to extend the concept to operations in deeper space. In April, Nasa asked three teams to develop ideas for landing its astronauts on the Moon.  Again, this would be a service the agency would purchase.  Lift-off for Hurley and Behnken next Wednesday is scheduled for 16:33 local time (21:33 BST/20:33 GMT).Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US roads have become more lethal even though Americans are driving less due to coronavirus quarantine and stay-at-home orders, a new report has found. Early data indicate a year-on-year 14% jump in fatality rates per distance driven in March, the document by the National Safety Council (NSC) says. The number of miles driven during the month dropped by more than 18%. However, the overall number of roadway deaths across the US in March fell by 8% to 2,690. Deaths for the current year have so far totalled 8,460.  The mileage death rate per 100 million vehicle miles driven was 1.22 in March compared with 1.07 in March 2019, the NSC report said. "Disturbingly, we have open lanes of traffic and an apparent open season on reckless driving," said NSC President Lorraine M Martin. "Right now, in the midst of a global pandemic and crisis, we should take it as our civic duty to drive safely.  "If we won't do it for ourselves, we should do it for our first responders, our law enforcement and our healthcare workers, who are rightly focused on coronavirus patients and should not be overwhelmed by preventable car crashes," Ms Martin said. Data suggested that the increase in speeding was one of the key factors explaining the alarming rise in the death rate, the NSC said. It also said relaxing driving licence requirements for teenagers in some states might have been a contributing factor.  The NSC - a non-profit organisation chartered by US Congress - counts a fatality as anyone involved in a motor vehicle accident: drivers, passengers, pedestrians and cyclists. The estimated cost of motor-vehicle deaths, injuries, and property damage through March was $95.4bn (£78bn), the report said. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The Venezuelan military will escort Iranian tankers delivering much-needed petrol to the country to prevent any attempt by the US to stop them. Five vessels are on the high seas and are due to arrive in the coming days. Venezuela's defence minister said they would be "welcomed" into its exclusive economic zone, which extends 370km (200 nautical miles) from its shores. The US, which has imposed sanctions on Venezuela and Iran, is reportedly considering steps to deter shipments. The US-backed Venezuelan opposition leader, Juan Guaidó, said the need to import petrol highlighted the mismanagement of Venezuela's oil industry by President Nicolás Maduro's government. Venezuela has the world's largest oil reserves, but production has plummeted in the last two decades and the country is in a deep economic crisis. Analysis by Guillermo D Olmo, BBC News Mundo, Caracas Venezuela's gross domestic product has fallen by more than 50% since Nicolás Maduro came to power in 2013.  Millions of Venezuelans have left the country in recent years because of poverty. Coronavirus and falling petrol prices have further exacerbated the situation, as Venezuela's economy overwhelmingly relies on oil products.  For months, the government circumvented its refinery problems by delivering crude oil in exchange for gasoline to its customers, mainly the Russian company Rosneft. But the Trump Administration launched two rounds of sanctions in February and March against Rosneft affiliates for trading Venezuelan crude in international markets. In late March, Rosneft announced its surprise departure from Venezuela.  Since then, petrol has had to be strictly rationed, with people queuing up through the night to fill up no more than 30 litres.  The five Iranian tankers - Fortune, Forest, Petunia, Faxon and Clavel - are carrying about 1.5m barrels of fuel and passed through the Suez Canal earlier this month, according to shipping data on Refinitiv Eikon. "When they enter our exclusive economic zone, they will be escorted by Bolivarian National Armed Forces boats and planes to welcome them in and thank the Iranian people for their solidarity and co-operation," Venezuelan Defence Minister Gen Vladimir Padrino said on state television on Tuesday. Venezuela's permanent representative to the UN, Samuel Moncada, stressed that the tankers were "civilian vessels carrying vital goods for our people" and were "coming from a country that has engaged in legal trade with mine". "In the midst of a pandemic, forbidding those vessels from reaching our ports would thus constitute a crime against humanity," he told the UN Security Council. Iran has also warned that it will retaliate if the tankers are blocked. A flotilla of US Navy and Coast Guard vessels is patrolling the Caribbean Sea on a mission to counter illicit drug trafficking. But US officials have not announced any plan to stop the Iranian tankers. On Monday, the head of the US military's Southern Command, Admiral Craig Faller, said he was following the Iran's shipments to Venezuela "with concern", but played down the possibility of a confrontation. "With respect to Venezuela, our focus has been to share intelligence, trying to figure out what Maduro and his cronies are up to," he said.   Earlier this month, President Donald Trump rebuffed suggestions the US was behind what appeared to have been a bungled attempt to overthrow Mr Maduro.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The US Senate has passed a bill that could block some Chinese companies from selling shares on American stock exchanges. It would require overseas firms to follow US standards for audits and other financial regulations. The measure now has to be passed by the House of Representatives before being signed into law by President Trump. It comes as US-China tensions increase over the virus pandemic and after the Luckin Coffee accounting scandal. The planned legislation would also require publicly traded companies to reveal whether they are owned or controlled by a foreign government. The bill applies to all foreign companies, but is targeted at China, and follows intense criticism of Beijing by Mr Trump and other US politicians. Mr Trump and officials in his administration argue that China mishandled the coronavirus outbreak in its early stages. The outbreak has now grown to become a pandemic that has killed almost 330,000 people worldwide and crippled the global economy. US-listed Chinese companies have already come under increasing scrutiny in recent weeks after Luckin Coffee revealed that an internal investigation found hundreds of millions of dollars of its sales last year were “fabricated”. The company said its own investigation had found that fabricated sales from the second quarter of last year to the fourth quarter amounted to about 2.2bn yuan ($310m; £254m). That equates to about 40% of its estimated annual sales. The Chinese coffee chain has since sacked its chief executive and chief operating officer, while six other employees who were alleged to have been involved in or known about the transactions have been suspended or put on leave. The scandal-hit firm has said it has been co-operating with regulators in the US and China, who have begun an investigation into the company. Luckin's Nasdaq listing had been one of China's few successful US stock market debuts of 2019. On Tuesday Luckin said the Nasdaq exchange had notified the company of plans to delist it due to concerns over the alleged fabricated sales and disclosure failures. Its shares will trade on the exchange pending the outcome of an appeal, expected within 45 days. The scandal-hit firm's shares, which had been suspended since 7 April, plunged by more than 35% after they resumed trading on Wednesday.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A trial to see whether two anti-malarial drugs could prevent Covid-19 has begun in Brighton and Oxford. Chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine or a placebo will be given to more than 40,000 healthcare workers from Europe, Africa, Asia and South America. All the participants are staff who are in contact with Covid-19 patients. US President Donald Trump was criticised this week after he said he had been taking hydroxychloroquine, despite warnings it might be unsafe. The first UK participants in the global trial are being enrolled on Thursday at the Brighton and Sussex University Hospitals and the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford.   They will be given either hydroxychloroquine or a placebo for three months. At sites in Asia, participants will be given chloroquine or a placebo. These are the first of a planned 25 UK sites, with results expected by the end of the year.  The trial is open to anyone delivering direct care to coronavirus patients in the UK, as long as they have not been diagnosed with Covid-19.  It will test whether the drugs can prevent healthcare workers exposed to the virus from contracting it.  One of the study's leaders, Prof Nicholas White at the University of Oxford said: "We really do not know if chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine are beneficial or harmful against Covid-19." But, he said, a randomised controlled trial such as this one, where neither the participant nor the researchers know who has been given the drug or a placebo, was the best way to find out.  "A widely available, safe and effective vaccine may be a long way off," said Prof Martin Llewelyn from Brighton and Sussex Medical School, who is also leading the study.   "If drugs as well-tolerated as chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine could reduce the chances of catching Covid-19, this would be incredibly valuable."  The drugs can reduce fever and inflammation and are used as both a prevention and a treatment for malaria.  Hydroxychloroquine regulates the body's immune response and is also used in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and Lupus - an inflammatory disease caused by an overactive immune system.  Lupus charities in the UK and US have raised concerns that demand for the drug associated with coronavirus could threaten the supply for patients who already rely on it.  The drug gained attention after US President Donald Trump suggested it may be beneficial, and this week said he was taking hydroxychloroquine to ward off coronavirus. The US Food and Drug Administration warned against use of the medication outside hospitals, where the agency has granted temporary authorisation for its use in some cases, or clinical trials. While the University of Oxford trial is taking place in a controlled clinical environment, the World Health Organization has warned that some individuals were self-medicating and risked causing themselves serious harm. It has not yet been shown to be safe and effective in the prevention or treatment of coronavirus and can cause dangerous heart arrhythmias.  The trial also involves researchers from the UK, Thailand, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia and Italy. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A US TV host has furiously rebuked President Donald Trump for falsely suggesting her husband and co-presenter may have got away with murder. In tweets, Mr Trump has appeared to link MSNBC anchor Joe Scarborough to the death of an aide two decades ago, a conspiracy theory debunked by police. "Donald, you're a sick person," anchor Mika Brzezinski said on air as she defended her husband. She also demanded Twitter take down the president's incendiary tweets.  "He's once again tweeting conspiracy theories about Joe, falsely accusing him of murder," Ms Brzezinski said on her MSNBC show Morning Joe on Wednesday, before addressing the president directly. She questioned how the president could subject the family of a congressional aide - who authorities said died of natural causes in Mr Scarborough's office in 2001 - to such "BS". "Donald, you're a sick person," Ms Brzezinski said. "You're really a cruel, sick, disgusting person."  She said the president's tweets were merely a ploy to deflect from the Covid-19 pandemic because her husband "speaks the truth" about Mr Trump's "lack of ability to handle this massive human catastrophe".  MSNBC, Ms Brzezinski and Mr Scarborough have been highly critical of the president's handling of the US coronavirus outbreak. Countrywide, cases have surpassed 1.5 million.  Ms Brzezinski then turned to Twitter, saying the company should remove Mr Trump's tweets.  "You should be ashamed of yourself," she scolded the social media giant.  It is by no means the president's first clash with the couple. In 2017, he referred to Ms Brzezinski on Twitter as "low IQ Crazy Mika" and claimed she had been "bleeding badly from a face-lift" when he saw her once near his Florida home. On Wednesday, Mr Trump complained that his convicted former adviser Roger Stone had been treated unfairly, "while guys like Low Ratings Psycho Joe Scarborough are allowed to walk the streets? Open Cold Case!" Last week he tweeted: "When will they open a Cold Case on the Psycho Joe Scarborough matter in Florida. Did he get away with murder? Some people think so. Why did he leave Congress so quietly and quickly? Isn't it obvious? What's happening now? A total nut job!" The president first directed the baseless charge at Mr Scarborough in November 2017, suggesting he should be fired "based on the 'unsolved mystery' that took place in Florida years ago". However, the case the president is apparently referring to is not a cold case.  Mr Scarborough is a former Republican congressman who represented a Florida district from 1995 to 2001. In July 2001, a member of his staff, 28-year-old Lori Klausutis, was found dead in the lawmaker's office in Fort Walton Beach. Mr Scarborough was in Washington DC at the time. Despite the president's suggestion of something untoward in his exit from Congress, Mr Scarborough had stepped down before Klausutis' death.  Authorities determined Klausutis died after losing consciousness from an abnormal heart rhythm, before collapsing and striking her head. She had told a colleague a day earlier that she felt unwell. Police found no foul play and a medical examiner established Klausutis had suffered an acute subdural hematoma, or blood clot, ruling her death accidental.  After Mr Trump's tweet about the matter on 12 May, Mr Scarborough said live on air: "Why don't you turn off the television, and why don't you start working, OK?"  Mr Trump was the most high-profile supporter of the bogus "birther" theory that former President Barack Obama was born in Kenya and ineligible for the presidency. In 2016, Mr Trump suggested the father of his then-Republican presidential rival Ted Cruz had been seen with John F Kennedy's assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, before the president's death. His source for the claim was an unverified tabloid report. Last April, Mr Trump suggested that the noise from windmills causes cancer. Scientists have found no such health risks. The president has also shared a baseless theory that former President Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton were connected to last year's prison suicide of disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump's ex-lawyer Michael Cohen has been released from prison to home confinement due to Covid-19 concerns. Cohen, 53, is serving a three-year sentence for lying to Congress and campaign finance fraud. His early release was first reported in April, but it was delayed. New York is the epicentre of the US pandemic and the minimum-security prison where Cohen is detained has had a number of confirmed cases. According to the federal Bureau of Prisons, 2,265 inmates and 188 staff have tested positive for Covid-19 nationwide. There have been 58 inmate deaths due to the virus. Cohen said on Twitter on Thursday, following his release, that he was "so glad to be home and back with my family".  "There is so much I want to say and intend to say. But now is not the right time. Soon. Thank you to all my friends and supporters." Earlier this month, another former Trump aide, ex-campaign chairman Paul Manafort, was released from prison to serve the remainder of his custodial term at home due to Covid-19 fears. Manafort, who was convicted of conspiracy and fraud charges, had served a little over a year of his seven-and-a-half year sentence. Cohen - who was originally due to walk free in November 2021 - was expected to remain in quarantine for two weeks before early release. The former fixer, who once said he would take a bullet for Mr Trump, was the first member of his inner circle to be jailed during a justice department-led inquiry into alleged Russian meddling in the 2016 election. He admitted to lying to Congress about a Trump Tower project in Moscow, and campaign finance violations for his role in making hush money payments to women alleging affairs with Mr Trump and other tax and bank fraud charges unrelated to the president.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Wildfires and hurricanes are coming this summer. Are emergency services and response agencies ready to tackle those catastrophes amid a pandemic?  Earlier this month, ice jams caused flood waters to rise in Fort McMurray, forcing some 13,000 people from their homes.  The northeast Alberta city is no stranger to natural disasters.  Four years ago a massive wildfire, nicknamed "The Beast", nearly destroyed the town. This time though, city officials and emergency services had something else to be concerned about: the global coronavirus pandemic. "We're as concerned about that issue as we are about the floods," Mayor Don Scott told journalists.  Keeping residents safe from the rising waters and from the outbreaks was "two tracks we're trying to maintain". That meant drive-thru - not in-person - registration for evacuees and getting protective gear for all frontline workers.  Fort McMurray's mayor isn't alone in having to handle the response to a natural disaster while trying to avoid any contagion.  Officials at federal, provincial, state and municipal levels across North America are grappling with planning for floods, wildfires, hurricanes, severe heat waves and other extreme weather events alongside the pandemic.  The considerations necessary are wide-ranging, from managing already strained resources to sourcing extra protective equipment and figuring out the logistics of safely evacuating at-risk populations - even how to cajole evacuees, who might be fearful of catching the virus, from their homes.  This week, 10,000 residents were evacuated in Michigan after two dams collapsed following days of heavy rain. Governor Gretchen Whitmer, noting the city of Midland in the US state could see historic high water levels, said: "To go through this in the midst of a global pandemic is almost unthinkable." Responding to any major natural disaster is already a complicated operation and "this is just adding another layer of complexity", says Rick Swan, director of wildland fire fighting with the International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF).  But "coronavirus has not stopped the fire season and it won't stop the hurricanes from happening".  That means considering "everything you can think of and stuff you just don't", says Silvio Lanzas, chief of Glendale Fire Department in LA County.  Like many organisations, Mr Lanzas' is focusing on preparation and an early "aggressive prevention action" strategy. His crews are working hard to ensure brush fires don't grow into the major wildfires California has seen in recent years. They  are also appealing to property owners to take steps protect their homes from wildfire, like properly maintaining their landscaping. Organisations like the Red Cross and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (Fema) are also urging those living in wildfire and storm prone regions to think in advance about how the pandemic could change their current evacuation plans.  One of Mr Lanzas' preoccupations is the potential strain a major fire in the region could place on personnel.  He recently had a firefighter diagnosed with Covid-19, which in the end meant 16 firefighters were quarantined for two weeks.   Hurricane season is less than a month away. Make sure you prepare now as the weather is already starting to shift.  #BeReady: https://t.co/dA14yAXq6P https://t.co/OVZgYre4Td End of Twitter post  by @FEMA_Pete "What do we do if we have a third of our workforce off, or worse?" he says.  That type of scenario puts the commitment to mutual aid - when emergency responders lend assistance across jurisdictions - at risk if  other regions aren't able to send staff to assist with major disasters.  Another aspect of fighting wildfires that is getting a major overhaul is fire camps. Well over 1,000 firefighters can congregate in those camps, often for weeks at a time when battling a major blaze. Fire crews and support staff usually eat, sleep and work in cramped quarters, which will now have to be expanded to include extra hygiene measures and space for social distancing. A series of April events suggests this may the deadliest tornado season in the US in years, says Trevor Riggen, senior vice president of Disaster Cycle Services for the American Red Cross. So far, the Red Cross has been finding hotel rooms for evacuees instead of opening shelters but "we know we're going to open a shelter eventually", he says.  Extreme weather has become more common in recent years with this year's weather predictions suggesting another tough season.  National agencies in the US and Canada are predicting "areas of concern" for wildfires in California, Oregon, most of the US southwest, and western Canada and the prairies moving into June. Last year, California wildfires led to mandatory evacuation orders for some 180,000 people.  The Atlantic hurricane season begins on 1 June and runs until 30 November with researchers predicting an "above-average" season.  When Hurricane Dorian headed towards  the US east coast last September, at least one million people were ordered to evacuate across three US states in its path .  In the US, Fema has set up a new "surge" National Response Coordination Center to help manage disasters in addition to Covid-19. "That means when it comes to mass evacuations, it means considerations like evacuating a nursing home or extended care facility", Fema administrator Pete Gaynor told The Weather Channel in early May.  "Have you done all the legwork to make sure you can move a possible Covid-19 patient somewhere else?"  Both the Red Cross and Fema say shelters will have new protocols in place like isolation facilities and multiple daily symptoms health checks. In some cases, officials in areas that have already seen natural disasters this spring have suspended measures that may have prevented people from gathering in shelters.  And the American Meteorological Society issued guidelines prior to a wave of deadly tornadoes in the US, urging people to "not let the virus prevent you from seeking refuge from a tornado".  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has also put out a guide for evacuees, which includes a suggestion to bring hand sanitisers or soap, as well as face masks, to any public shelter. Fire Chief Brian Fennessy, with the Orange County Fire Authority, says if the pandemic had gotten started in July or August instead of late winter  "we would not have been nearly as prepared as we are going into this fire season".  Those months have "given us the time to consider, it's given us the time to prepare", he says.  "We're about as prepared as we can be for something unknown to us."  But he says: "We'll get pretty good at this pretty quick."  Mr Fennessy has started working with a wildland fire industry consulting firm that has set up a database that allows fire departments to share lessons  learned during the Covid-19 response. The men and women of OCFA remain dedicated to helping our community during this pandemic. #COVID19 #COVID19OC pic.twitter.com/JRF6r1RFlH End of Twitter post  by @OCFAChief The pandemic has already changed how fire fighters respond to emergency calls and smaller brush fires that require a two- or three-day response. Mr Fennessy says his fire engines are now equipped with kits that hold about 48 hours worth of personal protective gear.   Still, no matter how much preparation is done "there are going to be some miscues out the door," says the IAFF's Mr Swan.  "This is going to be a learn on the fly type of event." Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window As the country's death toll surpasses 92,000, all 50 US states have partially reopened after a two-month shutdown. On Wednesday, Connecticut became the final state to lift restrictions when it gave the green light to shops and restaurants under  certain conditions. But wide discrepancies remain between states in terms of infection rates and the pace of their economic restart. Many have not met the federal guidance on how to reopen, including a 14-day "downward trajectory" of cases.  The District of Columbia is expected to announce its reopening next week.  Countrywide, the US is seeing an overall downward trend in new cases and deaths over time.  Some of the hardest-hit areas, including New York, New Jersey and Washington state are now showing the sharpest declines, while majority of states have reached plateaus. Still, states like Arizona and North Carolina continue to report increases.  Many like Connecticut have started with a state-wide approach, with varying degrees of restrictions.  In Maryland, for example, residents must stick to outdoor recreation, including golf courses, beaches and campgrounds, while states like Oklahoma now allow residents to attend religious services, get a tattoo, and even spend an evening at a nightclub.  Slower moving states - mostly concentrated in the country's North East and West Coast - have begun regional openings.  In California, for example, some restaurants and retail locations will be allowed to open, but only in counties that meet standards for testing and declining infection rates.  Last week, District of Columbia Mayor Muriel Bowser extended the city's social distancing restrictions until at least 8 June.  The guidelines may be loosened, however, if DC meets a series of reopening metrics set out by Ms Bowser, including a two-week decline in community spread of the virus.  In 60 pages of guidance released by the Centers for Disease Control this past weekend, the centre provides detailed guidance to particular sectors.  In schools, for example, desks must be placed six feet apart and face the same direction, with temperature checks for all staff and students.  In restaurants, the CDC advises establishments open first with limited seating to allow for social distancing, and place higher-risk workers in roles that limit their interaction with customers.  And states are advised to ensure a decline in reports of "covid-like symptoms", documented cases and positive tests over a 14-day period.  But even as confirmed cases in the US pass 1.5 million, not all states are following the guidelines as they forge ahead.  Texas, for example, which has begun its reopening in earnest, reported its highest single-day jump in cases on Saturday, with 1,801 new infections.  Just one day after employees returned to work at a Ford assembly plant in Chicago, thousands were forced to leave after someone tested positive, according to BBC's US partner, CBS News. In Florida, which has taken aggressive steps to reopen, a developer who created the state's Covid-19 web portal says she was fired for refusing to manipulate data "to drum up support" for loosened restrictions.  A spokeswoman for the governor said the employee, Rebekah Jones, was dismissed because she was "disruptive". As of Thursday, Florida had at least 47,471 confirmed cases.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window British businessman Sir Richard Branson is looking to this weekend to debut one of his new space systems. Virgin Orbit, based in California, will put satellites above the Earth, using a rocket that's launched from under the wing of a jumbo jet. The maiden mission, to be conducted out over the Pacific Ocean, could take place as early as Saturday. Assuming this demonstration is successful, Virgin Orbit hopes to move swiftly into commercial operations. It already has a rocket built at its Long Beach factory for a second mission. There is an emerging market for small, lower-cost satellites, whose developers are seeking more flexible and affordable ways of getting their assets into space. Virgin Orbit is one of a number of companies now racing to meet this demand. Other contenders include the Rocket Lab outfit, which sends up its vehicles from a ground launch pad in New Zealand; but there are tens of other small rocket start-ups at various stages of development. Sir Richard had originally planned to run his satellite-launch business as part of his tourist spaceplane venture, known as Virgin Galactic, but decided eventually to split the projects into separate entities. The businessman will not be in California at the weekend to witness the demonstration. He'll be following events remotely.  Virgin Orbit engineers will only proceed with the test mission if the weather over the Pacific launch zone is favourable.  If it is, the former Virgin Atlantic jumbo, now named Cosmic Girl, will carry the rocket, dubbed LauncherOne, to an altitude of about 35,000ft (10km), where it will drop the liquid-fuelled booster into a freefall. Roughly four seconds into that fall, as Cosmic Girl banks hard to the right, LauncherOne will ignite its Newton Three engine to begin the climb to orbit. The dummy payload atop the rocket's upper-stage will be released after 32 minutes. The company is trying to dampen too much expectation. Maiden flights of rockets quite often discover unforeseen technical shortcomings and fail. "That's what the history of rockets tells us and we're ready for that, but we'll see how far we get," Will Pomerantz, Vice President of Special Projects at Virgin Orbit, said. "As soon as that Newton engine ignites, we'll be learning," he told BBC News. The company had hoped to run this campaign earlier in the year but like all businesses has had to contend with coronavirus complications. Indeed, part of the Long Beach factory has been turned over to making ventilators for use in hospitals. Currently, flight operations are being run out of the Mojave Air and Space Port to the north of Los Angeles. But Virgin Orbit expects at some point to offer launches to customers in different locations around the world.  Sir Richard and the British government have spoken of using Newquay in southwest England as a potential base. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US authorities have arrested a former special forces soldier and his son for allegedly helping ex-Nissan boss Carlos Ghosn flee Japan last December. Former Green Beret Michael Taylor, 59, and his son Peter, 26, were detained in Massachusetts on Wednesday. Japanese prosecutors issued warrants for their arrest in January. Mr Ghosn, who was detained in Japan on charges of financial misconduct in 2018, made a dramatic escape from house arrest last year.  He denies the charges against him.  Despite being monitored 24 hours a day, on 29 December he managed to fly to Beirut, Lebanon, via Turkey. Details of the Taylors' alleged involvement in the escape are unclear. But Japanese prosecutors have said the two were in Japan at the time and helped Mr Ghosn evade security checks as he left. Earlier this month prosecutors in Turkey charged seven people over the escape. The suspects - four pilots, two flight attendants, and an airline executive - are also accused of helping Mr Ghosn flee. Full details of the escape have never been fully explained. Mr Ghosn, who holds Brazilian, French and Lebanese nationalities, ran Renault and Nissan as part of a three-way car alliance. He is accused of misreporting his compensation package, but has insisted he can never get a fair hearing in Japan.  Since his arrival in Lebanon, he has told reporters he was a "hostage" in Japan, where he was left with a choice between dying there or running.