As the crisis has unfolded, scientists have discovered more evidence about a strange and worrying feature of the coronavirus. While many people who become infected develop a cough, fever and loss of taste and smell, others have no symptoms at all and never realise they're carrying Covid-19.  Researchers say it's vital to understand how many are affected this way and whether "silent spreaders" are fuelling the pandemic. When people gathered at a church in Singapore on 19 January, no-one could have realised that the event would have global implications for the spread of coronavirus. It was a Sunday and, as usual, one of the services was being conducted in Mandarin. Among the congregation at The Life Church and Missions, on the ground floor of an office building, was a couple, both aged 56, who'd arrived that morning from China. As they took their seats, they seemed perfectly healthy so there was no reason to think they might be carrying the virus. At that time, a persistent cough was understood to be the most distinctive feature of Covid-19 and it was seen as the most likely way to transmit it. Having no symptoms of the disease should have meant having no chance of spreading it.   The couple left as soon as the service was over. But shortly afterwards, things took a turn for the worse, and in a wholly confusing way. The wife started to become ill on January 22, followed by her husband two days later. Because they had flown in from Wuhan, the epicentre of the outbreak, that was no big surprise. But over the following week, three local people also came down with the disease for no obvious reason, leading to one of Singapore's first and most baffling coronavirus cases. Working out what had happened would lead to a new and disturbing insight into how the virus was so successfully finding new victims. "We were extremely perplexed," says Dr Vernon Lee, head of communicable diseases at Singapore's Ministry of Health. "People who didn't know one another somehow infected each other," while showing no sign of illness. This new batch of cases simply did not make sense, according to what was known about Covid-19 back then. So Dr Lee and his fellow scientists, along with police officers and specialist disease trackers, launched an investigation, generating detailed maps showing who was where and when. This involved the very best of the process known as contact tracing - a version of which is getting under way now in the UK. It's seen as a vital system for tracking down everyone involved in an outbreak and helping to stamp it out, and Singapore is renowned for the skill and speed with which this is carried out. Amazingly, within a few days, investigators had spoken to no fewer than 191 members of the church and had found out that 142 of them had been there that Sunday. They quickly established that two of the Singaporeans who became infected had been at the same service as the Chinese couple.  "They could have spoken to each other, greeted each other, during the usual activities of a church service," says Dr Lee. That was a useful start and would explain in theory how the infection could have been passed on, apart from one key factor. It did not answer the crucial question of how the virus could have been transmitted by the two Chinese people when at that stage they had shown no indication of having the disease. And on top of that was an even greater puzzle. It was confirmed that the third Singaporean to become infected, a 52-year-old woman, had not been at the same service as the others. Instead she had attended another event in the same church later that day, so how could she have picked up the virus? Investigators resorted to going through the CCTV recordings made at the church that Sunday to search for clues. And they stumbled across something completely unexpected - the woman who'd attended the later service, after the Chinese couple had left, had sat in the seats they had used several hours earlier. Somehow, despite having no symptoms and not feeling ill, the Chinese husband and wife had managed to spread the virus. Maybe they'd had it on their hands and touched the seats, maybe their breath carried the infection and it landed on a surface, it's not clear, but the implications were huge. For Dr Lee, piecing everything together, there was only one possible explanation - that the virus was being passed by people who had it without even realising. This was a revelation that would be relevant the world over because the central message of all public health advice on coronavirus has always been to look out for symptoms in yourself and others. But if the virus was also being spread by people without symptoms, silently and invisibly, how could the disease be stopped? He remembers the moment, while working in his office, when the reality dawned on him. "Every time you make a scientific discovery, it is like a 'eureka' moment when you realise that this is something important that you've uncovered, through the hard work of many individuals and teams." What was revealed was what's known as "pre-symptomatic transmission" where someone is unaware of being infected because the cough, fever and other classic symptoms have yet to begin.  Along with many others, this study highlighted a critical period of 24-to-48 hours before the visible onset of the disease in which people can be highly infectious, perhaps even their most infectious. Being aware of that is potentially invaluable, because as soon as you realise you're ill then everyone you've been in close contact with can be warned to stay at home. That would mean that they would be isolating during the key phase of infection before their own symptoms start. But exactly how the disease can be transmitted without a cough to project droplets containing the virus is still open to debate. One option is that simply breathing or talking to someone can do the job. If the virus is reproducing in the upper respiratory tract at that time then it's possible that some of it will emerge with each exhalation. Anyone close enough, especially indoors, could easily pick it up. And another potential form of transmission is by touch - the virus gets onto someone's hands and they touch another person or a door handle - or a seat in a church. Whatever the route, the virus is clearly exploiting the fact that people are bound to be less vigilant if they're not aware that they might be infected. This is an even more mysterious scenario, and one that scientists simply have no definitive answer to. It's one thing to know that people can be infectious before their symptoms show, quite another when they become infected but never have any sign of it. This is what's known as being "asymptomatic" because you are a carrier of the disease but do not suffer in any way yourself. The most famous case is that of an Irish woman who was working as a cook in New York at the beginning of the last century. Wherever Mary Mallon was employed, in house after house, people became ill with typhoid and at least three, maybe many more, died of it, but she was completely unaffected. Eventually a connection was established and it was confirmed that she was the unwitting spreader of the disease. Reporters dubbed her "Typhoid Mary", a label she always resented, but the authorities took no chances and kept her in confinement for 23 years until her death in 1938. Staff nurse Amelia Powell was shocked when she found out that she is asymptomatic. She was at work on her hospital ward at Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge in April when a doctor rang to give her the result of a swab test. She had been feeling normal and safe behind the personal protective equipment she had to wear while caring for patients with Covid-19. But suddenly all those assumptions were undermined because, to her horror, she had tested positive.  "It was a bit like hearing that someone in the family had passed, it was surreal. "I thought, 'This can't be right, not me, I'm absolutely fine,'" says 23-year-old Amelia.  She had to leave her post straightaway to go into isolation at home. "I was worried because I've seen the other side, with patients deteriorating very quickly with it, so I did wonder if this would happen to me." But, to her surprise, at no point did she feel unwell. "I had nothing, literally - I was exercising indoors, eating normally, sleeping normally."  At the moment it's impossible to know how many cases of infection exist but remain hidden from view. The discovery that Amelia was infected was only revealed because she was part of a study of all the staff at her hospital. It produced the surprising result that as many as 3% of more than 1,000 people were positive while showing no symptoms at the time of the test. An even greater proportion of asymptomatic cases was found on the Diamond Princess cruise ship which had been sailing off the coast of Japan earlier this year. Later branded "a petri dish for infection", it had around 700 cases.  Researchers found that three quarters of the people who had tested positive had no symptoms.  And at a care home in Washington state more than half the residents were positive but had no sign of the illness. Different studies suggest a huge range of possibilities for how many cases are asymptomatic stretching from 5% to 80% of cases. That was the conclusion of an analysis by Prof Carl Heneghan of the University of Oxford and colleagues who looked at 21 research projects. The upshot, they said, was that "there is not a single reliable study to determine the number of asymptomatics". And they said that if the screening for Covid-19 is only carried out on people with symptoms - which has been the main focus of UK testing policy - then cases will be missed, "perhaps a lot of cases". The biggest concern of Amelia, the nurse, was that she might have unwittingly transmitted the virus either to those she works with or to the patients who depend on her help.  "I don't think I passed it on because all the colleagues I work with tested negative but it was worrying to think how long I'd been positive for," she says. "But we still don't know if people who are asymptomatic are contagious or not - it's very bizarre and the information about it at the moment is minimal." One study in China which found that the number of asymptomatic cases was actually greater than those with symptoms had a warning for the authorities. "As 'silent spreaders'," the scientists wrote, "asymptomatic carriers warrant attention as part of disease prevention and control." The team that studied that Diamond Princess reckoned that asymptomatic cases were likely to be less infectious than people with symptoms but even so they're estimated to have caused a significant number of cases.  To try to get an answer, scientists in Norwich are pushing for the population of the entire city to be tested. "Asymptomatic cases may be the 'dark matter' of the epidemic," according to Prof Neil Hall, head of the Earlham Institute, a life science research centre, who's leading the initiative. Dark matter is the invisible substance believed to make up most of the matter in the universe, and it's yet to be identified. Prof Hall worries that asymptomatic cases may actually be driving the pandemic, keeping it going despite public health measures. "If you have people who don't know they're ill while using public transport and health care facilities, inevitably that's going to increase transmission," he says. "Any intervention that's only based on people coming to primary health care when they have symptoms will only deal with half the problem."  A team of scientists in California believes that not knowing who's carrying the virus without symptoms is the "Achilles Heel" of the fight against the pandemic. In their view, the only way to stop the disease from spreading is to find out who's infected regardless of whether they think they are or not. That was also the recommendation of MPs on the Commons Science and Technology Committee in a letter to the Prime Minister Boris Johnson. They wrote that the risk of asymptomatic transmission has "a profound consequence for the management of the pandemic". And they said that anyone looking after vulnerable people - such as health workers or care workers - should be given regular testing. A similar approach is being adopted on a far larger scale in the Chinese city of Wuhan, where the pandemic is thought to have begun. As many as 6.5 million people there were tested in as little as nine days in a mass screening programme designed to detect the disease - including in those showing no symptoms. As lockdown measures are eased and more people start to use public transport, return to work or go shopping, getting to grips with the invisible risk matters more than ever. At the moment, there is no way of telling who among the growing crowds may be carrying the virus without knowing. That's why governments the world over say it's essential that everyone cooperates with efforts to trace the contacts of anyone infected and then quickly self-isolates. They also advise that the best defence remains social distancing - to keep apart wherever you can. But where that isn't possible, the recommendation is to cover your face, even with a mask that's homemade. When the US government announced this policy, it highlighted the discoveries made in the church in Singapore back in January. The logic is that this is not about protecting yourself, it's about protecting others from you, in case you're infected but don't know it. Many health professionals worry that masks might distract people from hand washing or social distancing, or increase the risk of contamination if they're clumsily handled. But more and more governments, most recently that of the UK, have become convinced of the benefits.  Not that face coverings will halt the pandemic on their own. But because there's still so little we know about asymptomatic transmission, almost anything is worth a try. When you talk to intensive care doctors across the UK, exhausted after weeks of dealing with the ravages of Covid-19, one phrase emerges time after time: "We've never seen anything like this before." They knew a new disease was coming, and they were expecting resources to be stretched by an unknown respiratory infection which had first appeared in China at the end of last year. "It felt in some ways like we were trying to prepare for the D-Day landings," says Barbara Miles, clinical director of intensive care at Glasgow Royal Infirmary, "with three weeks to get ready and not a great deal of knowledge about what we would be facing". Read a summary, often in their own words, of what doctors have learnt about how Covid-19 attacks the human body.

Two days after the US recorded its first case of coronavirus, Donald Trump said the situation was "totally under control" and assured the public it was "going to be just fine".  Fast forward four months and the virus has spread across all 50 states, leaving a death toll of 100,000 from more than 1.6 million confirmed cases.  We've taken a look at how those figures compare to other countries around the world and how the situation could develop over the next few months.  The death toll in the US became the highest in the world in early April and has risen dramatically since then.  President Donald Trump initially said "50 to 60,000" people could die during the outbreak but in May he said he was hopeful the toll would be lower than 100,000. That benchmark has now been hit though and there are still about 1,000 deaths a day on average.  Rather than focus on deaths, Mr Trump has preferred to cite the mortality rate - that is the number of people that have died relative to the country's population - as evidence that the US has dealt with the virus more effectively than some other nations. The chart below shows the countries with the highest death tolls and, to the right, their mortality rate. You can see that by that measure there are several countries where a greater proportion of the population has died during the coronavirus outbreak.  Belgium, with a population of 11.5 million, has seen 82 people in every 100,000 die during its coronavirus outbreak while the US, with a population of around 330 million, has seen nearly 30 people in every 100,000 die.  But if you look at New York - the worst-hit state in the US - the mortality rate there is close to 150 people in every 100,000, which shows that there is a lot of variation across the US.  One of the problems with comparing countries is that many of them report deaths in different ways. Belgium, for instance, includes deaths where coronavirus was suspected of being present but was never confirmed with a test. Some US states record deaths this way, but not all.  There have also been questions over whether official data from some countries can be trusted. Critics of China in particular have accused it of under-reporting the scale of its outbreak.  Another issue is that countries could be at different stages of an outbreak. In many European countries it's clear that daily cases numbers are coming down significantly and they are past the peak. But you can't say the same for the US at the moment.  Several countries in Europe had outbreaks around the same time as the US and all of them have seen the number of deaths grow quickly, peak and then fall away. The US has not.  One of the reasons the number of daily deaths in the US has plateaued rather than fallen is the sheer size of the country - rather than one large outbreak, there have been multiple centres of infection that developed at different times and spread at different rates.  In New York, the virus struck early, spread quickly and peaked in early April. In the rest of the US, however, the number of daily deaths has been slow to fall. Some other states that were badly affected early on, like Louisiana and Michigan, have also seen a substantial drop in the number of daily deaths like that in New York. But as the situation in those states has improved, others have worsened. About a third of all states saw more deaths last week compared to the week before, with Rhode Island, Mississippi and Ohio seeing some of the largest percentage increases.  In recent weeks, President Trump has been keen to talk about the number of tests being done in the US. The most recent data says the US has carried out about 15 million so far.  That figure puts the US way ahead of other countries, but when it comes to using testing to try to control the virus, there is more to it than the total number you've conducted. Countries that did a lot of testing early in the pandemic, and followed it up by tracing the contacts of anyone who was infected, have been most successful in slowing the spread.  In South Korea, for example, they ramped up testing early on in the outbreak and managed to contain the virus. Less than 300 people have died with coronavirus in the country, which has a population of about 50 million.  But as the chart above shows, it wasn't until several weeks after the first death in the US that officials really stepped up testing.  The top US health official for infectious diseases, Anthony Fauci, admitted in early March that the testing system was "currently failing" and that the US was not able to supply tests "easily, the way people in other countries are doing it". The number of daily tests shows the US is well past those initial problems, but progress can still be made. If the 15m figure is accurate, that would still only be 4.5% of the population.  The death toll is still rising, albeit at a slower rate, and one model that has been cited by the White House predicts it could be at nearly 150,000 by August - although its projections have come in low in the past.  One of the issues with making projections is that no one is quite sure what effect the gradual reopening of the US economy will have on the spread of the virus. At one point, more than 90% of the US population was under mandatory lockdown orders, but the majority of states have now begun to loosen their stay-at-home restrictions. The White House has outlined a set of criteria for states to meet before they begin reopening, including seeing a downward trajectory of case numbers for two weeks. But a group of public health experts say only a couple of states are hitting the targets.  Dr Fauci has warned states that they will see "little spikes that might turn into outbreaks" if they reopen before getting the virus under control.  But his advice has contradicted that of President Trump, who is keen to get the US economy restarted ahead of his re-election campaign. The latest figures show that nearly a quarter of the American workforce have lost their jobs since the outbreak began.  Asked earlier this month whether lives would be lost to reopen the country, Mr Trump said: "Will some people be affected badly? Yes. But we have to get our country opened and we have to get it open soon." Even if states continue to ease restrictions, it's unclear whether the American public will be eager to return to shops and restaurants just yet. A recent poll by the Pew Research Center found that 70% of Americans were concerned that states would reopen too quickly. 

If you didn't know better you'd swear the elephants at the Park Pairi Daiza zoological gardens held a morning meeting. They line up with extraordinary discipline and precision on a keeper's word of command and then dissolve into a friendly huddle. It is a ritual that has played out without an audience every day since Belgium went into lockdown at midnight on Friday 13 March. Now the park, its name is derived from the Ancient Persian concept of paradise as a harmonious garden, is slowly emerging from confinement, as it's known in French. The process will be slow and gradual. At first there'll be a maximum of 5,000 visitors instead of the 30,000 the park is capable of welcoming. They'll wear masks, they'll socially distance and they'll follow carefully marked one-way pedestrian walkways. All European governments are struggling with the issue of how far and how fast to unwind the lockdown. But zoos were among the first tourist attractions to reopen in many countries, including Denmark and Germany. Now they are reopening in France, Italy, the Czech Republic and some Spanish regions too. The sudden shutdown demonstrated the difficult economics of zoo-keeping - even for an institution like Pairi Daiza, which has benefited from huge investment and has twice been voted European Zoo of the Year. Zoo spokesman Mathieu Godefroy put it like this: "Life goes on inside a zoo and it cost a lot of money if there are no visitors to pay for it. "During confinement, we estimate we lost €100,000 (£90,000; $110,000) every day, for the whole year of 2020 we hope to limit our loss to €30m." Zoos have high fixed costs. Even when lockdown reduced revenue to zero the animals had to be fed and the keepers paid to care for them. Being allowed to reopen at reduced capacity is helpful to zoos but offers little comfort to the operators of theme parks. There's no economically viable way to apply social distancing rules to a rollercoaster. Among the first wave of visitors were families with small children mesmerised by the opportunity to be out in the fresh air and the bright spring sunshine. "He's looking forward to seeing a hippopotamus," one mother told me about her son. "But today he's really just as excited to be out of the house and in the car again." Belgium has so far reopened shops but not restaurants.  Zoos are the only places of public entertainment allowed to start trading again, simply because they're mainly places of outdoor entertainment and scientists are confident that outdoors is less dangerous than indoors. The zoo staff are confident that excitement at the reopening isn't confined to the human public. Elephant manager Rob Conachie, whose job is a real labour of love, said one elephant in particular, Mala, was effectively used as an ambassador to introduce visitors to the herd. The zoo's herd gathered in a trumpeting, friendly mob as we talked while the zoo's gates opened and the crowds filed in. "Mala is normally fed a lot of carrots," Rob told us, "and in lockdown she's definitely been wondering where all the carrots have gone. The elephants are fine but there's no doubt they do miss visitors." Now slowly the lockdown is easing and the zoo is coming back to life. The human visitors are delighted of course but it doesn't take much imagination to believe that their excitement is shared by the elephants. More stories you may be interested in: All pictures are subject to copyright.

Covid-19 came late to Turkey - on 11 March - but soon singed every corner of the country. Within a month all 81 provinces had been affected.  It was the one of the fastest growing outbreaks in the world - worse than China or the UK. There were fears that the death toll would soar turning Turkey into another Italy, which was then the hardest hit country.  Three months on that hasn't happened, even without a total lockdown. The official death toll is 4,397. Some doctors here dispute that, claiming the real figure could be twice as high because Turkey only includes those who test positive. Either way, in the horrific annals of the Covid-19 era, it's a relatively low number for a population of 83 million. Experts warn it is hard to reach conclusions and compare statistics while countries are still burying their dead. But Turkey has "clearly averted a much bigger disaster", according to Dr Jeremy Rossman, Lecturer in Virology at the University of Kent.    "Turkey fits in the category of several countries that responded fairly quickly with testing, tracing, isolation and movement restrictions," he told the BBC. "It's a fairly small club of countries that have been quite effective in reducing the viral spread."  As the virus multiplied, the authorities subtracted key pieces from the jigsaw of daily life - no trips to the coffee shop, no shopping in crowded markets, no communal prayers at the mosque.  The over-65s and under-20s were locked down completely, weekend curfews were imposed, and major cities were sealed off.   Istanbul was the centre of the epidemic. The city lost its rhythm, like a heart that keeps missing a beat.  Now restrictions are gradually easing, but Dr Melek Nur Aslan remains on alert. She's director of public health for the district of Fatih, a heavily populated area in the heart of old Istanbul. Dr Aslan, who is articulate, and energetic, leads a contract-tracing operation. Across Turkey there are 6,000 teams. "We feel we are in a war," she tells me. "People forget to go home. We say 'OK eight hours is completed' but they don't even care about going home because they know this is a duty they have to complete, before it spreads to anyone else." Dr Aslan says they began tracking the virus on day one - 11 March -  thanks to decades of experience tracking measles. "Those plans were ready," she says. "We just got them off the shelf and started using them."   We join two young doctors in the narrow streets of Fatih, equipped with an app, and clad in Hazmat suits. They head for an apartment block where two flatmates in their twenties have been in quarantine. Their friend is Covid-19 positive. The women are framed in the doorway of their apartment, both in face masks, and one wearing a headscarf. They are tested on the spot for Covid-19 and will get the results within 24 hours. It's just a day since they started showing mild symptoms. Nazli Demiralp, 29, is grateful for the prompt response. "We follow foreign news," she says, "and when we first heard about the virus we were really scared. But Turkey has rallied faster than we thought - much faster than Europe and the United States. " The country has public health lessons to offer, according to acting head of the World Health Organization (WHO) in Turkey, Dr Irshad Shaikh.  "Initially we were worried," he told the BBC. "They were having 3,500 positive cases per day. But what has worked is testing. And they did not have to wait five or six days for results." He also credits the quarantine, isolation and contract tracing measures but says it's too soon to judge Turkey's treatment protocol for patients.  Controversially that includes the anti-malarial drug, hydroxychloroquine, as standard. It's much touted by President Donald Trump - but has been roundly rejected by the latest international research. The WHO has temporarily suspended it from their trial of possible treatments for the virus. That followed research published in the Lancet which suggested hydroxychloroquine can cause cardiac problems in Covid-19 patients, and could do more harm than good.  We were given access to a hospital where it has been part of the standard treatment for thousands of patients. The Dr Sehit Ilhan Varank hospital, a two-year old-state hospital, is also state of the art. It's a bright, spacious battlefront against the virus. Chief doctor Nurettin Yiyit - whose art work is on the hospital walls - says it's key to use hydroxychloroquine early. "Other countries are using this drug too late," he says, "especially the United States. We only use it at the beginning. We have no hesitation about this drug.  We believe it's effective because we get the results." On a tour of the hospital, adding and subtracting protective layers as we go, he explains that Turkey's approach is to "get ahead of the virus", by treating early and treating aggressively. They use hydroxychloroquine and other drugs, along with blood plasma and oxygen in high concentrations.  Dr Yiyit is proud of his hospital's mortality rate of under 1%, and of the empty beds in the intensive care unit. They try to keep patients out of here, and off ventilators.   We meet 40-year old Hakim Sukuk who has left the ICU and is homeward bound, brimming with gratitude.  "Everyone took care of me so well," he said, sitting up in bed. "It was like being in my mother's arms." The government's handling of the pandemic has not been given a clean bill of health by the Turkish Medical Association.  It says there were many mistakes in Ankara's "inadequate" response to the pandemic, including leaving borders open for too long.  However, Turkey is getting some credit from the WHO. "This is a young outbreak," said Dr Shaikh. "But we would expect more people to be severely sick. Something is going right." Turkey has advantages in the fight against Covid-19, including a young population and a high number of ICU beds. Despite this, new cases continue to be recorded, currently at the rate of about 1,000 a day.  While the country is being seen as a success story, there's still plenty of caution because the story isn't over yet.

A BBC team tracking coronavirus misinformation has found links to assaults, arsons and deaths. And experts say the potential for indirect harm caused by rumours, conspiracy theories and bad health information could be much bigger. "We thought the government was using it to distract us," says Brian Lee Hitchens, "or it was to do with 5G. So we didn't follow the rules or seek help sooner."  Brian, 46, is talking by phone from his hospital bed in Florida. His wife is critically ill - sedated, on a ventilator in an adjacent ward.  "The battle that they've been having is with her lungs," he says, voice wobbling. "They're inflamed. Her body just is not responding."  After reading online conspiracy theories, they thought the disease was a hoax - or, at the very least, no worse than flu. But then in early May, the couple caught Covid-19.  "And now I realise that coronavirus is definitely not fake," he says, running out of breath. "It's out there and it's spreading."  A BBC team has been tracking the human toll of coronavirus misinformation. We've investigated dozens of cases - some previously unreported - speaking to the people affected and medical authorities in an attempt to verify the stories. The effects have spread all around the world.  Online rumours led to mob attacks in India and mass poisonings in Iran. Telecommunications engineers have been threatened and attacked and phone masts have been set alight in the UK and other countries - all because of conspiracy theories.  And in Arizona, a couple mistakenly thought a bottle of fish tank cleaner contained a preventative medicine.  It was late March when Wanda and Gary Lenius started to hear about hydroxychloroquine.  The couple noticed a similar-sounding ingredient on the label of an old bottle that was lying around their house in Phoenix. Hydroxychloroquine may have potential to fight the virus - but as research continues, it remains unproven. On Monday, the World Health Organisation halted its use in trials after a recent study suggested it could actually increase the risk of patients dying from Covid-19. Speculation about its effectiveness started circulating online in China in late January. Media organisations, including Chinese state outlets, tweeted out old studies where it was tested as an anti-viral medicine. Then a French doctor claimed encouraging results. Although doubt was later cast on that study, interest in hydroxychloroquine surged. It was mentioned, with various degrees of scepticism, by a variety of media outlets and influential people including Tesla chief executive Elon Musk and Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro. It also found its way into White House press briefings - and President Trump's Twitter feed. HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE & AZITHROMYCIN, taken together, have a real chance to be one of the biggest game changers in the history of medicine. The FDA has moved mountains - Thank You! Hopefully they will BOTH (H works better with A, International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents)..... End of Twitter post  by @realDonaldTrump "What do you have to lose?" he said on 3 April. "Take it." In mid-May, he went further - saying that he'd been following his own advice. Each comment resulted in big spikes in social media chatter about the drug, according to data from online monitoring tool CrowdTangle. Overdoses of the drug are rare, but the anxiety produced by the pandemic has driven people to extreme measures. In Nigeria, hospital admissions from hydroxychloroquine poisoning provoked Lagos state health officials to warn people against using the drug. And in early March, a 43-year-old Vietnamese man was admitted to a poison control clinic in Hanoi after taking a large dose of chloroquine. He was red, trembling and unable to see straight. The clinic's director, Dr Nguyen Trung Nguyen, said the man was lucky he received treatment quickly - or else he might have died. Gary Lenius was not so fortunate. The cleaner he and Wanda gulped down contained a different chemical, and was poisonous.  Within minutes, both started feeling dizzy and hot. They vomited and struggled to breathe. Gary died, and Wanda was hospitalised.  Wanda later explained why the couple drank the concoction. "Trump kept saying it was pretty much a cure," she said.  In Iran, authorities say hundreds have died from alcohol poisoning after viral rumours about its curative effects.  The total was put at 796 by the end of April by Kambiz Soltaninejad, an official from Iran's Legal Medicine Organisation, who said it was the result of "fake news on social media." The truth behind the number is murky in a country where alcohol is banned in Iran and bootleg moonshine is routinely contaminated.  However in this case, BBC journalists did see rumours of the supposed "cure" spreading on the messaging app Telegram before the official announcement. Shayan Sardarizadeh of BBC Monitoring's disinformation team notes that the announcement was potentially embarrassing to the Iranian authorities and, if anything, the number could be an underestimate. In one case we verified, a 5-year-old boy went blind after his parents plied him with illegal booze in an attempt to fight the disease.  "We know that bad information can ruin lives," says Clare Milne, deputy editor of UK fact-checking organisation Full Fact. "There's such great potential for harm."  President Trump has speculated on a number of other cures beside hydroxychloroquine. In late April, he opined that ultraviolet rays could neutralise the virus. "And then I see the disinfectant where it knocks it out in a minute. One minute. And is there a way we can do something like that, by injection inside or almost a cleaning?" Trump later said his comments were sarcastic. But some Americans didn't see it that way, and poison control hotlines received calls asking about the advice. Officials at one in Kansas said they heard from someone who said his friend swallowed disinfectant soap after the president's briefing.  Dr Duncan Maru, a doctor at Elmhurst Hospital in New York, says his colleagues have treated patients who have become acutely ill after ingesting disinfectant.  "These ingestions also can have long-term consequences, like cancers and gastrointestinal bleeding," he says.  Social networks have also been fertile ground for conspiracy theories. One particular coronavirus-related one - there are many circulating online - has resulted in arsons and assaults. Across the UK, more than 70 phone masts have been vandalised because of false rumours that 5G mobile phone technology is somehow to blame for the virus.  In April, Dylan Farrell, an engineer for Openreach, was driving his van in Thurmaston near Leicester. It had been a long day and he was thinking about what he might have for tea as he pulled up to a roundabout. That's when he started to hear shouting. At first, he thought it was directed at someone else. But when he heard "5G!" being screamed through his passenger side window, he realised the shouting was meant for him. "You've got no morals!" a man shouted. "5G is killing us all!"  "I have no doubt he would have tried to get inside and physically attack me had I not locked the doors straight away," Dylan says. "It was so frightening."  He drove away quickly. There have been no arrests in connection with the incident. "We've seen a lot of conspiracies which have been online for a long time now about 5G," says Claire Milne of Full Fact. "Those have evolved to be connected to the new coronavirus." In March, WHO Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus warned that the pandemic would lead to a flare up of a "dangerous enemy". When talking about #COVID19, certain words & language may have a negative meaning for people and fuel stigmatizing attitudes https://t.co/yShiCMfYF3 #coronavirus pic.twitter.com/d54qL4LY2H End of Twitter post  by @WHO He was referring to racism against people from Asia and China, but the virus has exacerbated tensions in several countries.   In April, three Muslim men were violently attacked in separate incidents in Delhi. They were beaten up after rumours circulated that Muslims were spreading the virus.  In Sisai, a small village in eastern India, rival gangs clashed. It came after an attack on a Muslim boy, again linked to false rumours suggesting Muslims were spreading disease. One young man lost his life and another was seriously injured.  False reports have circulated within ethnic communities as well. In Bradford, England, rumours circulated that non-white patients were being left to die. And in Indore, a city in west-central India, doctors on a mission to track down someone who might have been exposed to the virus were attacked with stones. Misleading WhatsApp videos claimed that healthy Muslims were being taken away by health care workers and injected with the virus. Two doctors were left with serious injuries after the incident in early April. Online disinformation can have direct consequences, and social media platforms such as Facebook said they'll remove coronavirus posts that pose an immediate threat.  But it can also have indirect or delayed effects. "I hope she pulls through," says Brian Lee Hitchens, the patient in Florida who got sucked in by coronavirus conspiracy theories. "But if I do lose her, she'll be in a better place."  Brian and his wife didn't have one firm belief about the disease - instead they oscillated between thinking that the virus was a hoax, linked to 5G, or a real but mild ailment. So they carried on as normal despite official warnings. Brian went to work as a taxi driver in his hometown of Jupiter. He went shopping and picked up his wife's medications. Despite his wife's sleep apnoea and asthma, he didn't bother with social distancing or wearing a mask. Catching the virus brought Brian back to reality. He turned to social media, this time to warn people off of misinformation and conspiracy theories.    Many people still think that the Coronavirus is a fake crisis which at one time I did too and not that I thought it wasn... End of Facebook post  by Brian Lee Experts say posts like Brian's may be more useful in combating conspiracies than news articles and fact checks. "One of the most effective ways of trying to correct the record," says Full Fact's Claire Milne, "is by getting the person who made the original claim to do it themselves."  Brian's may be an extreme case, but with the sheer amount of information circulating - the WHO has called it an "infodemic" - many other people have been misled by what they read online. They're not killing themselves by taking fake cures. Instead, they're lowering their chances of survival by not thinking coronavirus is real or serious.  On an unusually cold Friday in May, two men in their forties arrived at an emergency hospital in the New York borough of Queens. They were roommates, working long shifts and sharing a single bed, and both were seriously ill. Within hours, Dr Rajeev Fernando saw one die in front of his eyes. The other was put on a ventilator. Dr Fernando asked the men why they hadn't come to hospital sooner. They explained to him that they read somewhere online that the virus wasn't very serious. "They try alternative therapies," Dr Fernando says. "They think this is just like the flu." The men were in at-risk groups - but Dr Fernando believes they would have fared better if they had ignored the misleading advice and sought help sooner.  Professor Martin Marshall, chair of the Royal College of General Practitioners, says he and his colleagues in the UK  have seen patients taking tips from posts they see online - including holding their breath in an attempt to "diagnose" themselves or thinking that drinking hot drinks will fight off the virus. Some have cited President Trump's statements about disinfectant. Dr Maru, the doctor at New York's Elmhurst Hospital, calls the numbers who have potentially delayed treatment "staggering."  He knows of neighbours who have caught the disease and died because they believed that social distancing is ineffective or that coronavirus is a hoax. And he says that he and his colleagues spend precious time trying to debunk misinformation when they could be treating patients. But as he spoke on the phone, exhausted and preparing to return to Elmhurst for another shift, Dr Maru was also quick to shift the blame away from the patients themselves. "Misinformation is a structural problem," he says. "Blaming somebody for ingesting bleach or for staying at home and dying is akin to blaming somebody who is walking down the street and gets hit by a drunk driver." In response to the wave of misinformation, social media companies have drawn up new rules. In a statement, Facebook said: "We don't allow harmful misinformation and have removed hundreds of thousands of posts including false cures, claims that coronavirus doesn't exist, that it's caused by 5G or that social distancing is ineffective." The company also says it has put warning labels on 90 million pieces of content.  YouTube says it does not allow content promoting dangerous so-called cures and has a range of policies against Covid-19 misinformation, including disputing the existence of the disease or suggesting that it is caused by 5G.  But as research continues into a coronavirus vaccine, many anti-vaccination and conspiracy-minded groups and accounts have seen their numbers swell. They pose a potential health threat - albeit not an immediate risk.  What some doctors we spoke to fear the most is that the development of a coronavirus vaccine - something that would be a human achievement for the ages - could be completely undermined by misinformation. The future is scary, medical professionals say, because of what they're seeing right now.  "We lose so many lives. They come in very late," says Dr Fernando in New York. He's just finished a night shift, and as we talk on Skype, a protective mask dangles from his ears. "And we just watch them die in front of our eyes."  Brian, the coronavirus patient in Florida, has a message for the people who still believe in the conspiracy theories he endorsed just a few days ago.  "Don't be foolish like I was," he says, "and the same thing won't happen to you like it happened to me and my wife." With reporting by Khue Luu Binh, Flora Carmichael, Alistair Coleman, Shruti Menon, Olga Robinson, Shayan Sardarizadeh, and a BBC Persian journalist.  Is there a story we should be investigating? Email Marianna Follow us on Twitter @BBCtrending or on Facebook.  

Doctors and nurses in Italy have been celebrated as heroes for treating desperately ill coronavirus patients. But now, they are suffering. Lombardy was the hardest-hit region in the world and medics are struggling to hold it together.  Paolo Miranda is an intensive care nurse in Cremona. "I'm more irritable," he says. "I get angry easily and I pick fights." A few weeks ago, Paolo decided to document the bleak situation inside the intensive care unit by taking photographs. "I never want to forget what happened to us. It will soon become history," he tells me. In his photos, he wants to show how his colleagues are coping with 'Phase 2' as life goes back to normal in Italy. "Although the emergency is slowing down, we feel surrounded by darkness," he says. "It's like we are full of wounds. We carry everything we've seen inside us." It's a feeling echoed by Monica Mariotti, also an intensive care nurse. "Things are much harder now than during the crisis," she says. "We had an enemy to fight. Now that I have time to reflect, I feel so lost, aimless." During the crisis, they were overwhelmed and had no time to think. But as the strain of the pandemic fades, so does the adrenaline. All the stress accumulated in the past few weeks is coming to the surface. "I have insomnia and nightmares," Monica says. "I wake up 10 times each night with my heart racing and out of breath." Her colleague Elisa Pizzera says she felt strong during the emergency but is now exhausted. She does not have the energy to cook or take care of the house, and when she has a day off she spends most of her time sitting on the couch. Martina Benedetti is an intensive care nurse in Tuscany and still refuses to see family and friends as she fears she could infect them. "I even social distance from my husband," she says. "We sleep in separate rooms." Even the simple things have become overwhelming. "Every time I try to go for a walk, I feel anxious and I have to go back home immediately," Martina admits. Now that she's finally got time to reflect, she is full of self-doubt. "I'm not sure I want to be a nurse anymore," she tells me. "I've seen more people die in the past two months than in the whole six years." Some 70% of health workers dealing with Covid-19 in Italy's hardest-hit areas are suffering from burnout, a recent study shows. "This is actually the hardest moment for doctors and nurses," says Serena Barello, the author of the study. When we deal with a crisis, our body produces hormones that help us handle stress. "But when you finally have time to reflect on what happened, and society is moving on, it can all come crushing down and you feel more exhausted and emotionally distressed," says Dr Barello. She worries that a lot of doctors and nurses will have post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms long after the pandemic. This is when the impact of a traumatic experience affects a person's life, sometimes months or even years later. For health workers, this could impede their ability to keep working with the intensity and focus their jobs require. Around the world, frontline doctors and nurses are being hailed as heroes for risking their lives to treat patients. But in Italy, this love is ebbing away. "When they were scared of dying, suddenly we all became heroes but they've already forgotten us," says Monica. "We will go back to being seen as people who wipe asses, lazy and useless." In Turin, nurses recently chained themselves together and wore bin bags, a reference to how they had to improvise in wards because of a lack of PPE. They staged a protest to demand recognition for their work. "In March we were heroes, now we've already been forgotten," one nurse shouted through a megaphone. They were promised a bonus for their work but have not yet seen it.  At least 163 doctors and 40 nurses died from Covid-19 in Italy. Four of them took their own lives. And yet, many health workers now feel that it's almost as if this pandemic never happened. "I feel overwhelmed with anger," says Elisa Nanino, a doctor who dealt with Covid-19 in care homes. Since the lockdown has been lifted, she constantly sees people drinking and eating together with no face masks and no social distancing. "I want to go up to them and scream in their face, tell them they're putting everyone in danger," she says. "It's so disrespectful to me and all my colleagues." One thing all the health workers agreed on is that public support helped them get through the crisis. "I'm no hero but it made me feel important," Paolo says. Public recognition is the most powerful way we have to help health workers struggling with PTSD, according to Dr Barello's study. "All of us, we have a crucial role to play right now," she says. "We have to make sure we don't forget what doctors and nurses did for us." Soldiers can leave the battlefield and deal with their trauma back home. But for these doctors and nurses, the next 12-hour shift is always around the corner. They have to cope with all of this in the very place where they suffered so much. "I feel like a soldier that has just returned from war," says Paolo. "Obviously I didn't see weapons or dead bodies in the street but in many ways, I feel like I was in the trenches."

It's an uncanny and almost tragically perfect piece of symmetry. The number of US servicemen and women killed in Korea, Vietnam, Iraq and Afghanistan - over an aggregate 44 years of fighting - is almost exactly the same as the number of Americans who've now lost their lives to coronavirus in just three months of America's war against the hidden enemy, as Donald Trump likes to refer to Covid-19.  He also calls it the Chinese virus, but we'll come to that. Now I know you could replace the Covid-19 deaths with US cancer deaths or road crash victims and come up with similarly stark or perhaps even more dramatic statistics. But sadly, fatal car accidents and terminal tumours have always been with us. A global pandemic has not. And out of nowhere 100,000 American families are this spring mourning loved ones, whose lives have been cut short by this virus. 1.5m Americans have been infected. Many millions more have lost their jobs. One of Donald Trump's first acts when he moved into the Oval Office in 2017, was to restore to a central position the bust of Winston Churchill that Barack Obama had moved out in favour of a bronze of Martin Luther King Jr.  And in this fight against coronavirus, Donald Trump does see himself as a war leader; the property tycoon who could work a shovel on a Manhattan building site was also going to be shown to be a man of destiny -  the untried field-marshal, with a baton in his knapsack ready to command the troops to get the job done. But also keeping the home fires burning, and lifting the morale of a frightened nation. It has all been far more jagged than that.  Donald Trump is not imbued with the gift of soaring Churchillian rhetoric; there have been no "we shall fight them on the beaches" moments. Nor has he conjured the Rooseveltian calm when delivering one of his fireside chats. There have been days of infamy, but they have been invariably generated by things that the president has said, rather than what has been done to the United States.  And anyway, for a self-styled war leader he must at least face the charge of ignoring the warnings about the enemy he was confronting in the early stages, appearing more Neville Chamberlain than Winston Churchill. Korean War (1950-1953): 36,500 Vietnam War (1961-1975): 58,000 Iraq War (2003-2011): 4,500 Afghanistan (2001-today): 2,000 Covid-19 (Feb 2020- today): 100,000 The initial period of the US effort against the virus was marked by one significant action in late January, when the president stopped non-American visitors from China entering the United States. That was smart and decisive (although some have argued, to my mind unfairly, that Trump should have stopped anyone and everyone coming from China). But any tactical advantage that had given the administration was squandered in February where there was a month of inaction and incompetence.  Attempts to roll out testing were woeful (the president was badly let down by the Centers for Disease Control). Procurement of PPE was weak. The federal emergency stockpile of vital equipment was like Old Mother Hubbard's cupboard: bare. The president had also disbanded the entire global-health-security unit of the National Security Council. He also eliminated the US government's $30m (£23m) Complex Crises Fund. These were decisions that badly undermined the American ability to counter the disease.  All while he was on a determined mission to tell America that this thing from China was no biggie, and certainly was not going to upend the economy - the centrepiece of his strategy for re-election in November.  It is worth just going through the president's quotes from these critical few weeks.  Jan 22: "It's one person coming in from China and we have it under control. It's going to be just fine." Feb 2: "We pretty much shut it down coming in from China." Feb 10: "Looks like by April, you know, in theory, when it gets a little warmer, it miraculously goes away. I hope that's true. But we're doing great in our country. China, I spoke with President Xi, and they're working very, very hard. And I think it's going to all work out fine." Feb 11: "In our country, we only have, basically, 12 cases and most of those people are recovering and some cases fully recovered. So it's actually less." Feb 24: "The coronavirus is very much under control in the USA. We are in contact with everyone and all relevant countries. CDC and World Health have been working hard and very smart. Stock market starting to look very good to me!" Feb 26: "When you have 15 people, and the 15 within a couple of days is going to be down to close to zero, that's a pretty good job we've done." Crisis? What crisis?  But in March the contours became clearer, and it was not pretty. The news was all grim. Because of a lack of testing, there had been extensive community transmission - people were coming down with coronavirus, but it wasn't clear where they'd contracted it, who they'd caught it from, how they'd got it. The "track and trace" (the language of coronavirus that we've all now become so familiar with) was now impossible.  Although the first reported outbreak was out on the West Coast in Washington state, Covid-19 was playing a mean sleight of hand on us all. This pesky virus got us to look in one direction, when we really should have been focused on the other. Where Covid-19 was really letting rip was on the East Coast, especially in the biggest, richest and most densely populated city in the US, New York, with devastating consequences.  If the city was quickly to become the most worrying centre of the outbreak, the borough of Queens became the epicentre of the epicentre - the district where Donald Trump had grown up. And the visuals from there drove home to Americans - and to the president - the scale of the unfolding disaster. At Elmhurst Hospital, refrigerated container lorries were parked to store bodies that the morgue had no way of dealing with. I interviewed a young doctor from there at the height of the pandemic who painted a harrowing picture of daily life and death.  In the richest city of the wealthiest country on the planet, we saw nurses heading into intensive care units to treat Covid patients wearing bin liners as PPE, because that is all they had. We saw the ER consultant putting on his ski goggles to examine a patient, because the hospital didn't have the right face masks. We saw mass graves being dug on a small island in the Bronx to accommodate all those who'd died with no next of kin, or with no money for a funeral. Like the inscription on the tomb of the unknown soldiers in the Commonwealth war graves: "known unto God".  America, this all-mighty superpower, with enough weaponry to blow the planet to smithereens many times over, was looking ragged and not in control of events in its own backyard. It's hard to see this chapter of America's story going down as another moment of this nation's greatness. If Queens is where Donald Trump grew up, Manhattan is where he made his money - and nothing says money like Wall Street, the pulse and oxygen monitor of the US economy. And the president likes to stand over its bed to take its vitals hourly. But as it became clear that the US economy was going to have to shut down, so the Dow Jones index went diving downwards - vertiginous drops, causing circuit-breakers to kick in, and causing the president and his advisers to fret that his whole re-election strategy had gone up in flames.  But then the precipitous falls would be followed by dizzying rises as word came from Capitol Hill that lawmakers might be close to some agreement to inject gazillions into the cryogenically frozen economy.  More than 25,000 of the deaths have come from New York state, and Governor Andrew Cuomo became coronavirus's first political superstar. His daily factual and highly detailed presentation of what was happening, where it was happening, what was being done to mitigate, and what still needed to be done, became appointment-to-view television across the US. Cometh the hour and all that. This lifelong Democrat - who also grew up in Queens - was drawing admiring glances from a lot of Republicans, and with many Democrats quietly thinking: "I wish he was our candidate for president in November, and not Joe Biden." Like an old-fashioned newspaper, he delineated clearly what was fact and what was opinion. In the space of 45 highly polished minutes he would deliver the news stories of New York's descent into the abyss, and then give you his op-ed column. He admitted his response wasn't perfect, acknowledging he could have acted earlier. And he also gave praise to Donald Trump where he thought it was due; he tweaked the tail of the administration when he thought it needed a bit of a kicking. At around the same time as Cuomo was capturing the nation's attention, Donald Trump decided he would go daily with a White House briefing too. It is hard to overstate how much Donald Trump loves - and needs - the roar of the crowd. Governing is dull. Campaigning - and the adoration from his rallies - is what gives him energy. It's what gets his heart pumping and the blood circulating. And because of the lockdown, here was a president who was deprived of the two things he yearns for most - a day out playing golf, and an evening rally addressing raucous, loving crowds. There were also no heads of states visiting him, where the cameras would record his thoughts on whatever was the subject du jour. He was being starved of the oxygen of publicity, and so daily to the briefing room he would come, with us reporters playing the most unlikely role as his ventilator. Being intubated to a bunch of journalists he's never trusted was never going to end well.   Vice President Mike Pence had been given the task of heading the coronavirus taskforce. A poisoned chalice it may have been, but it's a task he's performed with aplomb. He is across the detail of everything, and was the perfect link person between the different branches of government and the White House; between the different branches of government and the governors of the 50 states. And two other things he did with considerable deftness. He never forgot to praise the president to the hilt, saluting him for his leadership. Woe betide you if you don't. And he never forgets to display empathy - talking about the suffering of the American people, expressing condolences to those who'd lost loved ones. That is something that came easily to Mr Pence and is something Donald Trump hardly ever does.  Though there would be a revolving cast of characters in the briefing room - the two other stalwarts were Dr Anthony Fauci, the independent-minded head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and Dr Deborah Birx, who used to head the fight against Aids for the Obama administration, and was made the coronavirus response co-ordinator. These were the scientists who wanted to ensure that the judgements the president made were evidence based. They had limited success.   No sooner had the US economy gone into shutdown than other, more business-minded voices were in Donald Trump's other ear telling him that the remedy his doctors were prescribing was worse than the disease. Let people go back to work. Reopen the economy. The loss of jobs, the recession, depression, the devastation of the US economy will be worse than the death toll. And you could see where the president's sympathies lay. First he advocated that the US should reopen by Easter, with churches packed. Only to have that kyboshed by doctors Birx and Fauci. When asked about this Dr Fauci gave an object lesson in disagreeing with the president without disagreeing: "You don't set the timeline, the virus does," he told reporters. Masterful. But the impetus to reopen became overwhelming. The jobless totals were soaring, and Donald Trump saw his "strong economy" election strategy disappearing down the plug-hole.  And all the while the death toll was mounting, ever, ever higher. What started as a trickle at the end of February became a gradual flow. The gradual flow then became a steady stream. And by late April the stream became a torrent.  Coronavirus was indiscriminating about who it infected, but selective with who it killed. The statistics were striking - if you were black or Latino you were much more likely to die. Longstanding health inequalities came to the fore. If you'd grown up in an impoverished background, you were more likely to have the pre-existing conditions - the co-morbidities, as they say in the US - that would prove so deadly with coronavirus: hypertension, diabetes, obesity, heart disease. And if you live in densely packed, multi-generational households, and work in factories or meat-packing plants where social distancing is impossible, then - surprise, surprise - you're more likely to contract the disease.  The US Surgeon General, Admiral Jerome Adams - himself African American - addressed this directly, and spoke powerfully about it. But he seemed to pay a price for doing so - he was not seen again at another White House news conference. Someone must have taken exception to what he said. The president's own erratic performances at these briefings were coming to be seen as counterproductive by Republican strategists. The president's poll numbers were going down. I was at a couple of the most extraordinary briefings. There was the one where the president made it all about himself. His staff had produced a lengthy campaign style video detailing how brilliantly he'd handled the outbreak - for the first 45 minutes of this over two-hour-long news conference, Donald Trump spoke about himself. He spoke about how unfair the media was to him. It was "poor me". Not once in those first 45 minutes did he talk about those who'd died, nor about those who'd been infected. Nor about the millions who were fretting about how they were going to pay the bills having lost their jobs. I was also at the briefing where the president spoke about injecting disinfectant to treat coronavirus. Dr Birx, who was sitting at the side of the briefing room, looked like she was in some kind of gastric agony as she listened to the president, but never felt she had the space to stand up and say: "This is dangerous nonsense." His performance was lampooned and ridiculed.  But as the criticism piled up against the president, so Donald Trump bristled.  And there were two culprits who'd be forced onto the perp walk of shame. The first was China. Despite his early praise for President Xi, China was now in Donald Trump's cross-hairs. China had lied and covered up. This was the Wuhan flu, the city where the outbreak originated. The Chinese had taken actions to protect themselves, but not anyone else. Worse still in Donald Trump's eyes, China had intimidated the World Health Organization, and its weak, pusillanimous leadership had allowed itself to be cowed by Beijing, and therefore had failed to warn the world sufficiently of the dangers that this new strain of virus presented. In this, sure, there was blame shifting - but President Trump had a point, both about shortcomings of the WHO, and the candour of the Chinese leadership.  All of this fired up the Trump base, but it was as nothing compared with the president shifting firmly in favour of reopening the US economy. Wild demonstrations sprang up - particularly in Democrat-run states, which the president did nothing to tamp down. In California, surfer dudes, backed by libertarian Republicans and small business owners, protested at beachside locations in a bizarre Baywatch meets the Tea Party moment. In Michigan, heavily armed men carrying assault rifles and dressed as though they were auditioning as extras for a movie about mercenaries laid siege to the State House.  A public health emergency, with a virus that is no respecter of whether you are a Democrat or Republican, Trump lover or Trump hater, had divided and bitterly polarised the country. Like everything else.  If you want the country to reopen you're with Trump (broadly); if you're wary about reopening too soon you're a Dem (broadly). If you love the fact that the president has ignored the advice of the Food and Drug Administration over the dangers of hydroxychloroquine, and decided to take it anyway, then you are firmly in his camp.  And although the president has publicly stated that everyone ought to wear a mask, the fact that he chooses not to is taken as a clear dog-whistle to his supporters that you really don't have to. In the face - so to speak - of all medical advice, the mask is being seen by some as an act of provocation, a symbol of the nanny state.  Shopkeepers who insist that customers wear a mask are being intimidated by thuggish gangs patrolling outside their premises. It is grotesque. They are being ripped up and destroyed as though a symbol of oppression by the "Deep State", rather than a small effort to halt the spread of the disease. Our film crews have been jostled and abused for wearing face masks while filming these protesters. Needless to say, these people are no respecters of social distancing.  And now that America has reached this grim milestone of 100,000 dead, what of the future?  In public opinion there does seem to be a battle going on between head versus heart. Science pitted against gut instinct. The role of the state against the rights of the individual.  If a phone app that can track and trace your movements is the vital tool to prevent a second wave of the virus, it relies on a sizeable majority of the population handing over their personal data for it to be effective. Will that happen? In a country whose founding fathers fretted about the dangers of the state becoming too mighty, I just cannot see it (and this goes far wider than pro- and anti-Trump). And what if, please God, an effective vaccine is found? You can be sure that the anti-vaxx brigade (and remember Donald Trump was once one of its advocates) will be out in force, stirring up doubts about the science, the medicine, the state, Big Brother, you name it.  Donald Trump has boasted repeatedly in the past couple of months that no country has done more coronavirus testing that then USA. "It's not even close," he says. No country has built more ventilators or supplied so much PPE to its front-line workers, he says. The president has claimed that other world leaders are jealous of what the US has managed to achieve. Really? Germany, South Korea, Taiwan, Australia, New Zealand, Greece: envious?  Hard to believe somehow.  No country has had more deaths, more infections. Anywhere else, so far, is not even close.

Attacks on East Asian people living in the US have shot up during the pandemic, revealing an uncomfortable truth about American identity. Though she was not born in the US, nothing about Tracy Wen Liu's life in the country felt "un-American". Ms Liu went to football games, watched Sex and the City and volunteered at food banks.  Before the Covid-19 pandemic, the 31-year-old didn't think anything of being East Asian and living in Austin, Texas. "Honestly, I didn't really think I stood out a lot," she says.  That has changed. With the outbreak of the pandemic that has killed around 100,000 people in the US, being Asian in America can make you a target - and many, including Ms Liu, have felt it. In her case, she says a Korean friend was pushed and yelled at by several people in a grocery store, and then asked to leave, simply because she was Asian and wore a mask. In states including New York, California, and Texas, East Asians have been spat on, punched or kicked - and in one case even stabbed. Whether they have been faced with outright violence, bullying or more insidious forms of social or political abuse, a spike in anti-Asian prejudice has left many Asians - which in the US refers to people of east or southeast Asian descent - wondering where they fit in American society. "When I first came here five years ago, my goal was to adapt to American culture as soon as possible," says Ms Liu. "Then the pandemic made me realise that because I am Asian, and because of how I look like or where I was born, I could never become one of them." After her friend's supermarket altercation, she decided to get her first gun.  "I hope the world never comes to a day when we have to use that," she says, adding: "That would be a very, very bad situation, something I don't even want to imagine." Authorities in New York City and Los Angeles say that hate incidents against people of Asian descent have increased, while a reporting centre run by advocacy groups and San Francisco State University says it received over 1,700 reports of coronavirus-related discrimination from at least 45 US states since it launched in March.  Police in at least 13 states, including Texas, Washington, New Jersey, Minnesota and New Mexico, have also responded to reported hate incidents.  Critics say those at the very top have made things worse - both President Donald Trump, and Democratic hopeful Joe Biden have been accused of fuelling anti-Asian sentiment to varying degrees with language they've used while talking about China's role in the outbreak.  And for many Asian Americans, it can feel as though, in addition to being targeted, their identity as Americans is being attacked. Large numbers of Asian Americans, and Asians in the US - have described a sharp change in their experiences following the outbreak. Kimberly Ha, 38, says she noticed the difference in February, after a stranger began shouting at her as she walked her dog in New York. "He yelled: 'I'm not scared of radioactive Chinese people' and started pointing at me, shouting 'you people shouldn't be here, get out of this country, I'm not scared of this virus that you people brought over,'" the Chinese Canadian, who has lived in New York for over 15 years, said. In the weeks that followed, she also noticed that "about one in 10" people she encountered in public appeared angry when they saw her. "I've never felt that level of hostility before," she says. On the opposite side of the US in California, Madison Pfrimmer, 23, had heard about anti-Asian attacks, but "didn't think it was as prevalent as everyone made it seem". Then, in April, she helped translate for an elderly Chinese couple in a supermarket in Los Angeles when they were confronted by an angry woman who swore at them at length, threw water at them and sprayed them. "She yelled 'how dare you come to this store where my family shops, how dare you come and ruin my country. You are why my family is not able to make money,'" Ms Pfrimmer, who is half-Chinese, recalls. Ms Pfrimmer says she tried to reason with the woman, who berated her for translating for the couple and hurled water from a bottle at her, soaking her legs and feet.   The woman walked by them again when they were waiting for the cashier, spraying them with something that appeared to be air freshener or disinfectant - and then followed the elderly couple to their car, where she took photos of them while shouting "it's your fault", and directing expletives at "China", "all those dirty people" and "communism". "I ran to the couple, told them in Mandarin to just get in their car, and loaded their groceries for them - I handed the man the eggs through his window," says Ms Pfrimmer. The woman followed her in her car - until Ms Pfrimmer purposefully drove near a police station. Asian rights groups and San Francisco State University teamed up to start the STOP AAPI HATE database, which records reports of Covid-19 discrimination directed at Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders in the US. They received examples from 45 states, with California and New York making up the bulk of cases. The incidents recorded fall on a broad spectrum. Verbal harassment is by far the most common, but shunning, physical assault, workplace discrimination, being barred from establishments, and vandalism also feature in the database - with women more likely to be targeted than men. Russell Jeung, a professor of Asian American studies at San Francisco State University who has been running the database, says he found so many incidents of people "being coughed or spat upon" that he added it as an additional category.  That's what happened to Ted Nghiem, a Vietnamese American in Philadelphia. He says in March, a man swore at him, yelling "get out of here, you caused coronavirus" - but it didn't particularly bother him. However, later that month a man spat at him as he walked past, which got him "really down for a day or two".  "I did inform the cops but I don't know if anything happened… luckily I didn't catch anything," says Mr Nghiem, 37. The STOP AAPI HATE database is based on online self-reporting. A separate BBC analysis of interviews and US media reports found coverage of more than 100 alleged incidents since January that appeared to target Asians.  About 70% of those incidents had a clear link to the pandemic, and about 40% of cases were reported to police. Some incidents reached the bar of hate crimes. New York City police say they have investigated 14 hate crimes related to Covid-19, involving 15 Asian victims. There have been at least nine physical attacks in the state. In California, an elderly man was attacked with an iron bar, and a teenager was taken to hospital after being physically assaulted.  In Texas, an Asian family, including a two-year-old and six-year-old, were stabbed in a supermarket. An FBI report obtained by ABC news said that "the suspect indicated that he stabbed the family because he thought the family was Chinese, and infecting people with the coronavirus". The family was Southeast Asian. Sources: Ipsos, STOP AAPI HATE, New York City Commission on Human Rights, New York City Police, Los Angeles County Commission on Human Rights, Seattle Police, Network Contagion Research Institute, BBC research Some Asians have also reported being refused service from hotel rooms, or Uber rides, as a result of their ethnicity.  Matt (not his real name), a Chinese American emergency room doctor in Connecticut, noticed that several patients asked to be admitted to hospital because they said an Asian person had coughed near them. He experienced what appeared to be anti-Asian bias more personally, when he tried to treat a patient thought to have Covid-19. "I had my protective equipment on, walked in and introduced myself. Once they heard my surname, they were like 'don't touch me, can I see someone else - can you just not come close to me'." Many other minorities face more "overt types of discrimination which are worse", Matt says - but he fears that incidents such as what he experienced would be demoralising for medical workers. "This is a pretty stressful time - we're working a lot more, wearing very uncomfortable equipment all the time, and a lot of us are getting exposed to Covid-19." The virus originated from Wuhan, China, and much of President Trump's rhetoric has focused on what he calls the country's failings to contain the outbreak. Earlier this year, he regularly referred to the coronavirus as the "Chinese virus" - a term that critics said did not distinguish between China, the Chinese government, and people of Chinese ethnicity. He later called for Asian Americans to be protected, saying "the spreading of the virus is not their fault in any way shape or form". But that hasn't stopped Chinese Americans from being blamed - or other East Asians from being targeted. Prof Jeung says about 40% of the reports he received were from ethnic Chinese people - but a majority of cases were from people of other East Asian ethnicities. "That's an example of racial profiling - that 'if he looks Chinese, he gets attacked'." Back in February - before cloth masks were recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention - Dahyung Oh, 23, remembers a woman staring at her in a hostile manner on a New York subway platform. "She started approaching me, pointing at me and saying 'Why aren't you wearing a mask, you should be wearing a mask'," the university student, from South Korea, says. The woman did not wear a mask herself, and Ms Oh felt "singled out, because there were literally 10-20 people around us who weren't wearing masks". "I felt really angry at the situation, as if I was singled out because I'm Asian, and a small sized woman that could be easier for someone to target." That incident didn't end in violence - but Ms Oh was lucky. In two separate incidents in New York in March, Asian women were physically attacked for not wearing masks. Many others have been harassed while wearing masks. Prof Jeung says face masks can be a lose-lose situation for Asians when it comes to discrimination, because "if they wear a mask, they are suspected of being infected - and if they don't wear a mask, they're suspected of being infected but negligent".  It's not just in the US either - there have been several high profile cases of physical attacks against East Asians in the UK and in Canada. Vancouver's police department has said that 20 anti-Asian hate crimes have been reported in 2020 so far. Meanwhile, in China, there has been discrimination of African residents - with reports of people being forced into quarantine, and a McDonald's barring African people from entering.  Many say they have been singled out for multiple Covid-19 tests, or been evicted, following online rumours that two Nigerians who had tested positive for the virus escaped.  "I think it is very consistent with past times of crisis, where typically one group is scapegoated," says Carmelyn P. Malalis, head of the New York City Commission on Human Rights. She cites the HIV/Aids crisis and Ebola as past examples.  In the US, there has been "underlying anti-Asian discrimination" even before the pandemic, but little awareness of it, because there are typically lower levels of reporting, and "people often think of racism as a black-white thing, not realising that racism exists in many forms," she adds.  Asians in the US come from a wide range of ethnicities, countries and backgrounds, and often have different political beliefs and identities.  Some 20 million US residents - or about 6% of the US population - are Asian, according to census data. The figure includes Asian Americans, as well as people from South and East Asia living, studying or working in the US.  Some Asian residents, such as Bhutanese Americans, are more likely to be immigrants born abroad, while others, such as Japanese Americans, are most likely to come from families that have been in the US for generations. About three million tourists from China alone visit the US each year.  But race-based prejudice against Asians in the US is indiscriminate, whether one identifies as Asian American, hopes to become American, or is simply visiting.  Asian Americans have described some common experiences - including that they've been seen as "perpetual foreigners" even before the pandemic. "Race, like many social categories, [is a] thing that says you're part of this category [that is] plainly visible for everybody to see," says Debbie Ma, a psychology professor at California State University, Northridge.  "Because of that," she adds, "it's very easy to quickly label and assign stereotypes and associations with those categories" - that an East Asian person is foreign, even if they are not, for example. A 2008 study she co-authored found that respondents - US university participants of various racial backgrounds and ages - were more likely to implicitly think of Kate Winslet, the English actress, as "American", than Lucy Liu, the New York-born star of Chinese heritage.  Matt says he is regularly told "you speak great English", and asked where he is actually from, even when he explains he was born in the US. Meanwhile, Prof Jeung says: "Even though my family's been in the US for five generations, I'm still seen as a foreigner." Dr Ma notes that these are "specific burdens" that Asian people in America experience differently from other minorities. For example, "nobody is surprised when a black American speaks English really well," though African Americans face other sets of prejudices, she says. This has made a person's Asian appearance - something "we wear so apparently", as Dr Ma puts it - a reason to target them amid the outbreak. Nor is it the first time race has been used as cover to marginalise or act against East Asians in the US.  Asian Americans were interned en masse in the US following attacks on Pearl Harbour in World War Two, and sweeping caricatures of East Asians were used as racist propaganda to exclude immigration from China and other eastern countries in the 19th Century. Today, some Asian Americans still describe feeling "on probation", and needing to prove their status as US citizens - a situation that has significantly worsened amid the outbreak. Andrew Yang, a former Democratic candidate for president, wrote in April in the Washington Post: "Some level of background disdain or alienation has grown into outright hostility and even aggression."  He called on Asian Americans to "show our American-ness in ways we never have before" by helping neighbours and wearing "red white and blue". However, he was also accused of victim-blaming for appearing to internalise the notion that Asian people, by virtue of their ethnicity, are not American enough.  Both the Trump and Biden campaigns have also come in for criticism. An advert for the Trump campaign described Mr Biden as soft on China, and showed a montage of video clips of him with Chinese officials.  The montage included a shot of Gary Locke - the Chinese American former Washington governor who served as the US ambassador to China - leading to accusations that the ad was implying Mr Locke was a foreign official.  The Biden campaign came under fire after an attack ad emphasised that "Trump let in 40,000 travellers from China into America" after announcing a travel ban - even though many of those would have been American citizens.  Both campaigns have denied any xenophobia or targeting Chinese Americans.  For some, the rise in anti-Asian sentiment has felt clear and dangerous. There is no comprehensive data on race and gun purchases in the US, but reports from gun shop owners suggest that many have seen more Asian buyers amid a general rise in sales. Chinese American Donghui Zang, 49, has started organising neighbourhood patrols in Queens, New York, where the group's more-than-200 members take turns driving around and reporting suspicious activities to the police. A dozen of members in the patrol group, including Mr Zang, have recently applied for firearms permits. Mr Zang, who describes himself as socially conservative, believes Chinese Americans should arm themselves "in case of social turmoil and skyrocketing crime".  The view is not shared by everyone. Max Leung, a co-founder of the San Francisco Peace Collective, says his group conducts patrols in Chinatown to help stop cases of vandalism and theft. "Although I do believe and am a huge advocate of self-defence, we do not promote our members bearing arms while on patrol," Mr Leung, 49, says. "The culture I want to create within our group is that of promoting peace, not perpetuating violence." Artists and comedians have also been inspired to speak out - including hip hop artist Jason Chu, who helped start the campaign Hate is a Virus, and wrote a rap about anti-Asian incidents. He says the rap aimed to show "the ridiculousness of people targeting Asian Americans", and also "emphasise the fact that Asian Americans belong here". "We're not guests in America - we were born here - this is where our parents raised us. We're saying that hate has no place in our country."  More generally, there are hopes that this new awareness of discrimination will lead to stronger Asian communities in the US - and more solidarity with other ethnic minorities. Matt recalls hearing negative comments about the African American community as he grew up - including from Asian Americans.  By contrast, "now I see a lot of Asian Americans standing up for Ahmaud Arbery", the black jogger shot dead in a Georgia suburb by two white men now charged with murder. Matt believes that Asian American communities have become more vocal in recent years about politics and representation.  "A lot of my friends have seen this anti-Chinese rhetoric going on, and become more interested in talking about the discrimination that other communities face" as a result.  Prof Jeung says he has seen examples of Asian Americans "recognising their common interests, and mobilising as a political group and community". Asians from different walks of life now "find themselves having a common experience" due to discrimination related to the pandemic. "We're all facing this process, of racial profiling, together. So hopefully, we'll come together to fight the racism, and develop empathy with other people who are racially profiled."  Additional reporting by the BBC's Xinyan Yu  . All pictures copyright

It's been two months since the US declared a national emergency over the coronavirus outbreak. The death toll from Covid-19 now stands at more than 83,000 - and tens of millions of Americans are out of work.   There has been a robust ongoing debate over whether the US was adequately prepared for a pandemic and if the proper steps were taken as the virus began to appear on American soil.  Ever since mid-March, however, most government officials have acknowledged that the magnitude of the crisis required a response of enormous scope.  The unprecedented lockdowns imposed in much of the country were designed to slow the spread of the virus, prevent the nation's healthcare system from being overwhelmed, buy time for further preparations and protect Americans particularly at-risk of serious health complications. This is how some of those efforts have succeeded - and failed. First, the good news. The patchwork of shutdowns and social-distancing across almost every US state has succeeded in stopping the exponential spread of the virus. In hard-hit states like New York, Michigan and Louisiana, the pandemic's growth curve has bent downward. What was once a runaway crisis in these hotspots has been controlled. Next, the concerning news. Outside of those three states, the rest of the US has continued to see an overall rise in the infection rates, albeit not nearly as sharply as before. Taken together, the chart of new cases in the US seems to have reached a plateau, but perhaps not a stable one. And now some bad news. According to the Washington Post, states that have begun a partial reopening have seen their number of cases increase the most compared to those that have kept them in place. And an unreleased Coronavirus task force report leaked to NBC News indicates that cities in the interior of the US, including Des Moines, Nashville and Amarillo, all recently have seen more than 70% week-over-week increases in cases. So while the efforts at restricting movement and business have been one of the success stories of the past six weeks, this success could be short-lived if it's not followed by a rigorous testing programme that includes extensive contact-tracing for those found to be infected. "I think we're going in the right direction, but the right direction does not mean we have by any means total control of this outbreak," Dr Anthony Fauci, head of the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and a White House Coronavirus Task Force member, said in Senate testimony on Tuesday. When asked to cite an administration accomplishment in its handling of the coronavirus pandemic, White House Press Secretary Kayleigh McEnany pointed to ventilators - the medical devices used to help patients breathe when they can no longer do so on their own. "The success story is that this administration mobilised the greatest efforts since WW2, that we provided something like 4,000 ventilators to New York," she said. "Not a single American died in this country for lack of a ventilator." The US government spent several billion dollars on contracts for new ventilators, and the president used a 70-year-old law, the Defense Production Act, to prod auto manufacturer General Motors to switch to ventilator production and streamline supply-chain issues for other manufacturers.  In the end, the ventilator crunch never materialised - because of increased supply, low-use states sharing their stockpiles, lower demand and a shifting view by healthcare professionals of the machine's benefits given the low survival rate of those who used them.  "I think they were able to share the ventilators from places that didn't need them to places that did need them quite effectively," says Gerard Anderson, a professor of health policy at Johns Hopkins University's Bloomberg School of Public Health. "There have been no place that I'm aware of that have had a severe ventilator shortage." In a 25 April tweet, Trump called the US "the king of ventilators" and has since offered to ship surplus machines to countries in Latin America, Europe and Africa, affirming that the ventilator supply is now a source of pride for the administration. On 18 March, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo issued a dire warning. Within 45 days, New York City would need 110,000 hospital beds to treat those suffering from the coronavirus, and it only had 53,000 available.  Donald Trump subsequently dispatched the hospital ship Comfort to New York to increase the city's capacity, and the state converted the Javitz Center - the site of Hillary Clinton's 2016 election-night party-turned-wake - into a 2,000-bed medical facility. In the end, New York hit a peak for hospitalisations on 12 April at 18,825 - well below the worst-case scenarios. The numbers have been in decline ever since. Across the US, the healthcare system has been strained in some states, such as New Jersey, Maryland and Massachusetts, but it has held up to the increased demand.  "In a clinical sense, it was a tremendous success," says Anderson. "They were able to handle all the patients that arrived. They might have had to wait, but all the patients that needed intensive care tended to get intensive care." The dire warnings of medical triage akin to what took place in northern Italy failed to come to pass - at least for now. Multiple vaccines for the coronavirus have already begun clinical trials on humans. According to the World Health Organization, there are more than 100 possible vaccines in various stages of development around the world.  Original predictions were that it could be more than a year and a half before one was proven effective and ready to use. Now the hoped-for date is sometime in the beginning of 2021. "From a vaccine development, we are doing incredibly well in that we've got a large number of entities trying to develop the vaccine," says Anderson. "The concern is, do we take that first one that is available, or wait for something that is probably better?" Until a vaccine is developed and widely distributed, the best-case scenario for governments contemplating how to respond to the pandemic will be to limit its spread and protect those most vulnerable. Life in the US - and across the world - will not be able to return fully to some semblance of normalcy until that day is reached. Fortunately, it seems, progress is being made. Meanwhile, the antiviral drug Remdesivir has been found to shorten the average hospital stays of coronavirus patients from 15 days to 11.  "Although a 31% improvement doesn't seem like a knockout 100%, it is a very important proof of concept," Anthony Fauci, head of the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said last week. "What it has proven is that a drug can block this virus." It's the first therapeutic drug to have documented evidence of effectiveness. For weeks, Trump - echoed by many prominent conservative commentators - touted the potential medical benefits of the anti-malarial drug chloroquine.  Some healthcare facilities and providers rushed to stock up on supplies, leading to widespread shortages. In one nursing home in Texas, patients were administered the drug without family consent, as county public-health officials raced to try to head off an outbreak in their jurisdiction. Further studies have since indicated that the drug is ineffective at best, however, and could lead to life-threatening complications for some who used it.  "You have to rely on the science," says Anderson. "Pushing things too quickly into the market sphere in an emergency situation can be very dangerous." During a press conference in April, the president speculated about the use of disinfectants or ultraviolet radiation to kill the coronavirus inside infected humans. The president was widely criticised - and mocked - for his off-the-cuff remarks, as some states reported an increase in calls to poison-hotline numbers. While scientists and public health officials have had a prominent role on the White House's coronavirus task force, the president has occasionally veered away from their guidance to offer his own armchair medical opinions. When those views have translated into government action, or led to life-threatening behaviour, they have made the implementation of science-based policy more difficult. When a nurse visiting the White House last week told the president that supplies of personal protective equipment (PPEs) like gloves, facemasks and gowns have been "sporadic but manageable", the president replied: "Sporadic for you, but not sporadic for a lot of other people". For months, however, there have been widespread reports of healthcare workers having to make do without the proper protective clothing or forced to reuse existing supplies. Many Americans outside the medical profession have resorted to fashioning make-shift masks from scarves and coffee filters, as protective items are even harder for them to find. The shortage in protective gear has been caused, in part, by virus-related disruptions in the supply chain from manufacturers in China, says Anderson. Administration efforts to ramp-up domestic production have had mixed results. A US national stockpile, not designed for such a widespread pandemic, was quickly depleted.  Trump initially told states it was primarily their responsibility to acquire the needed supplies, quipping that the federal government was "not a shipping clerk". That left many states bidding against each other on the open market for protective gear and, on occasion, facing federal government seizure of shipments they had ordered for themselves. "Project Airbridge", a recently ended administration programme to subsidise air shipment of protective supplies from overseas manufacturers, had little transparency. The government boasted that more than a million items were shipped, but a Washington Post investigation found little evidence of where the supplies ended up. While domestic production of protective gear has increased in recent weeks, there are still concerns that the distribution network is uneven and needed supplies aren't reaching front-line healthcare workers quickly enough.  On Monday afternoon, Trump stood in the Rose Garden in front of banners declaring "America leads the world on testing" and told the gathered reporters that "we have met the moment, and we have prevailed". He touted the $11bn the federal government would be giving to states to ramp up their testing programmes, and the 9 million coronavirus tests that have been given in the US so far, including a current rate of more than 300,000 a day. Although he boasted that the US now surpassed South Korea, long held up as an exemplar of coronavirus response, in per-capita testing, the cold reality is that the Koreans ramped up their testing in February and March. The US may have caught up, but by now the virus has claimed more than 80,000 victims and spread across the nation. "We treaded water during February and March," Republican Senator Mitt Romney said during a Senate coronavirus hearing on Tuesday. "I find our testing record nothing to celebrate whatsoever." The administration's case has been complicated by a pattern of overpromising on testing - only to come up short. On 10 March, Vice-President Mike Pence promised that the US would hit 4 million coronavirus tests a week. That number wasn't achieved until the end of April. (Pence says he was talking about tests distributed, not processed).  In mid-March, Trump touted a public-private partnership to offer drive-through testing at shopping centres across the nation. A month later, only a handful had opened. Even now, the US has only tested 2.74% of its population, which puts it well behind many industrialised nations. And even the current, higher rate of test is not near the mark of 900,000 a day that a Harvard University estimate indicates is necessary to reliably identify potential virus hotspots across the country before they become major outbreaks. Since the coronavirus outbreak hit America, the US Congress has appropriated more than $3tn to address the crisis. A large portion of that spending has been to soften the pandemic's blow to the economy, in the form of lost jobs and productivity from nationwide lockdowns and closures.  These measures include hundreds of billions of dollars in low-interest loans to businesses that can be forgiven if they don't lay off workers, direct cash payment to Americans and additional support for the unemployed. It turns out that authorising the expenditures - done by large majorities in Congress - was the easy part. Getting the cash to the right places, on the other hand, has proven more difficult.  The rollout of the small-business programme was riddled with delays and confusion from both the private banks authorised to make the loans and applicant businesses. There also were questions about why massive corporations, restaurant chains, wealthy universities and politically-connected businesses received funds - that is, before the money ran out and had to be replenished by another congressional appropriation. "A big problem with the relief response in the US is that it relies on many private sector intermediaries to deliver support to individuals, including in particular large corporations including large public corporations with access to financial markets," says Anat Admati, an economics professor at Stanford University Graduate School of Business.  "Meanwhile, the small business loans programs have created distortions in terms of who gets access to loans and under what terms, with insufficient accountability." The loan programme has operated smoothly compared to the state-run unemployment system, on the other hand. Some states have fallen behind in providing what should be weekly payouts to laid-off workers. In Florida, the online registration system became so overwhelmed, the state began only accepting paper forms - and the line of applicants in some places stretched for blocks. Francis Creighton, president of the Consumer Data Industry Association, cautions that given the massive amounts of money being spent to prop up the US economy, some difficulties were to be expected. "The point is to get the money out the door," he says. "I think that everything they've done has been really, really good. The underlying question is if anything is going to be enough given the unbelievable situation we find ourselves in." Democrats and Republicans in Congress have talked about a third round of economic stimulus, although both sides remain far apart on where to go from here. The coronavirus crisis has dragged on for months now, but the government responses - both good and bad - have a long way to go.

Amid political pressure to reopen America from the White House, the nation's capital city itself still isn't ready to do so - and Washington DC offers a diverse snapshot of how Americans are responding to the crisis. It's a gloriously sunny afternoon, and a rare opportunity to enjoy a live performance from a world-class musician. Residents of Washington's Capitol Hill district are still under orders to shelter at home. But they're taking a break from the pandemic, sitting on front steps and in socially distanced lawn chairs, listening to a neighbour in search of an audience after he had to cancel a tour. Just down the road at the Capitol building itself, lawmakers are gradually returning to work, to deal with matters less lyrical. "There can be no doubt that this will be one of the strangest sessions of the United States Senate in modern history," said Minority Leader Chuck Schumer when it opened at the beginning of the month. Members wearing masks sit in chambers that feel more empty than occupied. But while political pressure to open up the country is mounting in the capital, the city itself isn't ready yet for business. You just need to drive 10 minutes to see it's still on emergency footing. In DC's majority-black neighbourhoods like Anacostia, the virus has laid bare longstanding social and racial divides. I caught up with local councillor Trayon White, who's campaigning for re-election in Ward Eight, Washington's poorest. He's hard to miss - wearing a florescent yellow track suit and surrounded by a team of young men in blue and white camouflage outfits with matching blue surgical gloves. They're distributing bags with bleach and toilet paper while the councillor hands out masks with his name on them and takes selfies with constituents. But behind the smiles for the camera is a disturbing reality. The pandemic is killing black people at an alarming rate, including Mr White's own grandmother. Eighty percent of the city's Covid-19 deaths are African Americans, even though they're less than half its population. "We have some of the highest health disparities per capita in the country in this community," he says.  "From high blood pressure to diabetes, to asthma, you name it we have it. So we're fighting two monsters at the same time. You are talking about the people that are already at the bottom and have been pushed down even further." The city has increased testing in predominantly black and Latino neighbourhoods and recruited former First Lady Michelle Obama to record calls to spread the word.  And just this week the mayor, Muriel Bowser, opened a 437-bed field hospital in the convention centre. It's empty, but she called it an insurance policy. She said the number of confirmed cases was less than initially predicted, but still climbing. Her cautious approach to reopening, however, means she could be headed for a collision with the capitol region's largest employer, the federal government. Especially as its most famous resident, President Donald Trump, is pushing to get the nation back to work. "I hope that the President is right…that we will recover," Ms Bowser said recently. "All of us want to get open, we just want to do it in a safe way. The last thing we want is to be back here in the fall, having lost all of the gains of social distancing." Mr Trump is eager to return to normal, but just around the corner from the White House is the new normal: a venerable Washington institution is serving its own servers, handing out meals to its laid-off employees. The Ebbitt Grill is the oldest operating restaurant in DC, a favourite watering hole for politicians, now running a bare bones takeaway business. It can't go on like that for long but it's wary about reopening. David Moran, one of the Grill's senior directors, says areas of the country that "unfortunately" reopen quicker than recommended by guidelines set by the Centers for Disease Control could provide a "roadmap of what works and what doesn't work". "Just because the politicians or the government tell you that you can open doesn't mean you have to open that day," he says. "I think we're going to do what's right by our guests, right by our employees, and right by our integrity." Back on the streets of the Capitol Hill neighbourhood, musician Frederick Yonnet is still captivating the curbside crowd. He's a harmonica player who's performed with the likes of Prince, Stevie Wonder and Ed Sheeran. Now his stadium is his house, and his audience is his neighbours. "Thanks to this we are meeting more neighbours than I've ever met since I moved here," he says. "We've discovered that some guy over here is an astronaut, another one works for a news network. Music is a universal language and it needs to be spoken, especially in difficult times like this." It's a brief moment of harmony on the Hill, as this tug of war between the need to reopen and the desire to stay safe, plays out beyond them.

Primary schools in England are beginning to bring back more pupils but half of parents might not send in their children, surveys suggest.  There is a very mixed local picture in how schools are reopening, and in some areas schools will remain shut. Children in Reception, Years 1 and 6 are able to return, with many having been out of school for 10 weeks.  It comes as lockdown measures are eased in England, including groups of six people being allowed to meet outside. Schools have remained open throughout the coronavirus restrictions for the children of key workers and vulnerable children, but on Monday they are inviting back millions more primary pupils. Education Secretary Gavin Williamson said children "will be with their teachers and friends again". The day will look very different for those pupils who do return - with staggered drop-off times and children staying in small groups of no more than 15 pupils. It remains uncertain how many families will take up the offer to go back. A study from the National Foundation for Educational Research, based on 1,200 school leaders, suggests:  The reopening of schools will have many local variations - spread out over the next couple of weeks and with many schools making their own arrangements over which year groups return and for how many days a week. The most senior NHS doctor for children and young people's health, Professor Prathiba Chitsabesan, has warned parents to watch out for signs of children being anxious about returning to school after so much time away. In other developments in England: In Wales, people from two different households can meet each other outdoors. Groups of four to six people who are not in the same household can meet outdoors in Northern Ireland. And in Scotland members of two different households are already allowed to meet outdoors. Jane Reid, a parent from York, said it was still not safe for her son to go back, saying: "It's a definite no from me. "Plus, the contradictory information is infuriating. I can take him to school, but can't get his hair cut." "How can I send them to school now, knowing it will be impossible for teachers to implement social distancing rules properly?" asked Valerie Brooker from Haslemere in Surrey. But Melanie Freeman supported her children going back - reassured by her school's "very strict stance" on safety. In a post on the BBC News Family and Education Facebook page, she said she liked the fact pupils would only be going in two days a week and in groups of no more than 15. For some parents the decision has been taken out of their hands. Lancashire County Council is among those saying it is not yet safe to open schools. A mother in Lancashire, who wanted to remain anonymous, has described this as a relief as she did not want her child to go back, although her husband did. The Children's Commissioner for England Anne Longfield has written in The Daily Telegraph that some children - especially the "most deprived" - will need summer classes to help them catch up on work missed during lockdown. Ministers say opening schools will help with childcare for parents returning to work - and to help children catch up with missed lessons. From 15 June secondary pupils will start to return, in Years 10 and 12 - and there are plans for all primary years to go back for the last month of term. Parents have complained about the complications of juggling work and childcare, including those with jobs in schools. On the Workingmums.co.uk website Kerry from Middlesex says she works for two hours a day at lunchtimes in a school that is now reopening.  Grandparents would usually provide childcare for her two year old, but that is not possible with the lockdown, so she faces a return to work at school, but without any childcare. "I don't know where I stand," she says. Nurseries and early years' providers are also opening, and a survey of 4,500 parents with young children, carried out by the Early Years Alliance, indicated a divided picture on take-up. The biggest reason for parents not sending in their children was concern about safety. Chief executive Neil Leitch warned the row over the prime minister's adviser Dominic Cummings travelling during lockdown threatened to undermine parents' trust on safety measures. The concern was echoed by the Royal Society of Arts which published a survey of more than 2,000 adults in the UK showing 49% think the government is too caught up in the "Dominic Cummings affair" to be making the right decisions about schools. Mary Bousted, co-leader of the National Education Union, said it would be "deeply insulting and dangerous" if the return of schools was used as a "distraction". The teachers' union has continued to warn there is a lack of certainty about the safety of the return to school. Education Secretary Mr Williamson said: "Throughout this pandemic, our decisions have been based on the best scientific and medical advice.  "While there might be some nervousness, I want to reassure parents and teachers that the welfare of children and staff continues to be the heart of all of our considerations."

MPs return to Westminster on Tuesday and while some can't wait others say it is far too early and are angry about the end of working from home. The government insists they will be kept safe from coronavirus with new working practices and it is important that they get back to work to set an example to the rest of the country. Commons leader Jacob-Rees Mogg argues that the semi-virtual "hybrid" Commons - that saw some MPs in the chamber and others contributing via Zoom - was a poor substitute for the real thing. But Labour MP Vicky Foxcroft says the ending of the "hybrid" Parliament is forcing her to make a dangerous choice. The shadow minister for disabilities says she has to "ignore [the advice] and put myself in danger or I cannot participate in Parliament". "We have been disenfranchised, we cannot fulfil our roles. We should be leading by example and not exclude people with disabilities." The Lewisham and Deptford MP says she plans to raise the concerns of people shielding at home: "We need to be in there raising those issues. Who else is going to be?"  For other MPs, the return of Parliament brings with it the issue of travel and how to get to central London safely. "I am extremely angry about it," says Lib Dem MP Alistair Carmichael, speaking from his family home in Orkney - about 800 miles away from Westminster. "I think we can continue with the virtual Parliament until it is a safe for everyone to return. "The reasons for not doing that seems to have more to do with internal Tory party management than to do with government accountability." Mr Carmichael, who represents the seat of Orkney and Shetland, the most northerly parliamentary constituency in the UK, says it will take him about 18 hours to travel to Westminster. With transport options limited because of the coronavirus outbreak, he will travel by plane and two trains to London. "I am not going to do that every week, it is not feasible and it is currently not safe," he says. The MP says he has "resigned" himself to the fact that he will have to stay in London for several weeks in order to keep his family safe and not put his community at risk. He says there is no alternative but to travel to Parliament to ensure the scrutiny of the government. On the voting arrangements for Parliament, he says he has had no difficulty with remote voting, calling the proposed plan for a return to divisions, with MPs trooping through the "aye" and "no" lobbies, "ridiculous". "They are going to take twice as long as it does already," he says, with MPs having to keep socially distanced as they queue in the voting lobbies.  "I have some colleagues who will not attend who have underlying health conditions or who live with someone who does." "It is a daft idea," says SNP MP Angus MacNeil. He points out that in his local area (his constituency is Na h-Eileanan an Iar in the Outer Hebrides) there have been only six cases of coronavirus and no deaths.  It is "mad" to expect him to go London, "the Covid hotspot of Europe", he adds. "We're not out of the woods yet and they're ruling out the safety net of the virtual Parliament that is working just fine. "I can vote faster, here in my croft in the Hebrides, than I can in Westminster."  Despite living in his constituency almost 400 miles away from Westminster, DUP MP Jim Shannon is chomping at the bit to get back to House of Commons. "I can't wait to get back to Parliament, I've got my flights booked, " he says, adding: "I'm missing the cut and thrust of the chamber." He argues that the virtual arrangements are no substitute for being there in person. "You don't have any scrutiny," he says adding "whenever you are in the virtual parliament you are given a time slot, a guy in Westminster makes sure you are on and the picture is correct, he unmutes you for the question, then he mutes you." "You can't intervene on a minister, the government needs to be challenged." One thing that does worry him is the state of his Westminster office, with no one cleaning it for the past few weeks.  "It might look like one of those homes on that Channel 5 show where they need to bring in professionals," he says.  Conservative MP Theresa Villiers agrees MPs need to return to Parliament - not only to improve scrutiny - but also for what goes on outside the chamber. "The conversations you have in the corridor can be as important as the questions you ask in the chamber," she says . "It'll be good to see those kind of networks operating again." Labour MP Preet Gill wants to return to Parliament but worries about her colleagues who are in vulnerable groups and can't travel to Westminster. "If some can return and others can't there could be a backlash from constituents who'll want to know why their MP isn't in Parliament." She also has concerns of her own. Her husband is a keyworker and her children are not in the year groups going back to school.  "Childcare is a big issue for us," she says. And she is worried about statistics showing people from ethnic minorities are more likely to die from the virus than white people. "We still don't know why that is, which means we still don't know what to do to protect ourselves." Labour's shadow business and consumers minister Lucy Powell also raises the point that lots of her colleagues will have childcare issues and care issues and says the return without a virtual aspect disenfranchises "a lot of people". The mum-of-three - who will have to travel from Manchester - also believes the issue is not the workplace aspect, it is how MPs get there and where they can stay. The model for restarting Parliament has been "designed by one or two people in Parliament who live round the corner and have nannies", the MP for Manchester Central says.  But Conservative MP Henry Smith says while he understands the concerns of other MPs on the return of Parliament, he believes it is important that with schools and some businesses returning that "Parliament sets an example" - as long as social distancing is observed. "The hybrid Parliament was necessary during the worse of the lockdown restrictions," the MP for Crawley says. "But it severely curtailed my ability to hold government to account." He says debates have taken longer with virtual proceedings, with some MPs scheduled to speak not getting the opportunity to and there have been security concerns over remote voting. Conservative MP Sir Graham Brady says he is "perfectly happy" with how the Commons has adapted to social distancing, although he believes remote voting could have been kept with the return of physical voting in the lobbies. He says "scrutiny of government has been less effective" during the virtual Parliament. "It makes perfect sense to move back towards proper physical sittings," the MP for Altrincham and Sale West says. Speaking to Today in Parliament, Leader of the House of Commons Jacob Rees-Mogg said that the Commons, when not meeting in a physical format, "does not provide proper scrutiny, nor does it make legislative progress". He insisted it would be voting could be done safely in a social distancing way and most parliamentary staff would still be working from home - meaning the corridors of Westminster would be relatively sparsely populated. He also said those MPs in vulnerable groups who have to stay at home would still be able to participate through virtual select committees and written questions.

Coronavirus safety worries have led to calls for the Welsh Government to delay its ban on single-use plastics. Straws and cutlery are among items set to be outlawed or subject to restrictions from 2021.  The Foodservice Packaging Association (FPA) has twice written to First Minister Mark Drakeford, asking to delay the ban and "learn the lessons" of the pandemic.  The Welsh Government says it remains committed to the ban. As lockdown is gradually lifted, the FPA claimed the demand for hygienic single-use products should override concerns like environmental impact. The organisation is calling on the Welsh Government to push the ban on to 2022.  It wants more consultation so expert food safety and hygiene evidence can be presented. Executive director Martin Kersh said people had to learn from the pandemic.  "The world has moved away from plastic plates, cutlery and straws in line with EU legislation," he said.  "During the pandemic the demand from the NHS, care homes and other institutions has been incredible. "I'm not a scientist so I can't say how the virus travels, but psychologically, those who make those purchase decisions believe this is the best solution, so that when you are feeding patients and residents you are not inadvertently spreading the virus."  He said society compromised on hygiene "at our peril." The Welsh Government said it remained "committed" to banning or restricting the sale of "a range" of single use plastics.  A spokesman said: "We intend to issue a consultation on these proposals later this year. "The outcome of this consultation will inform future regulations to impose the bans". 

PPE stocks for nurses and doctors are "stable but fragile", according to the Welsh Government. There is "enough for the next three months", the deputy minister in charge of PPE supplies said, but warned against taking "our eye off the ball". With about 90% of Wales' PPE supplies coming from abroad, Lee Waters MS hopes to encourage more domestic production. The Royal College of Nursing (RCN) said there was "still some work to be done" ahead of a potential second wave. "I think the biggest thing out of this is the learning what we need to do so that next time, when there is a peak, we can switch it on very, very quickly," said Nicky Hughes, associate director of nursing at RCN Wales. She said there were still "some sporadic issues" with getting the right PPE to nurses, but with the number of cases falling "we're not hearing the concerns around PPE that we were". At the height of the first wave of coronavirus cases, RCN Wales said nursing staff were "dealing with horrifying shortages of equipment". Ms Hughes said the lack of a "centralised process" had meant supplies were not reaching staff. Deputy Economy Minister Mr Waters acknowledged there had been some issues, but said a "streamlined, efficient distribution system" was now in place. "It's a very complex situation and, of course, in a crisis there is panic, there is confusion," he added. "So, when you think about it, we have a central store and we have to get supplies out to every doctors' surgery, every care home, every hospital in Wales - and doing that seamlessly has been difficult." Despite some "hairy moments" when there were "just days worth" of supplies left, Mr Waters said that "at no point have we run out". Around 13 million pieces of PPE were being used every week at the start of the pandemic. This had dropped to eight million pieces last week. Since the start of March, more than 126 million pieces of PPE have been used in Wales, according to the Welsh Government. A traffic light-coded dashboard system listing supplies of 19 different items of PPE had been "running red or amber down the board" a couple of months ago, he explained, but "now they're all running green". Asked whether the government is confident it has enough stock and robust enough supply chains if there is a second wave of cases, Mr Waters was cautiously optimistic. "The system is stable but it is fragile and that's one of the reasons why we're keeping our 'stay at home' messaging in place, and the regulations, because we cannot afford to take our eye off the ball here," he said. Following a call from the first minister in April to create a "made-in-Wales supply chain for PPE", there are now 50 suppliers across the country. Transcend Packaging repurposed its operation to produce disposable face shields. Chief executive Lorenzo Angelucci said the Caerphilly-based firm was ready to produce PPE long-term. In Ebbw Vale, the Elite Clothing Solutions social enterprise is producing scrubs for the Welsh NHS. Wales is now "self-sufficient" in terms of producing scrubs, the Welsh Government claimed. Chief executive Andrea Wayman said Elite, which was set up to help disabled and disadvantaged people, has brought all production staff back to work after being forced to stop production due to a lack of fabric. "We hope that manufacturing will stay in Wales and not simply be based on imports as we previously experienced," she said. "We will need this to rejuvenate jobs in our economy."

The "test, trace, protect" system is launching in Wales on Monday. It will see the close contacts of people who have tested positive for coronavirus asked to self-isolate for 14 days. Similar systems are under way in England, Scotland and Northern Ireland. It comes on what Health Minister Vaughan Gething called a "big day" with a "significant easing" of the lockdown, so people could see others from another household. He said he was "proud to be taking choices that are in accordance with our scientific advice." Under the new rules, people in Wales from two different households will be able to meet outdoors. But they will need to stay in their local area - within five miles as a "general rule" - and remain two metres apart. But Mr Gething added that ultimately, it was for ministers to decide and take responsibility. "I hope the people of Wales understand this really is about how we keep Wales safe," he told BBC Wales. About 600 staff have been recruited so far for the "test, trace, protect" system, as it has been called in Wales. Up to 1,000 people will be needed as it is expanded.  Anyone with symptoms of the virus can apply for a home test kit or make an appointment at a drive-through test centre. An online portal was also made available at the weekend for anyone who has symptoms in Wales to book an appointment. Capacity has increased in recent weeks, with labs able to test 9,000 samples a day. NHS Wales chief executive Dr Andrew Goodall, when asked last week if 600 staff would be enough on Monday, said: "We'll need to get up to a number of 1,000, but we don't need that from the first day." "That's a progressive number that we need to put in place, but we have 600 available and in place," he added. Existing staff with public health experience have been deployed, as more are recruited. "We'll expect that number to keep increasing and certainly in line with the demand we expect," he said. Mr Gething said it was key to be able to contract trace to keep people safe and for the Welsh Government to be able to look ahead to further easing of lockdown restrictions. "By the next review period we'll have more evidence about what we're able to do, and that will give us more confidence about considering further adjustments," he told BBC Wales. "We've had really clear advice from our scientists, that they want that test, trace, protect system to be in place, and to be robust, before further significant adjustments from lockdown are taken. That's the approach we're taking." Some local health boards and local authorities have been trialling the new system in recent weeks. It is anticipated that as many as 20,000 tests a day might be needed in Wales, as part of the UK-wide testing programme. A greater demand on the system is expected in the autumn and winter, when more people are likely to present with possible symptoms. Dr Goodall added the testing approach was part of a "set of measures that we need to put in place."  He said: "It's really important to make sure that we still have the ongoing efforts on the ground - the need for example to make sure that we have good infection control both in our hospitals and our care homes, and those mechanisms continue." 

For many of us, our homes have become our workplaces over the past few months, and a full return to the office still appears a remote prospect. Major tech companies say they are open to their staff working from home permanently. Employees are coming to realise remote working is not only possible but, in some cases, preferable. A shift to a new way of working might already be under way. Such a shift could have profound implications on our home life, and by extension on the life of our towns and cities: almost a quarter of all office space in England and Wales is in central London alone. To understand those implications, we brought together four experts on city life, all of whom were working from home. Paul Cheshire, professor of economic geography, London School of Economics: I do think we'll go back to offices but not in the same way. People are more productive when they are closer together with face-to-face contact. There's 20 years of really good persuasive research demonstrating how important that is. There are lots of things you cannot do except with other people - people are innately social animals. Les Back, professor of sociology, Goldsmiths: I do think we are at a tipping point. There's a reorientation, a recalibration of the relationship between place and time and social life that we're on the cusp of. We may see profound changes. Some things may not come back. Aude Bicquelet-Lock, deputy head of policy and research, Royal Town Planning Institute: It's true some companies have said that they could allow their workforce to work from home forever. Twitter said it. Facebook said it. The CEO of Barclays said that putting 7,000 people in the office might be a thing of the past. The experience of going to the office in Aberystwyth isn't the same as going to the office in London. The decline of office space will affect small, medium and large cities in different ways. Les Back: The hollowing-out of city life has been coming for a long time. It may be that what will happen is that some businesses won't come back to the centre of the city and think it's too risky - or there may be other economic drivers where people will just take the opportunity to ask: "Why are we investing so much of our capital in these large office spaces?" I think there are possibly huge effects [of more working from home]. There's the pressure on the domestic sphere. There's the pressure on gendered relationships at home, on the blurring and overlaying of parenting and work and the pressures that would cause. Aude Bicquelet-Lock: I think what we will see is that local centres may see more diversification - more dining, more social activities as people may want to meet each other. Also working from home may mean getting access to workplaces in local towns for some days. Growth is to be expected in these areas. The contrary could apply to bigger cities, which of course raises the question of how the office space could be reused: there are several options, like turning offices into residential spaces, which hasn't always been done with absolute success. I also wonder whether we will need conference halls and other meeting spaces as we did in the past. Paul Cheshire: You will get more people working from home, which will mean there will be more demand for large houses. You have to have a workspace, which will push you out. You may need to move to commute maybe once a week, twice a week to your headquarters, wherever that is, for meetings. Therefore you'll accept a longer commute for cheaper space. You'll tend to move further away from the city centre. On the other hand, there will be people who have to stay in the offices, stay in the concentration, the social interaction, who will become even more strongly attracted to the city centre. But you will probably also get localised desk-sharing, specialised areas where people can go if you're a homeworker, where you can occasionally get better IT or better facilities or get away from your children. There will be an opening-up in smaller towns of hot-desking spaces. We will need more space. What you would be doing is opening land close to stations with good access to city centres. You could build a million houses on green belt land within 45 minutes of central London because there's so much green belt land. The fastest-growing places for people commuting to London are incredibly far away - Peterborough, York, Somerset. People are living miles out in order to get affordable land and more space. That will be accelerated. And it will be particularly accelerated unless we are willing to lease land close to transport nodes that will give access to jobs. Margaret Bell, professor of transport and the environment, University of Newcastle: Our research has shown that in a study of commuting to Newcastle the 7% of trips over 50km were responsible for 60% of the carbon emissions. The further you travel, the more detrimental effect with emissions. Paul Cheshire: That's one of the ironies of the green belt: forcing people to commute further. Margaret Bell: My worry is people buying more cars and those who have cars will use them more. What we do need is incentives to use bicycles more and to get people to shift towards living closer to their work or workplaces, or arranging for people to go to work more locally. We need a bottom-up approach to understand people's needs and try and tailor the transport accordingly. Paul Cheshire: Housing, particularly in England, is very energy inefficient. There's quite a big carbon footprint with more time spent in the home because home heating and home insulation is far, far worse than modern commercial premises are. Margaret Bell: Some work we did in Leicester showed that if you work from home, on average you use 75% more energy than you save by not going into work. And that corresponds to a 75% increase in carbon dioxide - purely and simply because if you need heating and gas, electricity at home, that's more than what you save by not going into work by car. And so, coupled with the isolation effect, it's sensible for local businesses to open up their hot-desking offices, or even have reciprocal arrangements with companies where consultants working more out of town could reciprocate hot-desking in offices. Les Back: We are predominantly talking about people who work in finance service sectors, white-collar jobs and white-collar workers. That isn't the workforce of cities. What about hospital, school and other public sector jobs? Also, cities are important because they're places of encounter. Places of difference. That difference and the negotiations that happen across racial and cultural difference take on particular qualities in the centre of cities that are not the same in the outskirts and in the suburbs. Aude Bicquelet-Lock: Everyone will have gone through the lockdown and will have gone through the changes and had new habits and will have strong views about what it is they want, what works for them and what doesn't. And I think one of the first things we will have to do as urban planners and policymakers is listen to what they want. But there will be financial constraints. Paul Cheshire: The other issue is people's fear: how long will it take people to recover from the experience of being worried about being in crowds, being vulnerable. I think people will recover from that if there is a vaccine, if the virus subsides. If that happens, offices will reassert themselves and all those things we liked doing in city centres will also reassert themselves. That may take quite a long time. Office life for many has changed significantly. Some will choose to continue working from home, while for others shielding, they have no choice in the matter. But when space is at a premium and bedrooms have been turned into work spaces, we want to know what life hacks you've come up with to make the most of tiny areas you are now living and working in.  Share your experiences and pictures by emailing haveyoursay@bbc.co.uk. Please include a contact number if you are willing to speak to a BBC journalist. You can also contact us in the following ways:

Early in the Covid-19 outbreak, the Shetland Islands were one of the worst-hit areas of the UK by head of population. Now, no new cases have been detected there for six weeks. Some experts say it offers the rest of the country a route map out of lockdown - but for the first family on the islands to test positive, it hasn't been easy. It was a clear, bright Tuesday in early March when the plane began its descent. The Shetland archipelago stretched out ahead of the tiny twin-propeller aircraft. Iain Malcolmson looked through his passenger-seat window at the sprawl of islands, aware of how far north he'd just travelled.   Iain, 53, an architect, was on his way home. He and his wife, Suzanne, had spent a long weekend in the Italian city of Naples with four friends. They'd hesitated before setting off on 28 February - news bulletins were full of alarming footage of the Covid-19 cluster in Lombardy, 500 miles to the north of where they were staying. But official travel advice at that point was clear - it was safe to visit the south of the country - so they'd gone as planned. All the same, Iain recalled spending the trip fastidiously wiping down restaurant tables and washing his hands. Now, after an overnight stop in Edinburgh, Iain would soon be back at the house in the tiny settlement of Nesting, about 12 miles north of the islands' capital, Lerwick. Locals call this leg of the journey the "white-knuckle express"; in strong winds, the plane has to take off and land at Sumburgh Airport sideways, like a crab. Normally, Iain preferred the 14-hour overnight ferry from Aberdeen. But on this occasion everything seemed calm. During the first week of March 2020, the novel coronavirus pandemic that had raged out of Wuhan still seemed far away. Here in the tiny aeroplane, Scotland's mainland was 110 miles to the south, Norway was 190 miles to the east. It was still possible to conceive that Shetland might be spared.  "You have to understand what Shetland is like," says Iain. "We're pretty isolated, and I think most people thought it would be something that would happen to other people. It wouldn't have come to Shetland."  Then, two days after he landed, on the evening of Thursday 5 March, Iain noticed he had a headache.  From Sumburgh Head in the south to Out Stack, the northernmost point in the British Isles, Shetland has 567 sq miles of land and 1,679 miles of coastline. Of its 100-odd islands, 16 are inhabited, and about half the 23,000 population, like Iain and his family, live close to Lerwick. In the summer, days are up to 19 hours long; in the winter, if you're lucky, you can see the Northern Lights. The islands were pledged to Scotland by Norway in 1468, and the Norn language - a form of Old Norse spoken on the islands - died out in the mid-19th Century. The Scandinavian influence is still strong, from the Nordic-derived placenames - Burravoe, Grutness, Mavis Grind - to the brightly coloured timber-clad houses dotted across the landscape, and the annual Up Helly Aa fire festivals, which conclude with the torching of a Viking galley.  But despite this Shetlanders don't want the rest of Scotland to forget about them. A 2018 law introduced by the islands' Member of the Scottish Parliament banned public bodies from producing maps that depict Shetland, for reasons of cartographical convenience, in a box in the Moray Firth or east of Orkney rather than its true geographical location. Iain was raised as a Shetlander. He left to study architecture in Edinburgh, where he met Suzanne, but two decades later, after starting a family, they decided to open a practice back on Shetland. It had been their dream for a long time.  "It's just the freedom that you have," he says. "You've got family, friends and that sort of thing. It's a very friendly, positive sort of place." He's a well-known figure in Shetland - he sits on the local community council, is a keen Up Helly Aa participant and has played guitar in local bands. The property he and Suzanne designed for their family to the dimensions of a Norse longhouse was featured on the BBC's Scotland's Home of the Year programme. Shetland might be remote, but it is no backwater.  Thanks in part to the discovery of North Sea oil in the late 20th Century, its per capita GDP is among the highest of all Scotland's local authority areas. In the 1970s, the local council drove an extraordinarily hard bargain with the energy companies who wanted to operate the terminal at Sullum Voe. Compensation payments were invested in a charitable trust that ensures the islands have exceptionally good public services. "The facilities up here are second to none," says Iain. "Every little community has its own leisure centre or pool." When he woke on the morning of Friday 6 March, Iain still didn't feel well. For the past two days he'd gone in to work, but now he clearly wasn't up to it. One of the friends he'd travelled to Naples with, a Glasgow resident, wasn't feeling great either and had been advised by the NHS to get tested; so Iain and Suzanne arranged to be tested too.  Nurses arrived at the couple's house. They stripped off on the porch and, before stepping inside, changed into full PPE - visors, protective suits - before taking swabs from the Malcomsons' noses and the backs of their throats.  "It was like something off the telly," Iain says. The whole scenario was unnerving, but the staff were reassuring. "They were saying: 'You'll be fine, the chances of you having it where you've been are almost zero. So don't worry about it.'" He says he and Suzanne stayed indoors that weekend anyway. There was a delay while the samples were tested - Iain was told they had to be flown down to Aberdeen and then taken to Glasgow. On Sunday evening the results came through: Shetland had its first confirmed cases of Covid-19. "Everybody was gobsmacked," says Iain. "And it all kicked off from there." At least one person on Shetland wasn't surprised by the arrival of the virus. His name is Michael Dickson. Not long before, as NHS Shetland's chief executive, he'd been summoned to the mainland for a presentation on the likely impact of the pandemic. "I can honestly say when I came out of the government briefing, it was without a doubt the worst day of my entire career," he says. "To go back to Shetland and have to share that with the people of Shetland was incredibly difficult." He also knew that Shetland's geographical isolation would make treating the virus there especially challenging. "Lovely as it is," he says, Lerwick's Gilbert Bain Hospital "was never built for this." There is no intensive care unit anywhere on the islands. At that stage, any patients who became critically unwell would need to be flown to Aberdeen or elsewhere on the mainland in an enormous RAF Atlas military transport aircraft. But Shetland would have advantages, too. Standing at his front door, "I can cast my eye out and see no-one", he says. "There's houses but I'm not going to see anyone walking down the street. If I go for a five-mile run I might run into three or four people. It's just a completely different place to socially distance." Also, an outbreak of measles on the Aberdeen ferry meant NHS Shetland had very recent experience of carrying out contact tracing. "That was hugely useful," he says. "The fact is, knowing the geography of Shetland, the different communities, makes a huge difference."  This was crucial, Dickson says, after the first positive test results came in. "When that call went out from the Public Health teams to say we need to do this now, there wasn't a debate. People came in on their Sundays and said 'Right, let's start, let's get on with this.'" The nurses in visors and PPE suits who came to test the Malcolmsons took the names of everyone they had come in contact with and tested them too.  According to Dr Susan Laidlaw, NHS Shetland's public health consultant, staff from other NHS departments were drafted in to phone contacts. "We had a week of very long hours and intense work following up the contacts, identifying new cases and getting them tested and isolated," she says. "Although difficult at the time, this did help to contain the initial outbreak."  "Everybody at our work got it," Iain says. "And everyone from our work's family ended up getting it." Some had diarrhoea, others lost all sense of smell and taste. Others fared worse - Iain says the father of one of his employees had to be airlifted to Aberdeen. He would later make a full recovery. While the contact tracers scrambled to identify how far the virus had spread, Iain's condition was getting worse. Suzanne's symptoms were cold-like, but his were more like the flu - a high temperature, shivering. There was talk of flying Iain, too, to Aberdeen. The prospect terrified him. "I really didn't want to go off the island," he says. After a few days, Iain's symptoms began to improve. But the knowledge he might have given the virus to others in less robust health weighed heavily on him. He was terrified he'd given it to his parents, both in their 80s. "That stress was there, knowing that you could have given it to people who weren't going to be as lucky as you."  And while he'd been feeling unwell, Iain hadn't felt much like looking at social media. He hadn't yet seen the rumours about him. The virus spread quickly on Shetland. On 12 March, four days after Iain and Suzanne's test results came back, the number of confirmed cases announced in the local press rose from two to six; five days later, they stood at 15; by 19 March, they had risen again to 24.  These were not enormous numbers, but they were enough to ensure that Shetland had the highest number of Covid-19 patients in Scotland relative to its population, and one of the highest in the UK. "I think we were top of the graph possibly in the world at one point," says Dickson. As Dickson sees it, this early spike was, in part, testament to the efficiency of the contact tracing teams. A dedicated Covid ward had already been set aside at the hospital. But compared to Orkney and the Western Isles, which had largely been unaffected at that point, Shetland stood out - and Shetlanders were understandably anxious. Dickson believes this was a crucial factor in containing the outbreak; it meant islanders were already taking social distancing seriously before controls on movements were enforced.  "It's a difficult thing to say, but I think having those cases early on enabled us to move possibly more quickly than had we not had cases until later on in the pandemic," he says.  "My family live down in Brighton and if you went down to the beach there a week before the lockdown occurred you wouldn't have known anything was different. In Shetland, things have been different pretty much from day one." As early as 11 and 12 March, two Up Helly Aa fire festivals - hugely important events in Shetland's social calendar - were called off, in response to appeals from the health board. The following day, while the Cheltenham Gold Cup was going ahead as planned 700 miles away, it was announced that nearly all Shetland's schools would close from 16 March - a week before the rest of the country.  Cafes, bars, restaurants and leisure centres were already shutting down across the islands long before the Scottish and Westminster government imposed their lockdowns, says Maggie Sandison, chief executive of the Shetland Islands Council.  "I think there's a really strong sense of community in Shetland," says Sandison. Naturally, islanders were anxious to do the right thing by their neighbours. But also, because such a high proportion of the population knew each other, "people were aware that they may have come into contact with somebody who then became a positive case" - and this in turn meant they knew to self-isolate. Sandison says the early decision to close schools was taken in part because some teachers had been part of the contact tracing teams and were advised to stay home after coming into face-to-face contact with people who had tested positive. On a sparsely populated group of islands, this was enough to put a strain on staffing levels. At the same time, "there was quite heightened anxiety from parents" some of whom were keeping their children at home already.  Ferry operators also began preventing tourists and non-residents from travelling to the islands before nationwide restrictions were brought in. "Because the transport links with the mainland were reduced early on, and the transport operators are only taking people who have essential reasons for travel, this has to some extent isolated the islands," says Laidlaw.  A weekly Covid-19 Facebook livestream hosted by Dickson would attract as many as 600 viewers at a time. And Shetland's community spirit wasn't just about locking down and staying vigilant. When laundry staff at the hospital found they had a shortage of scrubs, a sewing pattern was posted on Facebook along with an appeal to turn any unwanted bedsheets into medical clothing. "We had bags and bags of finished scrubs within days," says a personal assistant working for NHS Shetland, 38-year-old Lisa Grey, who oversaw the Shetland Scrubs project.  As well as bringing extra colour to the wards, superhero patterns on erstwhile children's duvet covers proved especially popular with medical staff.  "You can see it when you're flicking through Facebook - folk saying, 'If anyone needs shopping, I'm off tomorrow.' If anyone needs help, there will always be someone that'll help," Grey says. With the rest of Scotland and the UK soon following Shetland's example in locking down, and many other Covid-19 clusters emerging around the UK, the islands felt less like an outlier. But as March turned to April the archipelago's cases kept rising, and before long it would report its first death. Word had spread quickly around the islands that the Malcolmsons had been the first to test positive; Iain had never expected otherwise. "One thing about Shetland is you have absolutely no anonymity," he says. "People know you're the person that's brought it in."  To Iain, it was understandable, in a perverse way, when rumours about his family began to circulate on social media. Their names hadn't been officially released, and "in the absence of fact, people just make stuff up", he says. "That's never going to change. There's always a few idiots out there." As he hadn't been looking at Facebook, it was news to him when friends got in touch to say the family was "getting a serious amount of flak". According to the gossip, on the weekend he and his wife had been tested, "we were everywhere - we were out on pub crawls, we were out at concerts," says Iain. "That weekend we did everything in Shetland that everyone else was doing. And I don't know why, but they were totally convinced that they'd seen us there."  It was bad enough when it was confined to Facebook. Then tabloid journalists began calling the house. Iain's friends and family were feeling the pressure. They urged him to go on Facebook and correct the record.  Iain really didn't want to do it. He wasn't a big social media person. What if it backfired? Might this not antagonise people further? But something needed to be said. Late one evening, Iain sat down at his computer and began typing. "After some of the hardest few days we have ever experienced, and it is only getting harder, it is with a heavy heart that Suzanne and I feel it is necessary to put straight some of the more vicious rumours that are circulating about us on social media in Shetland," he wrote. After being told they were to be tested and advised to self-isolate, "we have not left the house since and have not been out partying, or socialising of any kind". The response was overwhelmingly positive. The post was shared over 1,000 times; friends and neighbours backed up their account; the record was duly corrected. Iain didn't bear a grudge - this was what happened in the absence of reliable information. "It showed you the good side and the bad side of social media."  According to National Records of Scotland (NRS), the first death of a person in Shetland with Covid-19 took place some time between 30 March and 5 April. Five more came the following week; a sixth the week after that. On 6 May, another death was announced; there have been no more since then. Tragically, five of the seven were in a single care home. Shetland has good reason to hope it has seen its last coronavirus death of the current peak. The last time a resident of the islands tested positive was 20 April - since then, the total number of confirmed cases has stood still at 54. Nine days afterwards, Dickson told Shetland's local media that the outbreak there may have "plateaued".  "They've obviously managed to control the virus by doing an early lockdown," says Hugh Pennington, emeritus professor of bacteriology at the University of Aberdeen, who has advised the Scottish and UK governments. "Full marks to them, really. Whatever they did worked." Shetland's isolation and lack of new cases makes it, along with Orkney, effectively "a very small-scale New Zealand", says Prof Pennington - and like New Zealand, he says, the islands could in theory lift their lockdowns by strictly controlling who comes and goes. But the islands' authorities are cool on the idea of a New Zealand-style quarantine. Dickson notes how many patients have to travel to Aberdeen for routine, non-Covid medical treatment: "So are we saying those people aren't able to go to the mainland because we've closed our borders?" It's also necessary for the fishing and oil industries for some people to have the ability to travel in and out. It's not just winter and spring events like the Up Helly Aa festivals that have been postponed though, as a result of the lockdown. In 2020 the long summer days will pass on the islands without sheepdog trials, the accordion and fiddle festival, Shetland Wool Week. And there's no end in sight - the first fire festival of 2021 has already been cancelled. The absence of tourists is also being keenly felt. "My business wouldn't exist without tourism," says Lynn Johnson, who runs the Cake Fridge tea room on a single-track road between Voe and Aith on West Shetland Mainland's northern coast.  To keep it going, she needs both the lockdown to be lifted and travel to resume. "We really, really need that spring, summer, along with the big tourism boost that our islands get, to see us through the winter. And we're not going to have that at all."  But for now, the lockdown is holding.  Shetland is ready to resume contact tracing - which was halted in late March, as in the rest of the UK - and Laidlaw says the islands are well prepared for the next phase. Since late April, Shetland has had its own Covid-19 testing equipment, meaning samples no longer have to be sent to the mainland. And two small planes - like the one Iain flew back from holiday on - have been converted into air ambulances.  In spite of the apparent success of Shetland's track-and-trace operation, no-one may ever know how the virus arrived there. Iain and his wife may have been the first people on Shetland to have tested positive, but that doesn't mean they were the first to bring it.  "Obviously I know about the contact tracing, the Malcomsons and their experience," says Dickson. "We picked up those people who were diagnosed and got a positive result. I always say, those are the ones we know about. Shetland is a small community but we do have people who come in and out of the islands frequently."  The couple most likely travelled in with the virus, but "what we can't guarantee is they were the only people". And there is no guarantee the Malcolmsons caught the virus in Italy either, as it is thought to have been circulating in Edinburgh, where they changed flights, since February.  Iain knows better than most the importance of social distancing. And he knows he's fortunate to being doing so in Shetland, where keeping apart from others is easier. "It's absolutely beautiful," he says. "You feel like you're on holiday. You have to be pretty disciplined about actually working. But this could be our summer, so you have to make hay while the sun shines." Follow @mrjonkelly on Twitter

Cartoonist Priya Kuriyan has drawn a series of pictures showing how masks became the new normal across India -  even before a stringent lockdown was put in place on 25 March. Ms Kuriyan says her art was inspired by her neighbours, as well as people she saw at the airport when she took a flight from the southern city of Bangalore to visit her friend in the eastern city of Kolkata (formerly Calcutta).  This was before masks were made mandatory and flights grounded. However, the threat of Covid-19 had just begun to emerge so some people had already begun wearing face coverings as protection. "At that point, we had no idea of the disarray the next few months would bring," she says. Her cartoons are humorous snapshots of people, trying to live their normal lives amid the backdrop of the looming pandemic - like the honeymooning couple in the first picture, who Ms Kuriyan says seemed "determined to get their honeymoon to a flying start". The next image - of "Batman" landing at the Kolkata airport was during a time she says that bats were being discussed in great detail within the context of the coronavirus' origins. "Information about bats were just flying around," she says. The next cartoon is inspired by a scene Ms Kuriyan witnessed at the Bangalore airport.  At the baggage claim belt, a group of sales girls were returning from an offsite trip, in identical sarees and masks.  "Something had clearly gone viral," says Ms Kuriyan.  But the masks were not only being restricted to airports. People had started wearing them every time they left their homes. "Back in my home in Bangalore, the only people to be spotted were those from my neighbourhood who I saw during my fortnightly visits to the grocers - many of them wearing some form of homemade mask," she says. But there was some creativity to be had as well.  In Kolkata, these young men seemed to be the only ones with some premonition of the chaos that was to come - and they accessorised accordingly. But mask or no mask, some habits die hard. Like for instance, this group of people who were still posing - and smiling - for the mandatory "airport selfie". The idea of social distancing is also one that is hard to stomach for many Indians, and Ms Kuriyan says she saw many examples of "social distancing fail". "On other days of social isolation, spying out from my kitchen window, to the street across my apartment, I was witness to some social distancing fail. It was a metaphor of how ironic the idea of social distancing was in a country where not even the real estate on a scooter is spared," she says.  All images copyright

