Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The private rocket company SpaceX has sent two Nasa astronauts into orbit. It's the first time since the retirement of the shuttles nine years ago that an American crew has made the journey from US territory. Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken are not only trialling a new capsule system, they are also initiating a new business model for Nasa. The agency will no longer own the vehicles it uses but merely purchase the "taxi" service offered by SpaceX. It's hoped companies other than tech billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX outfit will come in to expand the market. The aerospace giant Boeing already has a contract with Nasa to do so.  Mr Musk himself said he was overcome with emotion watching his hardware take the astronauts to orbit.  "I think this is something that should get people right in the heart, of anyone that has the spirit of exploration. And the US is the distillation of the spirit of exploration," he told reporters. The new capability the CEO is offering will end the reliance of Nasa on Russian rockets and capsules to get its people to the International Space Station (ISS). It was a point picked up on by President Donald Trump, who came to Florida to watch the launch. "Past leaders put the US at the mercy of foreign nations to send our astronauts into orbit. Not anymore," he said. "Today we once again proudly launched American astronauts on American rockets - the best in the world - from right here on American soil." Hurley's and Behnken's Dragon ship left Earth atop its Falcon-9 rocket precisely on time - at 15:22 EDT (19:22 GMT / 20:22 BST). Meteorologists had forecast only a 50:50 chance of favourable conditions around Florida's Kennedy Space Center at lift-off, but, as luck would have it, the weather window stayed open and the SpaceX controllers grabbed their opportunity. The Falcon soared off the spaceport's famous 39A pad to head northeast out over the Atlantic. After two-and-a-half minutes, the lower-stage of the vehicle had separated to return to a drone ship at sea. And after a further six minutes, the crew were safely inserted into orbit.  Hurley and Behnken are set to arrive at the ISS on Sunday. They'll use some of the intervening hours to test equipment and procedures in their capsule, including doing some manual flying.  Although the Dragon capsule is a fully automated vehicle capable of finding its own way to the ISS, the crew needs to prepare for all eventualities and that means knowing exactly how the ship will behave in their hands. Uniquely, the Dragon has no control stick; all flight commands must be entered via a touchscreen panel. One of their first tasks in orbit was simply to name their ship - in the tradition of past US spacefarers, all the way back to the Mercury programme. Radioing down to Earth, they announced it would be called Endeavour.  Doug Hurley said: "We chose Endeavour for a few reasons: One, because of this incredible endeavour that Nasa, SpaceX and the US have been on since the end of the shuttle programme back in 2011. The other reason is a little more personal to Bob and I. We both had our first flights on shuttle Endeavour and it just meant so much to us to carry on that name." Endeavour was the ship commanded by British explorer James Cook on his voyage to Australia in the late 18th Century. Hurley's and Behnken's stay at the ISS is not known currently, but is likely to be somewhere between one and four months.  Assuming their return to a splashdown in the Atlantic is as smooth as the launch, Nasa and SpaceX will move directly into the full terms of their new relationship. The company has a $2.6bn (£2.1bn) contract with the agency to fly six operational crew missions to the ISS.  The first of these should occur at the end August, or very soon after; and will see four astronauts climb aboard a Dragon rather than just the two we saw on this occasion. Saturday's launch went ahead against the background of the coronavirus crisis.  Crowds were encouraged not to assemble near the Kennedy complex, and Nasa itself severely limited the number of guests invited on to the spaceport. As for the astronauts, they would ordinarily observe a quarantine before flight. But again Nasa reduced the number of people the men could come into contact with in the weeks running up to launch, and those that had to get close were instructed to wear masks. For SpaceX, Saturday marked another significant milestone for the company which was founded just 18 years ago. The firm has upended the launcher industry with its reusable vehicles and is now pioneering a new market-driven approach to human spaceflight. It hasn't all been plain sailing - as evidenced by a spectacular explosion at the  firm's prototyping facility in Boca Chica, Texas, on Friday. But the company has routinely proved naysayers wrong, and Nasa believes its relationship with Elon Musk will save billion of dollars that can be diverted to the more complex task of getting people back to the Moon and then to Mars.     "We want to establish a commercial environment in low-Earth orbit so that we can focus on the hard job of exploring beyond our home planet, to establish a sustained presence on the Moon and get to Mars to establish a presence there," said Bob Cabana, the director at Kennedy.  "We can't do that if we're locked here in low-Earth orbit, and commercial crew - that's the beginning of a whole new era of spaceflight." Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The private rocket company SpaceX has sent two Nasa astronauts into orbit. It's the first time since the retirement of the shuttles nine years ago that an American crew has made the journey from US territory. Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken are not only trialling a new capsule system, they are also initiating a new business model for Nasa. The agency will no longer own the vehicles it uses but merely purchase the "taxi" service offered by SpaceX. It's hoped companies other than tech billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX outfit will come in to expand the market. The aerospace giant Boeing already has a contract with Nasa to do so.  Mr Musk himself said he was overcome with emotion watching his hardware take the astronauts to orbit.  "I think this is something that should get people right in the heart, of anyone that has the spirit of exploration. And the US is the distillation of the spirit of exploration," he told reporters. The new capability the CEO is offering will end the reliance of Nasa on Russian rockets and capsules to get its people to the International Space Station (ISS). It was a point picked up on by President Donald Trump, who came to Florida to watch the launch. "Past leaders put the US at the mercy of foreign nations to send our astronauts into orbit. Not anymore," he said. "Today we once again proudly launched American astronauts on American rockets - the best in the world - from right here on American soil." Hurley's and Behnken's Dragon ship left Earth atop its Falcon-9 rocket precisely on time - at 15:22 EDT (19:22 GMT / 20:22 BST). Meteorologists had forecast only a 50:50 chance of favourable conditions around Florida's Kennedy Space Center at lift-off, but, as luck would have it, the weather window stayed open and the SpaceX controllers grabbed their opportunity. The Falcon soared off the spaceport's famous 39A pad to head northeast out over the Atlantic. After two-and-a-half minutes, the lower-stage of the vehicle had separated to return to a drone ship at sea. And after a further six minutes, the crew were safely inserted into orbit.  Hurley and Behnken are set to arrive at the ISS on Sunday. They'll use some of the intervening hours to test equipment and procedures in their capsule, including doing some manual flying.  Although the Dragon capsule is a fully automated vehicle capable of finding its own way to the ISS, the crew needs to prepare for all eventualities and that means knowing exactly how the ship will behave in their hands. Uniquely, the Dragon has no control stick; all flight commands must be entered via a touchscreen panel. One of their first tasks in orbit was simply to name their ship - in the tradition of past US spacefarers, all the way back to the Mercury programme. Radioing down to Earth, they announced it would be called Endeavour.  Doug Hurley said: "We chose Endeavour for a few reasons: One, because of this incredible endeavour that Nasa, SpaceX and the US have been on since the end of the shuttle programme back in 2011. The other reason is a little more personal to Bob and I. We both had our first flights on shuttle Endeavour and it just meant so much to us to carry on that name." Endeavour was the ship commanded by British explorer James Cook on his voyage to Australia in the late 18th Century. Hurley's and Behnken's stay at the ISS is not known currently, but is likely to be somewhere between one and four months.  Assuming their return to a splashdown in the Atlantic is as smooth as the launch, Nasa and SpaceX will move directly into the full terms of their new relationship. The company has a $2.6bn (£2.1bn) contract with the agency to fly six operational crew missions to the ISS.  The first of these should occur at the end August, or very soon after; and will see four astronauts climb aboard a Dragon rather than just the two we saw on this occasion. Saturday's launch went ahead against the background of the coronavirus crisis.  Crowds were encouraged not to assemble near the Kennedy complex, and Nasa itself severely limited the number of guests invited on to the spaceport. As for the astronauts, they would ordinarily observe a quarantine before flight. But again Nasa reduced the number of people the men could come into contact with in the weeks running up to launch, and those that had to get close were instructed to wear masks. For SpaceX, Saturday marked another significant milestone for the company which was founded just 18 years ago. The firm has upended the launcher industry with its reusable vehicles and is now pioneering a new market-driven approach to human spaceflight. It hasn't all been plain sailing - as evidenced by a spectacular explosion at the  firm's prototyping facility in Boca Chica, Texas, on Friday. But the company has routinely proved naysayers wrong, and Nasa believes its relationship with Elon Musk will save billion of dollars that can be diverted to the more complex task of getting people back to the Moon and then to Mars.     "We want to establish a commercial environment in low-Earth orbit so that we can focus on the hard job of exploring beyond our home planet, to establish a sustained presence on the Moon and get to Mars to establish a presence there," said Bob Cabana, the director at Kennedy.  "We can't do that if we're locked here in low-Earth orbit, and commercial crew - that's the beginning of a whole new era of spaceflight." Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Tensions between Minneapolis' black community and the police did not start with the death of George Floyd. They have been years in the making. On a hot Thursday morning in the Longfellow neighbourhood of Minneapolis, a 28-year-old father named Nuwman stood outside the Minneapolis Police Department's Third Precinct drinking a large coffee as smoke wafted past from the smouldering ruins of nearby buildings.  It was day three of protests over the death of 46-year-old George Floyd, after a white police officer named Derek Chauvin kneeled on his neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds. Floyd begged for his life before falling unconscious and dying in the street, in full view of witnesses and a rolling mobile phone camera. Four officers, including Chauvin, were fired from the department for their involvement. The previous night, tensions ignited, and for the first time the city saw looting, arson and violence. At least one man died in a shooting at a pawn shop. "This is everyday. Everyday that these police officers have enforced their protocol has led up to this," said Nuwman, his voice rising with emotion over the din of protesters and sirens. "This is not just a singular moment. This is a cataclysm. A combination of all the things that happened before." That night, protesters stormed the precinct as police cruisers flew out of the rear parking lot, abandoning it to demonstrators who quickly moved from room to room lighting blazes.  The following afternoon, a Friday, saw the arrest of Chauvin by Minnesota's Bureau of Criminal Apprehension. Chauvin has been charged with murder. This is not the first instance of a controversial, police-involved killing in the region. In 2016, Philando Castile was shot and killed by a police officer in a neighbourhood just 15 minutes away from the current epicentre of protest.  In 2017, a Minneapolis officer was charged with the shooting death of Justine Damond after she called to report a possible sexual assault. In 2015, protests erupted over the shooting death of Jamar Clark, a 24-year-old man who was being pursued by Minneapolis officers. All three deaths sparked protest movements and yielded mixed results in terms of prosecution. Yanez was tried and acquitted. Mohamed Noor, Damond's shooter, was sentenced to 12.5 years. No charges were brought in Clark's case.  For some, Floyd's death was the continuation of those stories. "WE SHOULD HAVE BURNT THE CITY DOWN FOR PHILANDO CASTILE," one person posted on social media.  But in some ways, the pictures beamed around the world this week tell a story that's unique.  Demonstrations are occurring in the midst of a historic, global pandemic. The sheer amount of property damage and arson has been staggering. The swiftness with which officers were fired, and the speed in which Chauvin was arrested and charged surprised many. But Minneapolis - while a prosperous city that celebrates liberal policies and politicians - has struggled for years with socioeconomic inequality and segregation. It's a phenomena that's been dubbed the "Minnesota paradox".  The Twin Cities, as Minneapolis and St Paul are known, are still overwhelmingly white - about one-quarter of the population is non-white - and its neighbourhoods are still highly segregated. Most people of colour live on the cities' north sides.  They were shaped by racist red-lining policies dating to the early 20th Century, when black families were not allowed to buy homes in certain neighbourhoods. In the 1960s, the state built a major highway that cut through and destroyed a thriving black community known as Rondo in St Paul.  According to a 2018 study, the rate of black homeownership in the Twin Cities is among the lowest in the nation. Even before the pandemic caused massive layoffs, 10% of black residents were unemployed compared to 4% of whites. That disparity ranks as one of the nation's worst.  In 2016, the average white household in the Twin Cities made about $76,000 a year, while the average black household earned just $32,000. Thirty-two percent of black Twin Citians fell below the poverty line, while only 6.5% of whites did.  Racial disparities persist in the way the community is policed.  After Philando Castile was killed, data released about police traffic stops in the area showed that 44% of stops were black drivers, though the population was only 7% black.  According to the Minneapolis police department's own data, in 2018 55% of drivers stopped for "equipment violations" were black.  As Covid-19 ravages the area, these disparities are sure to worsen, as thousands lose their jobs, and their homes to evictions and foreclosures.  On Friday afternoon, residents of both St Paul and Minneapolis headed into the streets carrying brooms and pails, and slowly began to literally pick up the pieces of the town.  Following the announcement that former officer Chauvin had been jailed and charged with third-degree murder and manslaughter, protesters at Minneapolis City Hall let up a cheer.  But it was quickly replaced by a new demand: "One down, three to go." Follow Jessica on TwitterShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violent protests over the death of an unarmed African-American man in the hands of police officers in Minnesota "are no longer in any way" about his killing, the state's governor has said. Tim Walz spoke after a night of unrest in several US cities over the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. He said that as a result he was taking the unprecedented step of mobilising the state's entire National Guard. There are also reports that military police units could deploy. An ex-Minneapolis policeman has been charged with murder over the death of Mr Floyd, 46, in police custody on Monday. Derek Chauvin, 44 and white, was shown in footage kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for several minutes, even after he said he couldn't breathe. He and three other officers have since been sacked. The video went viral online, reigniting US anger over police killings of black Americans, and reopening deep wounds over racial inequality across the nation. On Friday night protesters clashed with police in cities including New York, Atlanta and Portland. In Washington DC, the White House was briefly locked down. In Houston, where George Floyd grew up, a 19-year-old protester told the Associated Press: "My question is how many more, how many more? I just want to live in a future where we all live in harmony and we're not oppressed." In Minnesota, "our great cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul are under assault," Governor Walz said. "The situation in Minneapolis is now about attacking civil society, instilling fear and disrupting our great city." He said violence on Friday night had made "a mockery of pretending this is about George Floyd's death, or inequities or historical traumas to our communities of colour".  He and other officials have suggested that many violent protesters came from outside the state to cause trouble, but did not give details.  On Saturday, President Donald Trump said Mr Floyd's death had "filled Americans with horror, anger and grief".  "I stand before you as a friend and ally to every American seeking peace," he said in a televised address from Cape Canaveral in Florida, following the launch into orbit of two Nasa astronauts by billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX company.  The president denounced the actions of "looters and anarchists", saying that what was needed was "healing not hatred, justice not chaos".   "I will not allow angry mobs to dominate - won't happen," he added. Mr Trump earlier praised the US Secret Service for securing the White House but said if protesters breached the perimeter they "would have been greeted with the most vicious dogs, and most ominous weapons, I have ever seen". He blamed violence on "organised groups".  Minnesota remains the most volatile region, with curfews ordered for the Twin Cities of Minneapolis-Saint Paul from 20:00 to 06:00 on Friday and Saturday evening. Protesters defied the curfew on Friday. Fires, many from burning cars, were visible in a number of areas and television pictures showed widespread looting.  Hundreds of troops from the National Guard, a reserve military force that can be called on by the US president or state governors to intervene in domestic emergencies, moved in late at night. Minnesota officials said tens of thousands of people turned out on Friday and they are expecting more unrest on Saturday night.  As a result, Gov Walz said he was activating all National Guard troops available in the state  - reportedly up to 13,000 - for the first time in history to respond to rioters. The Pentagon said some US military units were on alert to support Minnesota if asked. There are long-standing tensions between the black community and police in Minneapolis. Another black man, Philando Castile, was shot and killed in 2016 during a traffic stop close to the epicentre of these protests in a case that gained international attention. African-Americans also suffer significant socio-economic inequalities, entrenched segregation and a higher level of unemployment than the white community.  In Atlanta, Georgia, where buildings were vandalised, a state of emergency was declared for some areas to protect people and property.  Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms issued an impassioned plea, saying: "This is not a protest. This is not in the spirit of Martin Luther King Jr. You are disgracing our city. You are disgracing the life of George Floyd." In New York's Brooklyn district, protesters clashed with police, throwing projectiles, starting fires and destroying police vehicles. A number of officers were injured and many arrests made. The mayor of Portland, Oregon, has declared a state of emergency amid looting, fires and an attack on a police precinct. An immediate curfew until 06:00 local time (13:00 GMT) was imposed and it will restart at 20:00. On Monday night, police received a phone call from a neighbourhood grocery store alleging that George Floyd had paid with a counterfeit $20 note. Officers responded and were attempting to put him in a police vehicle when he dropped to the ground, telling them he was claustrophobic. According to police, he physically resisted officers and was handcuffed. Video of the incident does not show how the confrontation started.  With Mr Chauvin's knee on his neck, Mr Floyd can be heard saying "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me". According to a preliminary autopsy by the county medical examiner, the police officer had his knee on Mr Floyd's neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds - almost three minutes of which was after Mr Floyd became non-responsive. Nearly two minutes before Mr Chauvin removed his knee the other officers checked Mr Floyd's right wrist for a pulse and were unable to find one. He was taken to hospital and pronounced dead around an hour later. The preliminary autopsy, included in the criminal complaint against Mr Chauvin, did not find evidence of "traumatic asphyxia or strangulation". The medical examiner noted Mr Floyd had underlying heart conditions and the combination of these, "potential intoxicants in his system" and being restrained by the officers "likely contributed to his death". Mr Chauvin was charged on Friday with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter over his role in Mr Floyd's death. Mr Floyd's family and their lawyer, Benjamin Crump, said that this was "welcome but overdue". The family said they wanted a more serious, first-degree murder charge as well as the arrest of the three other officers involved.  Hennepin County Prosecutor Mike Freeman said he "anticipates charges" for the other officers but would not offer more details.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump has been criticised at home and abroad after announcing he is ending US ties with the World Health Organization (WHO).  The EU urged him to reconsider the decision, while Germany's health minister called it a "disappointing setback for international health". The head of the US Senate's health committee, a Republican like Mr Trump, said now was not the time to leave. Mr Trump said the WHO had failed to hold China to account over coronavirus. The WHO, a UN agency that helps countries promote healthcare and tackle outbreaks of disease, has faced regular criticism from the US president over its handling of the outbreak. He suspended US funding to the WHO last month and on Friday permanently halted the payment, which last year stood at more than $400m (£324m; €360m), the largest single contribution at around 15% of its total budget. European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and top EU diplomat, Josep Borrell, said in a statement: "In the face of this global threat, now is the time for enhanced co-operation and common solutions. Actions that weaken international results must be avoided. "We urge the US to reconsider its announced decision." German Health Minister Jens Spahn described the setback as "disappointing" although he accepted the WHO "needs reform". "The EU must take a leading role and engage more financially," he said. A spokesperson for the UK said: "Coronavirus is a global challenge and the World Health Organization has an important role to play in leading the international health response. We have no plans to withdraw our funding." The chair of the US Senate Health Committee, Lamar Alexander, said the move could hamper the discovery of a vaccine against Covid-19 and urged a reversal of the decision in the "strongest terms possible". "Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis has been dealt with, not in the middle of it," he said. Ex-presidential candidate and US Senator Elizabeth Warren tweeted: "President Trump's decision to leave the @WHO during a global pandemic alienates our allies, undermines our global leadership, and threatens the health of the American people." Anders Nordstrom, a former WHO acting director general, said he was "deeply concerned" the move would increase political tension at a time when "we need to have global solidarity". South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize called the decision "unfortunate".  WHO member states agreed on 19 May to set up an independent inquiry into the global response to the pandemic. Speaking  at the White House, Mr Trump said: "Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs."  It is not clear when any US withdrawal might take place. A 1948 agreement between the US and WHO allows for one year's notice before pulling out.  Mr Trump has accused China of trying to cover up the outbreak of coronavirus, which occurred in the city of Wuhan late last year. He also says that "China has total control over the World Health Organization". The president accused China of pressurising the WHO to "mislead the world" about the virus, without elaborating. "The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government," he said. The US will redirect its funds for the WHO  to other health groups. More than 102,000 people in the US have lost their lives to Covid-19 - by far the biggest death toll in the world.  Opponents say Mr Trump is trying to deflect criticism of his handling of the pandemic ahead of his re-election bid this year. Meanwhile, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has said that Mr Trump is trying to mislead the public, smear China and "shift the blame for [the US's] own incompetent response".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has said he will postpone this year's G7 summit and invite leaders of other countries to participate in the talks. "I don't feel that... it properly represents what's going on in the world. It's a very outdated group of countries," Mr Trump said on Saturday. The G7 group, which the US hosts this year, includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the UK.  The president said Russia, South Korea, Australia and India should be invited. Speaking to reporters on board the presidential plane Air Force One, Mr Trump said that he was delaying the summit - which was scheduled to take place later in June  - until September.  Last week, Mr Trump said it might be possible to hold a gathering at the White House and potentially parts of Camp David, the US presidential country retreat, despite concerns over the coronavirus pandemic. German Chancellor Angela Merkel later rejected the president's invitation to attend a summit in person because of the outbreak.  Her spokesman thanked Mr Trump, but said the German leader "cannot agree to her personal participation, to a journey to Washington". On Friday, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson "agreed on the importance of convening the G7 in person in the near future" following a conversation with the US president, the White House said in a statement.  The G7 - or Group of Seven - leaders were scheduled to meet by videoconference in June in response to Covid-19. The group is made up of the seven of the world's largest economies. It regards itself as "a community of values", with freedom and human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and prosperity and sustainable development as its key principles.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window As the crisis has unfolded, scientists have discovered more evidence about a strange and worrying feature of the coronavirus. While many people who become infected develop a cough, fever and loss of taste and smell, others have no symptoms at all and never realise they're carrying Covid-19.  Researchers say it's vital to understand how many are affected this way and whether "silent spreaders" are fuelling the pandemic. When people gathered at a church in Singapore on 19 January, no-one could have realised that the event would have global implications for the spread of coronavirus. It was a Sunday and, as usual, one of the services was being conducted in Mandarin. Among the congregation at The Life Church and Missions, on the ground floor of an office building, was a couple, both aged 56, who'd arrived that morning from China. As they took their seats, they seemed perfectly healthy so there was no reason to think they might be carrying the virus. At that time, a persistent cough was understood to be the most distinctive feature of Covid-19 and it was seen as the most likely way to transmit it. Having no symptoms of the disease should have meant having no chance of spreading it.   The couple left as soon as the service was over. But shortly afterwards, things took a turn for the worse, and in a wholly confusing way. The Chinese wife started to become ill on January 22, followed by her husband two days later. Because they had flown in from Wuhan, the epicentre of the outbreak, that was no big surprise. But over the following week, three local people also came down with the disease for no obvious reason, leading to one of Singapore's first and most baffling coronavirus cases. Working out what had happened would lead to a new and disturbing insight into how the virus was so successfully finding new victims. "We were extremely perplexed," says Dr Vernon Lee, head of communicable diseases at Singapore's Ministry of Health. "People who didn't know each somehow infected each other," while showing no sign of illness. This new batch of cases simply did not make sense, according to what was known about Covid-19 back then. So Dr Lee and his fellow scientists, along with police officers and specialist disease trackers, launched an investigation, generating detailed maps showing who was where and when. This involved the very best of the process known as contact tracing - a version of which is getting under way now in the UK. It's seen as a vital system for tracking down everyone involved in an outbreak and helping to stamp it out, and Singapore is renowned for the skill and speed with which this is carried out. Amazingly, within a few days, investigators had spoken to no fewer than 191 members of the church and had found out that 142 of them had been there that Sunday. They quickly established that two of the Singaporeans who became infected had been at the same service as the Chinese couple.  "They could have spoken to each other, greeted each other, during the usual activities of a church service," says Dr Lee. That was a useful start and would explain in theory how the infection could have been passed on, apart from one key factor. It did not answer the crucial question of how the virus could have been transmitted by the two Chinese people when at that stage they had shown no indication of having the disease. And on top of that was an even greater puzzle. It was confirmed that the third Singaporean to become infected, a 52-year-old woman, had not been at the same service as the others. Instead she had attended another event in the same church later that day, so how could she have picked up the virus? Investigators resorted to going through the CCTV recordings made at the church that Sunday to search for clues. And they stumbled across something completely unexpected - the woman who'd attended the later service, after the Chinese couple had left, had sat in the seats they had used several hours earlier. Somehow, despite having no symptoms and not feeling ill, the Chinese husband and wife had managed to spread the virus. Maybe they'd had it on their hands and touched the seats, maybe their breath carried the infection and it landed on a surface, it's not clear, but the implications were huge. For Dr Lee, piecing everything together, there was only one possible explanation - that the virus was being passed by people who had it without even realising. This was a revelation that would be relevant the world over because the central message of all public health advice on coronavirus has always been to look out for symptoms in yourself and others. But if the virus was also being spread by people without symptoms, silently and invisibly, how could the disease be stopped? He remembers the moment, while working in his office, when the reality dawned on him. "Every time you make a scientific discovery, it is like a 'eureka' moment when you realise that this is something important that you've uncovered, through the hard work of many individuals and teams." What was revealed was what's known as "pre-symptomatic transmission" where someone is unaware of being infected because the cough, fever and other classic symptoms have yet to begin.  Along with many others, this study highlighted a critical period of 24-to-48 hours before the visible onset of the disease in which people can be highly infectious, perhaps even their most infectious. Being aware of that is potentially invaluable, because as soon as you realise you're ill then everyone you've been in close contact with can be warned to stay at home. That would mean that they would be isolating during the key phase of infection before their own symptoms start. But exactly how the disease can be transmitted without a cough to project droplets containing the virus is still open to debate. One option is that simply breathing or talking to someone can do the job. If the virus is reproducing in the upper respiratory tract at that time then it's possible that some of it will emerge with each exhalation. Anyone close enough, especially indoors, could easily pick it up. And another potential form of transmission is by touch - the virus gets onto someone's hands and they touch another person or a door handle - or a seat in a church. Whatever the route, the virus is clearly exploiting the fact that people are bound to be less vigilant if they're not aware that they might be infected. This is an even more mysterious scenario, and one that scientists simply have no definitive answer to. It's one thing to know that people can be infectious before their symptoms show, quite another when they become infected but never have any sign of it. This is what's known as being "asymptomatic" because you are a carrier of the disease but do not suffer in any way yourself. The most famous case is that of an Irish woman who was working as a cook in New York at the beginning of the last century. Wherever Mary Mallon was employed, in house after house, people became ill with typhoid and at least three, maybe many more, died of it, but she was completely unaffected. Eventually a connection was established and it was confirmed that she was the unwitting spreader of the disease. Reporters dubbed her "Typhoid Mary", a label she always resented, but the authorities took no chances and kept her in confinement for 23 years until her death in 1938. Staff nurse Amelia Powell was shocked when she found out that she is asymptomatic. She was at work on her hospital ward at Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge in April when a doctor rang to give her the result of a swab test. She had been feeling normal and safe behind the personal protective equipment she had to wear while caring for patients with Covid-19. But suddenly all those assumptions were undermined because, to her horror, she had tested positive.  "It was a bit like hearing that someone in the family had passed, it was surreal. "I thought, 'This can't be right, not me, I'm absolutely fine,'" says 23-year-old Amelia.  She had to leave her post straightaway to go into isolation at home. "I was worried because I've seen the other side, with patients deteriorating very quickly with it, so I did wonder if this would happen to me." But, to her surprise, at no point did she feel unwell. "I had nothing, literally - I was exercising indoors, eating normally, sleeping normally."  At the moment it's impossible to know how many cases of infection exist but remain hidden from view. The discovery that Amelia was infected was only revealed because she was part of a study of all the staff at her hospital. It produced the surprising result that as many as 3% of more than 1,000 people were positive while showing no symptoms at the time of the test. An even greater proportion of asymptomatic cases was found on the Diamond Princess cruise ship which had been sailing off the coast of Japan earlier this year. Later branded "a petri dish for infection", it had around 700 cases.  Researchers found that three quarters of the people who had tested positive had no symptoms.  And at a care home in Washington state more than half the residents were positive but had no sign of the illness. Different studies suggest a huge range of possibilities for how many cases are asymptomatic stretching from 5% to 80% of cases. That was the conclusion of an analysis by Prof Carl Heneghan of the University of Oxford and colleagues who looked at 21 research projects. The upshot, they said, was that "there is not a single reliable study to determine the number of asymptomatics". And they said that if the screening for Covid-19 is only carried out on people with symptoms - which has been the main focus of UK testing policy - then cases will be missed, "perhaps a lot of cases". The biggest concern of Amelia, the nurse, was that she might have unwittingly transmitted the virus either to those she works with or to the patients who depend on her help.  "I don't think I passed it on because all the colleagues I work with tested negative but it was worrying to think how long I'd been positive for," she says. "But we still don't know if people who are asymptomatic are contagious or not - it's very bizarre and the information about it at the moment is minimal." One study in China which found that the number of asymptomatic cases was actually greater than those with symptoms had a warning for the authorities. "As 'silent spreaders'," the scientists wrote, "asymptomatic carriers warrant attention as part of disease prevention and control." The team that studied that Diamond Princess reckoned that asymptomatic cases were likely to be less infectious than people with symptoms but even so they're estimated to have caused a significant number of cases.  To try to get an answer, scientists in Norwich are pushing for the population of the entire city to be tested. "Asymptomatic cases may be the 'dark matter' of the epidemic," according to Prof Neil Hall, head of the Earlham Institute, a life science research centre, who's leading the initiative. Dark matter is the invisible substance believed to make up most of the matter in the universe, and it's yet to be identified. Prof Hall worries that asymptomatic cases may actually be driving the pandemic, keeping it going despite public health measures. "If you have people who don't know they're ill while using public transport and health care facilities, inevitably that's going to increase transmission," he says. "Any intervention that's only based on people coming to primary health care when they have symptoms will only deal with half the problem."  A team of scientists in California believes that not knowing who's carrying the virus without symptoms is the "Achilles Heel" of the fight against the pandemic. In their view, the only way to stop the disease from spreading is to find out who's infected regardless of whether they think they are or not. That was also the recommendation of MPs on the Commons Science and Technology Committee in a letter to the Prime Minister Boris Johnson. They wrote that the risk of asymptomatic transmission has "a profound consequence for the management of the pandemic". And they said that anyone looking after vulnerable people - such as health workers or care workers - should be given regular testing. A similar approach is being adopted on a far larger scale in the Chinese city of Wuhan, where the pandemic is thought to have begun. As many as 6.5 million people there were tested in as little as nine days in a mass screening programme designed to detect the disease - including in those showing no symptoms. As lockdown measures are eased and more people start to use public transport, return to work or go shopping, getting to grips with the invisible risk matters more than ever. At the moment, there is no way of telling who among the growing crowds may be carrying the virus without knowing. That's why governments the world over say it's essential that everyone cooperates with efforts to trace the contacts of anyone infected and then quickly self-isolates. They also advise that the best defence remains social distancing - to keep apart wherever you can. But where that isn't possible, the recommendation is to cover your face, even with a mask that's homemade. When the US government announced this policy, it highlighted the discoveries made in the church in Singapore back in January. The logic is that this is not about protecting yourself, it's about protecting others from you, in case you're infected but don't know it. Many health professionals worry that masks might distract people from hand washing or social distancing, or increase the risk of contamination if they're clumsily handled. But more and more governments, most recently that of the UK, have become convinced of the benefits.  Not that face coverings will halt the pandemic on their own. But because there's still so little we know about asymptomatic transmission, almost anything is worth a try. When you talk to intensive care doctors across the UK, exhausted after weeks of dealing with the ravages of Covid-19, one phrase emerges time after time: "We've never seen anything like this before." They knew a new disease was coming, and they were expecting resources to be stretched by an unknown respiratory infection which had first appeared in China at the end of last year. "It felt in some ways like we were trying to prepare for the D-Day landings," says Barbara Miles, clinical director of intensive care at Glasgow Royal Infirmary, "with three weeks to get ready and not a great deal of knowledge about what we would be facing". Read a summary, often in their own words, of what doctors have learnt about how Covid-19 attacks the human body.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window India has announced plans to further ease a strict national lockdown even as the country reported a record daily rise in new coronavirus cases. From 8 June, restaurants, hotels, shopping centres and places of worship will be allowed to re-open in many areas in the first stage of a three-phase plan. Weeks later, probably in July, schools and colleges will resume teaching.  But areas with high numbers of Covid-19 cases will remain under tight lockdown. The plan comes after India registered a new record single-day rise in confirmed infections, with nearly 8,000 cases reported on Saturday. In total India has recorded some 174,500 cases and nearly 5,000 deaths. The nation of 1.3 billion has been hit less hard by the coronavirus than many other countries. It went into a strict lockdown more than two months ago when the confirmed caseload was in the hundreds. Official data suggests the decision prevented the loss of between 37,000 and 78,000 lives. However the cost to the economy has been high and pictures of millions of informal workers leaving cities for their rural villages after losing their jobs - some of them on foot - shocked the country. Health officials say that they are able to further lift the lockdown in many places because most cases have been restricted to urban areas in a handful of states. More than 80% of the active cases are in five states - Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Delhi, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh - and more than 60% of the cases are in five cities, including Mumbai, Delhi and Ahmedabad, according to official data. As part of the three-phase plan: These measures will not apply to designated "containment zones" where the virus is believed to be transmitting at a higher rate. Such zones are at the district or neighbourhood level. The city of Mumbai, India's financial capital. in Maharashtra state, has one of the highest numbers of containment zones, reports suggest. Hospitals there are struggling to cope with an influx of virus patients. The reported infection rate - the number of infections for every 100 tests - in Maharashtra is three times the national average. People will be restricted from moving between containment zones and non-containment zones but there will be no restriction on general inter-state travel, the government says.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A Belgian prince has contracted coronavirus after attending a party during lockdown in Spain, the country's royal palace says.  Prince Joachim, 28, travelled from Belgium to Spain for an internship on 26 May, the palace said.  Two days later, he went to a party in the southern city of Córdoba, before testing positive for Covid-19. Spanish reports suggest the prince, a nephew of Belgium's King Philippe, was among 27 people at the party.  Under Córdoba's lockdown rules, a party of this size would be a breach of regulations, as gatherings of no more than 15 people are currently permitted. Spanish police have launched an investigation into the party. Those found to have flouted lockdown rules could be fined up to €10,000 (£9,000; $11,100). Everyone who attended the party is said to be in quarantine. Prince Joachim, the youngest son of Princess Astrid and 10th in line to the Belgian throne, is said to have mild coronavirus symptoms.  Rafaela Valenzuela, a representative of the Spanish government in Córdoba, condemned the party, calling those who attended "irresponsible".  "I feel surprised and angry. An incident of this type stands out at a moment of national mourning for so many dead," she said. The party was first covered by Spanish newspaper El Confidencial, which cited a document from the Andalucian authorities but did not name the prince. Belgian media have since confirmed with the palace that Prince Joachim was in Spain, where he remains.  The prince is known to have a long-standing relationship with a Spanish woman, reported to be Victoria Ortiz.  Spain is in the process of emerging from one of the strictest lockdowns in Europe. It outlined a four-stage plan on 4 May to start easing the lockdown, which saw children under 14 confined to their homes for six weeks. The country said it was moving to a second phase from 1 June for 70% of Spaniards, leaving only major cities under tighter restrictions. Spain has among the highest number of coronavirus cases and deaths in the world. As of Saturday, the country had 239,228 infections and 27,125 deaths, according to a tally by Johns Hopkins University.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Scientific advisers to the government have warned of the risk of lifting the lockdown in England, as sunshine marks the final weekend before rules change. Professor John Edmunds said it was a "political decision" to ease measures; Sir Jeremy Farrar said the NHS test and trace system should be "fully working". From Monday schools will reopen and up to six people can meet in England, with other nations also easing measures. The government said it had followed the data and evidence at all times. Another 215 people across the UK who tested positive for coronavirus have now died, taking the total death toll to 38,376. The Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), which advises the government, has published details of its confidential meetings.  It includes minutes of 34 Sage sessions, going back to 22 January, and a series of scientific reports. They show one Sage meeting on 23 April estimated there would be only 1,000 cases per day by mid-May. Instead, estimates by the Office for National Statistics suggest there are currently 8,000 cases per day in England alone. Those figures do not include cases in care homes or hospitals. Prof Edmunds, from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and a member of Sage, said the levels of coronavirus were still "very high" and many scientists would rather the number of cases declined before measures were relaxed. Sir Jeremy Farrar, director of the Wellcome Trust and a member of Sage, said on Twitter that Covid-19 is "spreading too fast to lift lockdown in England" and NHS test and trace "has to be fully working and infection rates have to be lower". Speaking on BBC Radio 4's Today programme, Prof Peter Horby, who sits on Sage and chairs its NERVTAG subcommittee, agreed, saying the R number was still close to one and it was important we "don't lose control". "What I would say is that returning to a situation where we lost control again is far worse than another week or two of social measures," he said.  A fourth Sage member, Prof Calum Semple, said a "brave" political decision had been made to coincide with when schools were due to reopen "were everything normal", but warned that high levels of transmission were still being seen.  "Essentially we're lifting the lid on a boiling pan and it's just going to bubble over," he said. "We need to get it down to simmer before we take the lift off, and it's too early." This is a significant moment.  Throughout the pandemic, the scientists and politicians have been following the same script. Now there is a clear, loud and public split between some of those advising government and those "following the science". They may not be household names, but those speaking out are big figures in their fields and sit on Sage for a reason. On Thursday, Boris Johnson confirmed the relaxing of lockdown. At the same televised briefing, the PM's chief science advisor, Sir Patrick Vallance, warned there was "not a lot of room" for manoeuvre and the data "urges caution". This is largely a disagreement about "when" to start lifting lockdown rather "how". If you go early then we all get a bit of our lives back sooner, but it means we will stay close to that 8,000 cases a day figure and have less time to prevent the NHS being overwhelmed if a second wave comes. If you wait longer, then cases are much lower and the virus easier to control, the price is keeping lockdown and all the pain it is causing.  The Sage documents warned there would be "little time" to reimpose stricter lockdown measures if the infection rate started to creep up again. Epidemiologist Prof Sian Griffiths told BBC Breakfast that if scientists were in charge of decisions, lockdown would probably not be eased currently, but she said there were other factors to consider. "I would say there is a huge amount of stress and strain which goes along with not being able to see your friends and your family and that to be able to see them, albeit at a distance, may actually help people's mental health and may help them live with lockdown better and may help them comply better," she said. Prof Sally Bloomfield, of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, warned against having a barbecue with guests, saying the virus could be present on bottles, cutlery and other objects. Picnics where people brought their own food were a better option, she said. One method of managing the easing of lockdown would be to give people a Covid risk score which would account for age, gender, ethnicity and health conditions, according to Prof Sir David Spiegelhalter - chairman of the Winton Centre for Risk and Evidence Communication at the University of Cambridge. "And that means I think we're going to need some sort of individualised Covid risk score that can be used in that way, to group people according to their risk, and then that would be advisory, and if people wanted to move, and they protected other people, then that would be open to them," he said. A Number 10 spokesperson said the government had "at all times been informed by the data and evidence", and the measures has been carefully designed "so that we can ease the burdens of lockdown while expecting to keep that R below one". It comes as police forces in England have warned people to take care in busy areas and beauty spots and as a fine weekend of weather is forecast.  The Rail, Maritime and Transport union blamed mixed government messaging for "chaos" on rail services in Bournemouth due to a surge in passengers. Each of the UK's nations has a different approach - and timescale - to lifting the lockdown on Monday. England is the only nation to reopen primary schools to selected year groups on Monday and will allow groups of up to six to meet outside.  In Scotland, two separate households - up to a maximum of eight people - can meet outdoors and in Northern Ireland, groups of up to six people who do not live together can meet outdoors. In Wales, any number of people from two different households will be able to meet each other outside from Monday, but beauty spots will remain closed. England remains at level four on the government's Covid-19 alert system, which means transmission of the virus is high or rising exponentially.  When the system was introduced the prime minister said the country was heading towards level three - at which there can be a relaxation of the rules. Mayor of London Sadiq Khan said he was "deeply concerned" that the government was rushing too fast to lift lockdown measures as the Joint Biosecurity Centre, which sets the alert level, had not said the country was ready to move to level three. "I urge Londoners to act with caution - lives depend on it," he tweeted. In other developments: How have you been affected by the issues relating to coronavirus? Share your experiences by emailing haveyoursay@bbc.co.uk. Please include a contact number if you are willing to speak to a BBC journalist. You can also contact us in the following ways:Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Scientific advisers to the government have warned of the risk of lifting the lockdown in England, as sunshine marks the final weekend before rules change. Professor John Edmunds said it was a "political decision" to ease measures; Sir Jeremy Farrar said the NHS test and trace system should be "fully working". From Monday schools will reopen and up to six people can meet in England, with other nations also easing measures. The government said it had followed the data and evidence at all times. Another 215 people across the UK who tested positive for coronavirus have now died, taking the total death toll to 38,376. The Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), which advises the government, has published details of its confidential meetings.  It includes minutes of 34 Sage sessions, going back to 22 January, and a series of scientific reports. They show one Sage meeting on 23 April estimated there would be only 1,000 cases per day by mid-May. Instead, estimates by the Office for National Statistics suggest there are currently 8,000 cases per day in England alone. Those figures do not include cases in care homes or hospitals. Prof Edmunds, from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and a member of Sage, said the levels of coronavirus were still "very high" and many scientists would rather the number of cases declined before measures were relaxed. Sir Jeremy Farrar, director of the Wellcome Trust and a member of Sage, said on Twitter that Covid-19 is "spreading too fast to lift lockdown in England" and NHS test and trace "has to be fully working and infection rates have to be lower". Speaking on BBC Radio 4's Today programme, Prof Peter Horby, who sits on Sage and chairs its NERVTAG subcommittee, agreed, saying the R number was still close to one and it was important we "don't lose control". "What I would say is that returning to a situation where we lost control again is far worse than another week or two of social measures," he said.  A fourth Sage member, Prof Calum Semple, said a "brave" political decision had been made to coincide with when schools were due to reopen "were everything normal", but warned that high levels of transmission were still being seen.  "Essentially we're lifting the lid on a boiling pan and it's just going to bubble over," he said. "We need to get it down to simmer before we take the lift off, and it's too early." This is a significant moment.  Throughout the pandemic, the scientists and politicians have been following the same script. Now there is a clear, loud and public split between some of those advising government and those "following the science". They may not be household names, but those speaking out are big figures in their fields and sit on Sage for a reason. On Thursday, Boris Johnson confirmed the relaxing of lockdown. At the same televised briefing, the PM's chief science advisor, Sir Patrick Vallance, warned there was "not a lot of room" for manoeuvre and the data "urges caution". This is largely a disagreement about "when" to start lifting lockdown rather "how". If you go early then we all get a bit of our lives back sooner, but it means we will stay close to that 8,000 cases a day figure and have less time to prevent the NHS being overwhelmed if a second wave comes. If you wait longer, then cases are much lower and the virus easier to control, the price is keeping lockdown and all the pain it is causing.  The Sage documents warned there would be "little time" to reimpose stricter lockdown measures if the infection rate started to creep up again. Epidemiologist Prof Sian Griffiths told BBC Breakfast that if scientists were in charge of decisions, lockdown would probably not be eased currently, but she said there were other factors to consider. "I would say there is a huge amount of stress and strain which goes along with not being able to see your friends and your family and that to be able to see them, albeit at a distance, may actually help people's mental health and may help them live with lockdown better and may help them comply better," she said. Prof Sally Bloomfield, of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, warned against having a barbecue with guests, saying the virus could be present on bottles, cutlery and other objects. Picnics where people brought their own food were a better option, she said. One method of managing the easing of lockdown would be to give people a Covid risk score which would account for age, gender, ethnicity and health conditions, according to Prof Sir David Spiegelhalter - chairman of the Winton Centre for Risk and Evidence Communication at the University of Cambridge. "And that means I think we're going to need some sort of individualised Covid risk score that can be used in that way, to group people according to their risk, and then that would be advisory, and if people wanted to move, and they protected other people, then that would be open to them," he said. A Number 10 spokesperson said the government had "at all times been informed by the data and evidence", and the measures has been carefully designed "so that we can ease the burdens of lockdown while expecting to keep that R below one". It comes as police forces in England have warned people to take care in busy areas and beauty spots and as a fine weekend of weather is forecast.  The Rail, Maritime and Transport union blamed mixed government messaging for "chaos" on rail services in Bournemouth due to a surge in passengers. Each of the UK's nations has a different approach - and timescale - to lifting the lockdown on Monday. England is the only nation to reopen primary schools to selected year groups on Monday and will allow groups of up to six to meet outside.  In Scotland, two separate households - up to a maximum of eight people - can meet outdoors and in Northern Ireland, groups of up to six people who do not live together can meet outdoors. In Wales, any number of people from two different households will be able to meet each other outside from Monday, but beauty spots will remain closed. England remains at level four on the government's Covid-19 alert system, which means transmission of the virus is high or rising exponentially.  When the system was introduced the prime minister said the country was heading towards level three - at which there can be a relaxation of the rules. Mayor of London Sadiq Khan said he was "deeply concerned" that the government was rushing too fast to lift lockdown measures as the Joint Biosecurity Centre, which sets the alert level, had not said the country was ready to move to level three. "I urge Londoners to act with caution - lives depend on it," he tweeted. In other developments: How have you been affected by the issues relating to coronavirus? Share your experiences by emailing haveyoursay@bbc.co.uk. Please include a contact number if you are willing to speak to a BBC journalist. You can also contact us in the following ways:Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Forbes magazine has struck reality TV star and entrepreneur Kylie Jenner from its list of billionaires, and accused her family of inflating the value of her cosmetics business. Forbes said the family went to "unusual lengths" to present its youngest member as richer than she was. In tweets, Jenner dismissed the article as "inaccurate statements and unproven assumptions lol". "I've never asked for any title or tried to lie my way there," she wrote. "I can name a list of 100 things more important right now than fixating on how much money I have," she added. The move reverses the status Forbes conferred on Jenner in 2019, when it declared her a self-made billionaire. The description sparked controversy, with critics scoffing at the "self-made" title and pointing to her upbringing as a Kardashian family reality TV star. Forbes, which is known for its widely cited billionaire rankings, credited Jenner's status to the success of her cosmetics company, which she founded in 2015 and which includes Kylie Cosmetics and Kylie Skin. Jenner last year announced she was selling a 51% stake in the company to beauty giant Coty for $600m.  Forbes said the family's accountant had provided it with tax returns that suggested the firm had done more than $300m in sales in 2016 and that publicists claimed sales of $330m the following year. But information shared by Coty, which is publicly traded, showed Jenner's firm is "significantly smaller and less profitable than the family has spent years leading the cosmetics industry and media outlets, including Forbes, to believe", Forbes said. Coty's presentation to investors about the business suggested the firm did only $125m in sales in 2018. "If Kylie Cosmetics did $125 million in sales in 2018, how could it have done $307 million in 2016 (as the company's supposed tax returns state) or $330 million in 2017?" Forbes asked in the article. Despite the magazine's downgrade, Jenner is hardly hurting. Forbes said she pocketed $340m from the sale of her business. It now estimates her net worth at "just under $900m". Forbes writers have previously accused other would-be billionaires of inflating their riches, including US Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross and President Donald Trump.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump has announced that he will start to end preferential treatment for Hong Kong in trade and travel, in response to a new security law pushed by Beijing. He described the Chinese government's moves to introduce the measure in Hong Kong as a "tragedy".  Mr Trump also said he was "terminating" the US relationship with the World Health Organization over Covid-19. China has told the West to "stop interfering" in Hong Kong. The territory, a former British colony, enjoys unique freedoms not seen in mainland China. But many people there see the looming security law as bringing an end to Hong Kong's special status, agreed under a 1984 agreement between China and the UK. There are fears the proposed measure - which has sparked a wave of anti-mainland protests - could quash freedoms by making it a crime to undermine Beijing's authority in the territory. This week, Britain said that if China went forward with the law, it could offer British National (Overseas) passport holders in Hong Kong a path to UK citizenship. On Friday, the UK Home Office confirmed that up to three million people with BNO status could acquire citizenship in this way - as long as they applied for and were granted a passport. Mr Trump said that he no longer considered Hong Kong to be separate from China, and accused Beijing of violating its obligations under the 1984 agreement "China has replaced One Country, Two Systems with One Country, One System", Mr Trump told reporters in the White House's Rose Garden, in a prepared statement that attacked China on several fronts.  "This is a tragedy for Hong Kong... China has smothered Hong Kong's freedom." Currently, Hong Kong - a major global financial centre - enjoys a special status with the US compared to mainland China. It is treated as a separate customs and travel territory and so is not, for example, subject to trade tariffs applied by the US on the mainland. Mr Trump also said sanctions would be imposed on Chinese and Hong Kong officials who were believed by Washington to be involved in eroding the territory's autonomy. He did not outline what form these sanctions would take.  The State Department, he added, would revise its travel advisory for Hong Kong in light of "increased danger of surveillance" from China.  The president also said the US would suspend the entry of foreign nationals from China identified by the US as potential security risks. There are fears that this could affect thousands of graduate students.  No further details were given regarding the "termination" of the US relationship with the WHO. In April, the US president said he would halt funding to the UN agency because it has "failed in its basic duty" in its response to the coronavirus outbreak. He accused it of mismanaging and covering up the spread of the virus after it emerged in China. The Global Times newspaper - run by China's ruling communist party - called the move towards revoking Hong Kong's special status with the US "recklessly arbitrary".  Hong Kong's Justice Secretary Teresa Cheng told the BBC's Chinese Service earlier on Friday that any threat of sanctions was unacceptable.  "Are the sanctions being imposed with a view to coerce another state to change their policy...? Any such sanctions are not going to benefit anyone," she said.   Analysis by Zhaoyin Feng, BBC Chinese  The US removing Hong Kong's special privileges sends a strong warning signal to China, which activists and protesters in the territory will welcome.  The announced measures cover not only Hong Kong, but also intellectual property theft and Chinese firms listed in the US.  According to media reports, Washington is expected to revoke more than 3,000 Chinese graduate students' visas. While this accounts for only 1% of the total number of Chinese students in America, Washington's move will open yet another front in bilateral tensions. But the separate punishments announced for China may not be as harsh as what had been expected, as indicated by a rise in the stock markets after Donald Trump's speech.  Beijing will probably match some of Washington's sanctions and restrictions in a tit-for-tat manner. After a short-lived honeymoon since the trade deal, China and the US appear to be heading towards an abyss at an accelerating speed. China has proposed security legislation which would make it a crime to undermine Beijing's authority in Hong Kong, and could also see China installing its own security agencies in the region for the first time. China's parliament has backed the resolution - which now passes to the country's senior leadership.  Full details about exactly what behaviour will be outlawed under the new security law are not yet clear. It is due to be enacted before September. However, it is expected to criminalise:  Experts say they fear the law could see people punished for criticising Beijing - as happens in mainland China. For example, Nobel Laureate Liu Xiaobo was jailed for 11 years for subversion after he co-authored a document calling for political reform. China's foreign ministry in Hong Kong described US criticism of the new draft law as "utterly imperious, unreasonable and shameless".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Vulnerable people in England who have been asked to remain at home since the coronavirus lockdown began are to be allowed outdoors once a day with members of their household from Monday. Those living alone will be able to meet one other person from another household while maintaining social distancing. The guidance - in place for 10 weeks - had indicated shielding measures would remain until 30 June. Support for shielders, such as food and medicine deliveries, will continue. Communities Secretary Robert Jenrick will announce the details at Sunday's government Downing Street press conference. Around 2.2 million people were asked to stay at home as lockdown began, because they were identified as being at particularly high risk of needing hospital treatment for coronavirus symptoms. Most were notified by their GP. They included solid organ transplant recipients, cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy, pregnant women with heart disease and people with severe respiratory conditions such as cystic fibrosis and severe asthma. Not all elderly people were asked to shield. Some were later removed from the shielding list if they no longer met the requirements. Prime Minister Boris Johnson said that "thousands of lives" had been saved by those who had shielded themselves. "We have been looking at how we can make life easier for our most vulnerable, so today I am happy to confirm that those who are shielding will be able to spend time outside with someone else, observing social distance guidelines," he said. Some scientists have expressed concerns about England's easing of lockdown rules while infection rates remain at around 8,000 per day according the Office for National Statistics. "Many of us would prefer to see the incidence down to lower levels before we relax measures," said Professor John Edmunds, from the London School of Tropical Hygiene and Medicine and one of the government's top advisors. "Covid-19 spreading too fast to lift lockdown in England," tweeted Jeremy Farrar, director of the Wellcome Trust. England's Deputy Chief Medical Officer Prof Jonathan Van-Tam said the consensus among scientists was that the new measures were not expected to push the rate of infection above the key R value of 1.0. However, he urged the public to be "sensible and proportionate with the freedom we have wanted to give people", saying the UK is "at a dangerous moment" and the easing of lockdown "has to go slowly".  Reacting to the change, Phil Anderson from the MS Society said thousands of the more than 130,000 people with MS in the UK had been feeling "forgotten" after months of shielding.  He said they were concerned the news had come "out of the blue" and extremely vulnerable people would want to hear "a lot more about the scientific evidence showing this will be safe for them". He also called for better mental health support for everyone who needs it. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violence has broken out again in the US as protests continue across the country over the killing of an unarmed black man by police in the state on Minnesota on Monday.  George Floyd died in police custody while an officer kneeled on his neck to pin him down.  In Minnesota - where he was killed - the state's entire national guard was mobilised on Saturday to try to prevent further trouble. All pictures copyrightedShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window On 31 May 1970, a huge earthquake struck off the coast of Peru.  The quake and the massive landslides it triggered killed approximately 70,000 people.  A wall of ice came loose from Peru's highest mountain, Mount Huascarán, careered down the mountain at incredibly speed and buried the town of Yungay. A statue of Christ in the town's cemetery and four palm trees were all that remained of Yungay. In nearby Ranrahirca, 20,000 people were killed, leaving only 400 survivors. It was not the first time Ranrahirca had been devastated. Only eight years earlier, 2,000 people had been killed in a similar landslide which also devastated seven more neighbouring towns.    But the 1970 quake, which has since become known as the Great Peruvian Earthquake, eclipsed that of 1962. The worst-affected areas were Ancash and La Libertad in Peru, but the tremors could be felt as far away as Brazil. Houses built from adobe, such as these in Huaraz, the capital of the Ancash region, could not withstand these forces of nature. The epicentre of the earthquake was located 35km off the coast of Casma and Chimbote on the Pacific Ocean, where the Nazca Plate meets the South American Plate.  The 7.9-magnitude quake struck on a Sunday afternoon at 15:23 local time and lasted 45 seconds. But it was the landslides which followed which caused much of the damage. Their force was such that a lorry and a bus could barely been made out after they had been swept along by the mudslide. A boulder estimated to have weighed 700 tonnes was swept along and came to rest near Ranrahirca. Arial photographs showed the size of slide of glacial ice and rocks which careered down the mountain at an average speed of 160kmh (100mph).  The landslide piled mounds of debris up to 15m high - as pointed out by the arrows in the photograph below - and the melted ice from the glacier formed small lakes. Homes and businesses, such as the power company which used to stand on the site pictured below, were completely destroyed.  The wave of mud and debris was 20m deep at this point and swept away the homes which had stood in the foreground of the picture. The fence posts in the foreground are bent in the direction of the flow of the mudslide. With 50,000 people killed, 20,000 missing and presumed dead, and another 150,000 injured, the Great Peruvian Earthquake is considered one of the world's most destructive quakes to this day. All pictures subject to copyright.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window If you didn't know better you'd swear the elephants at the Park Pairi Daiza zoological gardens held a morning meeting. They line up with extraordinary discipline and precision on a keeper's word of command and then dissolve into a friendly huddle. It is a ritual that has played out without an audience every day since Belgium went into lockdown at midnight on Friday 13 March. Now the park, its name is derived from the Ancient Persian concept of paradise as a harmonious garden, is slowly emerging from confinement, as it's known in French. The process will be slow and gradual. At first there'll be a maximum of 5,000 visitors instead of the 30,000 the park is capable of welcoming. They'll wear masks, they'll socially distance and they'll follow carefully marked one-way pedestrian walkways. All European governments are struggling with the issue of how far and how fast to unwind the lockdown. But zoos were among the first tourist attractions to reopen in many countries, including Denmark and Germany. Now they are reopening in France, Italy, the Czech Republic and some Spanish regions too. The sudden shutdown demonstrated the difficult economics of zoo-keeping - even for an institution like Pairi Daiza, which has benefited from huge investment and has twice been voted European Zoo of the Year. Zoo spokesman Mathieu Godefroy put it like this: "Life goes on inside a zoo and it cost a lot of money if there are no visitors to pay for it. "During confinement, we estimate we lost €100,000 (£90,000; $110,000) every day, for the whole year of 2020 we hope to limit our loss to €30m." Zoos have high fixed costs. Even when lockdown reduced revenue to zero the animals had to be fed and the keepers paid to care for them. Being allowed to reopen at reduced capacity is helpful to zoos but offers little comfort to the operators of theme parks. There's no economically viable way to apply social distancing rules to a rollercoaster. Among the first wave of visitors were families with small children mesmerised by the opportunity to be out in the fresh air and the bright spring sunshine. "He's looking forward to seeing a hippopotamus," one mother told me about her son. "But today he's really just as excited to be out of the house and in the car again." Belgium has so far reopened shops but not restaurants.  Zoos are the only places of public entertainment allowed to start trading again, simply because they're mainly places of outdoor entertainment and scientists are confident that outdoors is less dangerous than indoors. The zoo staff are confident that excitement at the reopening isn't confined to the human public. Elephant manager Rob Conachie, whose job is a real labour of love, said one elephant in particular, Mala, was effectively used as an ambassador to introduce visitors to the herd. The zoo's herd gathered in a trumpeting, friendly mob as we talked while the zoo's gates opened and the crowds filed in. "Mala is normally fed a lot of carrots," Rob told us, "and in lockdown she's definitely been wondering where all the carrots have gone. The elephants are fine but there's no doubt they do miss visitors." Now slowly the lockdown is easing and the zoo is coming back to life. The human visitors are delighted of course but it doesn't take much imagination to believe that their excitement is shared by the elephants. More stories you may be interested in: All pictures are subject to copyright.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A group of performers were halfway across the Pacific Ocean in a 75ft sailing boat when the coronavirus pandemic erupted. Suddenly countries began closing their sea borders - leaving the vessel with no guarantee of a safe haven before the start of the typhoon season.  When the crew of the Arka Kinari left Mexico on 21 February they, like everyone else, were aware of the coronavirus. They had no idea, though, how soon it would affect them and how seriously. They say they joked about it being just a Mexican beer. But approaching Hawaii six weeks later, they picked up a radio signal.   As their boat sliced through the waves, they clustered on the foredeck around the tiny radio, intently listening to a crackled voice announcing that Pacific islands, such as the Cook, Christmas and Marshall Islands, were all closing their borders.  "This really brought it home to us that the whole world was really shutting down," says British crew member Sarah Louise Payne. They had set out from the Netherlands in August - two musicians with a multinational seven-person crew, including lighting and sound engineers, heading for Indonesia, the country they planned to make their base. Grey Filastine and his Indonesian partner Nova Ruth had spent years flying around the world performing at music festivals, playing their unique mix of traditional Javanese melodies and contemporary electronic music.  Their lyrics focused on environmental and social justice, and Grey says he and Nova were "frustrated about our complicity with the very same fossil capitalism that we're denouncing in our performances". So they had an idea - to create a multimedia performance on board their boat with a message about the climate crisis and the health of the oceans. Finally, they would have "a method that matches the message", Grey says.  The ship would have an engine for emergencies, but they would use it very sparingly. Essentially, it would be carbon-neutral travel. Grey believed it was important for musicians to demonstrate that this was viable: "We can imagine life after the carbon economy and re-engage with the last great commons, the sea." They sold a share in a house in Seattle, and bought the boat. Nova originally wanted to build an Indonesian Pinisi sailing boat, but that would have required large amounts of tropical hardwood so they ended up recycling an old two-masted steel-hulled schooner. The sails double as screens during their performances. "When we saw it, the two sails were similar to the Pinisi, so it was close to our dream," says Nova, whose mother's family are from the Bugis, a seafaring tribe.   "As a descendant of the Bugis I feel sad that I haven't learnt to sail, and very few of my generation do," she says. She was also motivated by the fact she has been told that women from the Bugis tribe shouldn't sail, "so it's become my personal mission to do so". For Sarah it was a perfect gig as she is a sailor and a lighting technician - alongside having "a great love for this Earth of ours and the need to help protect it".  Fellow British crew member Claire Fauset joined the expedition after falling in love with "the crazy plan and the beautiful boat and of course, the zombie apocalypse survival team that is this crew".  Grey and Nova borrowed money, around £250,000 (€300,000), so at some point the project needs to generate money, either through performances or taking on paying passengers. This has also been put in jeopardy by the coronavirus pandemic. "Arka Kinari is a massive undertaking, it had already stretched us to the limits, physically, financially, emotionally, and then this happens," says Grey. After rebuilding the 1947 schooner in Rotterdam, crafting and rehearsing the on-board performances in Europe, the Canary Islands, Panama, and Mexico, they were mid-Pacific when the coronavirus outbreak became a pandemic affecting every country in the world. Grey and one other crew member, both US citizens, could have stayed indefinitely in Hawaii. The others - the Brits, a Spaniard and a Portuguese - got visas for a month, allowing them to restock with fresh food and regain their land legs. Nova had flown home from Mexico to prepare for the ship's arrival.  During their time in Hawaii the rest of the crew monitored the spread of lockdown measures from one country to another. Soon enough, Indonesia announced a ban on all foreign arrivals by sea or air until further notice.  "I got the taste of ashes in my mouth. You could describe that as a personal meltdown," says Grey. Before setting off, they had made a Plan B for just about any eventuality - or so they thought. Their route had doubled in length to avoid piracy off Somalia and the war in Yemen, but the coronavirus was a complete broadside.  "In practical terms our plans would have been less disrupted by World War Three, because at least warring states don't close their borders to the ships of allies," says Grey. On 6 May, with the US visas about to expire, they decided to head for Indonesia anyway hoping that it might open its borders before the start of the typhoon season in June - but with no clear idea where they would go if it didn't.  Before departure they were plagued with doubts and indecision. One crew member decided to bail out at the last minute. For the rest of the crew, with typhoon season bearing down on them, "we had to put such apprehensive thoughts about borders closing aside," says Sarah. Now, three weeks later, fresh food is running low, but there is enough dry food to last a couple of months. Fresh water is not a problem thanks to solar-powered desalination equipment on the vessel.  They are growing a few spindly lettuces on board as an experiment and catching fish with home-made lines and lures.  This involved a change in diet for some of the crew. "Veganism is a great choice on land, where plants grow - but we're on the sea, where the fish live," says Grey.  They are now sailing at around 13 degrees latitude, and if they see any circular storm developing they will route south. Worryingly, the navigation system has broken so they are navigating by iPhone.  "While we do have some paper charts, an iPhone is now our most full-featured navigation tool. That might sound pathetic but it's far more information than the Polynesians or Captain Cook had to cross the Pacific," says Grey. If they could stop somewhere with internet, the problem with the main navigation chart plotter might be resolved, Grey says. They also need to anchor somewhere, even an uninhabited atoll, to fix some problems that developed in the rigging.    But they don't know when or where they will next be able to land. "And as we slowly sail towards Indonesia the worries about landing are eclipsing the worries of the sea," says Grey.  At sea, everyone takes turns doing the necessary chores. During the dayshifts they steer the ship and carry out any sailing manoeuvres, enter data into the logbook, monitor the engine and grease the propeller shaft.  The morning shift involves cleaning the solar panels, washing the dishes, swabbing the deck and inspecting the fresh food, while the afternoon is for big infrastructure projects, repairs, wood maintenance and carpentry, de-rusting and painting the steel hull. And then at night the only responsibility is to keep to the course and look out for hazards. The Arka Kinari doesn't stop. "It's just you, the heavens above and infinite sea around," says Grey.  "On moonless nights your eyes become so light-sensitive that the rise of Venus and other planets casts a reflective path on the sea that we normally only experience from the Sun or Moon." Not only can you see the bow wave perfectly illuminated by starlight, he says, but the agitation of the water causes "trails of bioluminescence, like underwater fireflies or grinder sparks".  "If I bring the right music along, I can pass the whole two hours of my night watch breathless, in goosebumps." Back in Indonesia, Nova has been trying all her contacts to get permission for the Arka Kinari to land, but without success. Grey, as her spouse, might be allowed in, she gets told, but not the rest of the crew. Recently they passed Johnston Atoll, a US-administered territory once used for testing and storing chemical and biological weapons. They asked for permission to land, but there was no reply.  "Never thought I'd be asking a nuclear waste dump for refuge," says Grey. "Given it has a three-mile security perimeter, we didn't dare get any closer."  Next try was the Marshall Islands - completely closed.  Along the route ahead are some islands evacuated after contamination by US nuclear tests in the 1950s, which would not be safe to live in permanently, but perhaps safe enough for a short visit.  This could be the only place, Grey thinks, where they might be unnoticed or tolerated, and somewhere they could try waiting for a while. He points out that barring the boat is irrational, because they have been effectively quarantined at sea.  "Lawmakers didn't consider the fact that we spend weeks at sea in the strictest of quarantine. It's us that are at risk from land-dwellers, not the reverse." They are going slowly, intentionally, aiming to reach Indonesian waters in early July, hoping that by then they will be allowed to enter.  If they can't, the Arka Kinari will need to seek refuge from the typhoons elsewhere, preferably a country not far away - if there is one that will have them - from which they can make a dash for Indonesia between typhoons, when borders open. On the project website they have announced all scheduled performances are suspended. When this crisis finally does come to an end, it states, the Arka Kinari will be ready to begin its role inspiring people through music to build a better future. Few Australians are aware that the country's Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples had regular contact with foreign Muslims long before the arrival of Christian colonisers. And Islam continues to exercise an appeal for some Aboriginal peoples today. When Islam came to AustraliaShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window My Money is a series looking at how people spend their money - and the sometimes tough decisions they have to make. Here Alyssa Hulme from Heber City in Utah, US, takes us through a week in her life during the coronavirus pandemic. Alyssa, 31, is a freelance writer and educational consultant. She and her husband Randy have four children: Ellie, eight, Max, seven, Amethyst, four and Josie, one. She has been homeschooling her children for a year, months before the pandemic started.  She says her week started out mundane but ended up awesome! She had no idea on Monday where she would be by Sunday.  Over to Alyssa.... I started the day nursing my one-year-old, passed her off to her dad for breakfast and settled down for a solid 45 minutes of private time before spending the rest of the day homeschooling three kids and caring for a baby. After prayer, meditation, and setting my To-Dos for the day, I purchased a course, the 30-day Money Cure with Carol Tuttle for $297 (£242). The course is on gaining financial affluence by clearing out limiting belief systems that don't serve me and replacing them with healthy practices. I have been looking forward to this course for months and have set aside money for this specific purpose.  After that I moved on to begin my day with my family and set everyone to their beginning tasks of piano, chores, and math. We've been homeschooling for a year now, so it's been a pretty typical day. But at lunchtime instead of transitioning to a play date, my husband took our eldest out for one-on-one time to help supplement the loss of activities and outings that has come with Covid-19 lockdowns.  We've been isolating since the end of February and the loss of friends is wearing on us all. During our midday quiet time I taught two online vocal training lessons virtually to students who live in town. Typically they'd come to my home, but we are all still isolating. After that we settled into our evening routine: I made dinner, we ate together and then held our weekly "family night" - an evening of talent shows, games, treats and fun. Total spend: $297 (£242) I continued with the money course. I am starting up a homeschool consulting business and really want to get on the correct and mentally healthy track for the sake of my business. The course has helped me identify several limiting beliefs I can clear up to allow space for more growth. Then, as every weekday for months, we did homeschool, lunch and quiet time in the afternoon.  During quiet time I had a virtual occupational therapy appointment for my one-year-old in order to evaluate her for possible gross motor delays. This is free through our state. Next I had a virtual appointment with my therapist. This costs $110 after insurance and is withdrawn from my Health Saving Account, an account we pay into monthly through my husband's pay check and is tax free. Therapy always really takes it out of me and today it was compounded by some new business issues I'm working through, so my husband picked up dinner from a fastfood Chinese restaurant for $40. It ended up being a lot of food and will last a good two and a half meals for the six of us.  I took the evening to work more on my business and work on my personal goals. Normally I'd go out with friends or go to the gym, but everything is closed, so I get to save more money and get to know my bed a little better. Total spend: $150 (£122) Our big outing today was a trip up the canyon near our home. We spent two hours hiking in the woods, building fairy houses and crossing streams.  Later in the evening I started making plans for next year's homeschool and bought some notebooks and stationery through Target.com. I really dislike online shopping, especially for something as personal as a notebook. As a writer, the size, weight and binding of a notebook really matters to me, so buying from an online shop is very disorienting.  I also bought a summer dress through Target.com, something I can easily nurse in and hope to be able to wear out and about someday here soon when the quarantine is lifted. Our county just moved to a low-risk status, so hopefully my husband and I can start up our weekly date nights soon.  Total spend: $110.52 (£90) Late last night my husband discovered that he will not be returning to work in his office until the end of 2020. We discussed buying a motorhome, living in it for the next six months, renting out our home, and working and doing homeschool on the go. This has been a dream of ours for 10 years, but it never worked out with our careers. Now is the time.  Today we decided to rent an RV (recreational vehicle) - $1,160 for four nights - and start testing out different configurations and living quarters. We decided to head for Yellowstone National Park. Two of the four entrances are now open! I found an RV site and started packing up.  I normally would have gone grocery shopping last night but our travel plans halted that. As a result we were out of food today, so I grabbed lunch from a local shop for $33.50 and dinner from a restaurant for $45. This is not a normal thing for us to just pick up and drop a ton of money on travel, but we have now been in isolation since the end of February and we are all so ready to have a new experience.  This money is coming from the allotment my husband and I had set aside to celebrate our 10 year anniversary tomorrow, but all our kid-free-for-the-first-time-in-five-years international travel plans were squashed by the virus. This will be an interesting substitute.  We parked the RV along our path to Yellowstone at a Walmart. Anyone can park there overnight for free, so it's a great backup to have in mind when travelling.  Total spend: $1,238.50 (£1,005) Happy 10 year anniversary to my husband and me! We celebrate the day by first getting groceries from Walmart and starting the trek to Yellowstone. I bought groceries for the week for $233. Not too bad for a family of six with limited fridge and cupboard space. We stopped to fill up the RV with gas for $213. After several hours of driving, we arrived at the spot I had reserved online yesterday for two nights, a total of $180, including water and electricity plug-ins. It's a little high for an RV site, but it's the closest I could find to the park entrance online and we decided to value time in the park over the cost of the campsite. (All the sites inside the park are closed due to Covid-19.) Total spend: $626 (£510) More blogs from the BBC's My Money Series: We woke early and headed to the park today, but it was closed due to a snowstorm. The road ended up getting 12 inches of snow in some places! Instead of exploring the park we explored the National Forest just outside. Total spend: $0 We got up early again and were able to enter the park! We used our National Parks Pass to get in, so no cost today. We did everything that was open in the park, the big attractions for us being the Upper and Lower falls outlooks, the Grand Prismatic Spring, and Old Faithful.  We saw so much wildlife on this trip, far more than my husband or I even saw here as children. We drove by and hiked next to elk, bison, deer, egrets, and even several bears including a baby and mama bear. We attribute this expanse of wildlife to conservation efforts in the park as well as the closure of the park over the last several months.  The snow also allowed us to see all the animal tracks throughout the park which our kids loved! Old Faithful had the largest crowd, but still very small even for this time of year. We watched with a small, social distancing crowd for the big event, and then headed out. We were tempted to get take-out from the lodge near Old Faithful, but decided to continue eating the food we'd already purchased knowing the lodge food prices are really marked up.  We packed up and exited the park through the South Entrance and drove through Grand Tetons National Park and got gas in Jackson Hole for $176. Wyoming has lots of open land for free parking, but with a new vehicle and dark terrain, we decided to stay overnight in a National Forest campsite a half hour away for $15 for the night. We pulled in about 23:00, paid via cash in a drop box, and enjoyed sleeping next to a river and under a blanket of stars. Total spend: $191 (£156) Thanks for coming with me on my 10 year wedding anniversary trip! This is not the trip we'd planned, but it's been wonderful for our family. We've seen two more National Parks, taken a break from quarantine in a way that feels safe for us, and enjoyed our beautiful nation.  This is an unusually high week for us because we went on our trip. But considering $2,000 of that was spent on our trip and only $613.02 spent on our normal life, I feel good about that. We had $2,000+ saved for months now to go to Barbados later this summer, but we have given up all international travel until the virus settles down. All in, I feel like this was a successful trip. We would not be moving forward with purchasing an RV had we not had the real life experience of travelling in one for an extended period of time.  The remaining $613.02 also reflects an unusual cost in the money course I am taking. I haven't purchased class tuition in probably five years, but being home all the time has me under-stimulated and needing a project.  I think like many families these days, our spending in many areas has decreased (no extracurriculars, less shopping and self-care purchases, almost no gas purchases), but in other ways expanded. I don't bring my kids into any grocery stores anymore, so when my husband is too busy at work to be with them and we run out of food, I get take-out meals. When our mental health is being run down by monotony, we rent RVs, buy our kids bikes, and online shop for anything to help the kids make it through the day. This is survival for us.  I feel very privileged to be financially secure and have a very stable income. While the world is in chaos we will continue to use money as a tool to support our mental wellbeing and try to take advantage of the new opportunities opening up to us.  We're looking for more people to share what they spend their money on. If you're interested, please email my.money@bbc.co.uk or get in touch via our My Money (World) Facebook group, or if you live in the UK, please join our My Money (UK) Facebook group and we'll aim to contact you.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Han Jong-sun still clearly remembers the moment he was abducted with his sister.  It was a beautiful autumn day in 1984, and Han, then eight years old, was enjoying a long-hoped-for trip to the city with his busy father.  But Han's father still had a few errands to run, and he decided the quickest - and safest - thing to do would be to leave the children with an officer at a police substation for a few minutes. That police officer would tear the family apart.  "A bus stopped in front of the police substation and we were forced into the bus," Han recalls more than 30 years later. "A police officer exchanged unknown signs with the people who got off the bus. "We had no idea where we were taken to. 'Daddy told us to wait here! Daddy is coming!' We cried and bawled. "They started beating us, saying that we were too loud." The bus was taking them to Hyungje Bokjiwon, a private facility that was officially a welfare centre. But in reality, allege those who survived, it was a brutal detention centre which held thousands of people against their will - some for years on end. Warning: Some readers may find some of these details upsetting According to testimonies and evidence gathered from the site, detainees say they were used as slave labour at construction sites, farms, and factories during the 1970s and 80s. They were also allegedly tortured and raped, with hundreds dying under the inhumane conditions. The facility at Hyungje Bokjiwon has been compared to a concentration camp, but its story is not widely known, and nobody - to this day - has been held accountable for the atrocities that reportedly happened within its walls. For Han and his sister, their arrival was the start of a nightmare which would last three and a half years, and forever change the course of their lives. In the 1980s, South Korea was booming economically. It had achieved incredible growth, overcoming the scars of the Korean War in the 1950s, after which the Korean peninsula was split into North and South. The whole country was in a fever ahead of the 1986 Asian Games and the 1988 Seoul Olympics, and the government began spurring on the nation's rebranding efforts. But behind the so-called "Miracle of Han River" was a brutal and dark reality. In April 1981, a letter arrived at the office of then-Prime Minister Nam Duck-woo. The letter, handwritten by President Chun Doo-Hwan, a former general who had seized power through a military coup a year earlier, ordered the authorities to "crack down on begging and take protective measures for vagrants". Under the ordinance which allowed arbitrary detention of vagrants, social welfare centres were set up and buses with signs that read "Vagrants' Transport Vehicle" began to appear in large cities like Busan. These welfare centres, mostly private facilities, were given subsidies from the government based on the number of people they took care of. Meanwhile, police are said to have been rewarded for "purifying" the streets by sending people to these centres.  Rough sleepers, disabled people, some orphan children, and even ordinary citizens who just failed to show their identification when asked, were allegedly taken to the centres as part of the "Social Purification Projects". Hyungje Bokjiwon was one of the biggest of these welfare centres, not that far from a residential area in the south-eastern port city of Busan. The owner, Park In-guen, often insisted that they were there to feed, clothe and educate the vagrants.  On paper, each of the people who arrived at these centres should have only been kept inside for a year, given training and then released back into society. The reality is that, for many, the next time they would see their friends and family again was in 1987, when the centres were forced to close after more than 30 escaped inmates blew the whistle on what was really happening behind their walls. Choi Seung-woo, another Hyungje Bokjiwon survivor, was 13 when he was taken off the streets on his way home from school. "A police officer asked me to stop and started searching my bag," he told the BBC. "There was half a loaf of bread, a leftover of my lunch which was given from school.  "He asked where I stole the bread from. He tortured me, burning my genitals with a lighter. He kept beating me, saying he wasn't going to let me go unless I confessed to the 'crime'. "Just wanting to go home, I lied. 'I stole it, I stole it. Please let me go…'" About 10 minutes after he says he was forced to confess to a crime he did not commit, a freezer dump truck arrived, and he was forced inside. Choi says that was the start of his "prison life".  He spent almost five years in Hyungje Bokjiwon, in which time he says he saw - and experienced - brutal sexual and physical violence. To keep control of the inmates, he says, the centre was arranged like an army. Choi was placed in a platoon, under the command of another inmate who had risen to become a platoon leader, given authority to "educate others" and tacitly allowed to use physical force. "The platoon leader and some other guys took all of my clothes off and poured a bucket of cold water on my body.  "While I was trying to sleep, shivering naked, the platoon leader came again and raped me. He did that to me for three consecutive nights until I was transferred to a different platoon." It took Choi just a week to realise that "people are being killed here". "I saw a guy wearing a white robe dragging an inmate across the floor," he says. "He seemed dead. He was bleeding all over his body. His eyes were rolling back. The white robe guy didn't care at all and just kept dragging the man to somewhere. "A few days later, a guy showed some sort of resistance by asking the platoon leader some forbidden questions like 'Why are we trapped in here? Why should we be beaten?' "Four people came and rolled him in a blanket. They kicked him all over his body until he fainted, foaming at the mouth. People took him out wrapped. He never returned to the centre. I knew that he died." Aged just eight when he arrived, Han says he was the youngest in his platoon and was usually given manual work, like folding envelopes or making toothpicks. He described the facility as "hell". "The only thing I was provided from the centre was a set of blue training suits, rubber shoes, and a piece of nylon underwear.  "I rarely had a chance to take a shower. Lice were all over my body. We had rotten fish and stinking barley rice every day, literally every day. Almost all of the inmates were malnourished.  "Four people slept in zigzags on a small bed. Rape occurred every night in the corner of the dormitory." Some people dreamt of an escape, he says, adding that some even tried running away, but it was almost impossible to get past the guards and jump over a 7m (23ft)fence. If you tried, failure was not an option. "I knew that if I failed to escape, I would be beaten to death," Han said. The mutual monitoring system made escape more difficult. Han says that sometimes mass escape was planned secretly, but there were always whistleblowers. Prof Park Sook-kyung, of Kyung Hee University, who took part in a recent investigation into what happened at Hyungje Bokjiwon, pointed out the rule under which managers selected platoon leaders and gave them privileges helped maintain the whole detention system. "The platoon leader I met said he had mixed feelings about what happened in the past. He said he saw himself as a bastard, but he did that to survive. "If someone escaped, the platoon leader had to be punished instead." Some parents tried to get their children back. Choi's family searched everywhere for their beloved son.  Choi says his family tried filing missing persons reports for him and his brother, who had also been taken to the centre, but police simply ignored them. By the mid-1980s, rumours started spreading in Busan about people being beaten to death inside the so-called welfare centre.  Confident that his children were kidnapped and trapped in the facility, Choi's father knocked on the door of Hyungje Bokjiwon. His protest led the centre managers to release the brothers in 1986.  A year later, Park In-guen, who ran Hyungje Bokjiwon, was arrested. The centre was forced to close. Life after release was not easy though.  Choi says his life was like that of a "beast". His brother took his own life in 2009. "I was still a vagrant in the eyes of the society. I could only live a life of a vagrant, a beast. No-one held out their hands for us. We were branded by the state and the people followed. Whenever I said I was in Hyungje Bokjiwon, people were afraid of me." Han, meanwhile, had lost contact with his sister and his father, who had also ended up in the centre.  Eventually, in 2007, he found them being treated in hospital for the mental trauma inflicted during their years at the centre. A report into the centre by the then-opposition party published in 1987 found more than 500 detainees died under the inhumane treatment during the 12 years in which Hyungje Bokjiwon was in operation.  But nobody has ever been held to account for their deaths, nor the alleged human rights abuses which took place.  Park was eventually sentenced to two and a half years in prison only for embezzlement of state subsidies. He died of natural causes in 2016. Two years later, the prosecutor who led the initial investigation into Hyungje Bokjiwon confessed that "there was external pressure by the military government to stop the investigation... and demand a short sentence for Park". That same year, the then-prosecutor general Moon Moo-il formally apologised for the initial failures and requested that the Supreme Court review the ruling against Park, admitting that "no proper investigation was carried out". Han has never given up hope of a proper investigation: he has been protesting in front of the South Korean national assembly since 2012, demanding a state inquiry into Hyungje Bokjiwon. Choi joined him in 2013. Earlier this month, Choi staged a rooftop protest and was later taken to a hospital. He's still attending psychotherapy sessions regularly. There is some hope, though: a new report by the Busan city government, seen by BBC Korean, clearly shows that Hyungje Bokjiwon was not the welfare centre it claimed to be. Every one of the 149 former inmates - including a "platoon leader" - who took part in a survey said they were held by force. A third of them have a disability, and more than half failed to receive a proper education. The team behind the report, Prof Park says, also believes "there was a torture room hidden inside Park In-guen's office". The report also shows Park's centre benefited from the systematic segregation policy supported by the Chun administration during the 1980s.  There are now signs those locked up in Hyungje Bokjiwon may finally get the justice they have waited so long for: on 20 May, the South Korean National Assembly passed a bill, ordering the allegations be looked at again.  The next day, President Moon Jae-in, who took part in the investigation in 1987 as a member of Busan District Bar Association, said that he was "always sorry for failing to properly reveal the truth at that time", ordering a fresh investigation. It has given Han a sliver of hope. He has even stopped his protest in front of the national assembly. "I've always questioned myself. 'Did I really do something wrong to be taken to the hell-like facility?' If so, was it that grave that my whole life should be destroyed? "I don't think I could forgive the government and the people related for letting it happen. However, if they succeed in revealing what really happened in the facility and make an official apology for the victims, I would try to forgive. I will try. "My only wish is for my family to be reunited like in the past when I was an eight-year-old boy who just loved to play with daddy and sister." Illustrations based on drawings by one of the survivors of the facilities, Han Jong-sun, and edited by Davies SuryaShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window South Africa leads this continent in many ways. Right now, it is poised to lead Africa into the next, most dangerous phase of the pandemic, as the country braces itself for a dramatic rise in infections that will almost certainly overwhelm its relatively well-resourced healthcare system. Here are eight things it can teach the rest of Africa:  No, it is not a joke. Governments, and medical teams, still need to focus a lot more on hygiene.  Instead of wasting time and money - as many experts now see it - on acquiring expensive but relatively ineffective ventilators, the evidence from South African hospitals already grappling with the virus points to the need for vastly improved hygiene protocols.  Several major hospitals have already been forced to shut after becoming hot spots for the virus.  Doctors are warning that medical staff continue to congregate in tea rooms, removing their masks, passing mobile phones to each other, and undermining all the work they do on the wards.  "The most dangerous place in a clinic is undoubtedly the tea room. We're trying to get that message out," said Doctor Tom Boyles, an infectious disease specialist in Johannesburg.  After a promising start, South Africa is now struggling, woefully, with its testing. It has built up a huge backlog - "tens of thousands" according to several sources - at its laboratories, which is now undermining the validity of the entire testing process. "How do we prioritise limited resources?" asked Prof Shabir Madhi, a prominent vaccine expert, who said South Africa's likely testing limit - because of financial and logistical constraints - would stay at about 20,000 per day.  An impressive number, perhaps, but of no real use, doctors insist, unless the results of those tests can reliably be produced within, ideally, 24 hours. Much longer than that and an infected person will either have spread the virus to too many others to trace properly, or they will already be in hospital, or they will have passed the point of serious risk for infecting others.  "Currently the turnaround time for Covid tests is around 14 days in most places, so that basically means it's a complete waste of time," said Dr Boyles.  The same concerns apply to South Africa's much-hailed community screening and testing programme which, experts say, has outlived its usefulness, since the virus has now spread far beyond the capacity of the country's large team of community health workers to track with any effectiveness. "The timeline renders it meaningless and compromises the care that should be occurring in hospitals," according to Prof Madhi, who said it was vital that the testing system be aimed, as efficiently as possible, at hospitals, medical staff and those at most risk.  But there are signs of a political battle delaying these changes, with officials reportedly resisting calls for older tests to be simply thrown away.  Much has been made of the fact that Africa has an unusually young population, and, indeed, that may yet help to mitigate the impact of the virus here.  But the evidence from several South African hospitals already suggests that alarmingly high levels of obesity - along with hypertension and diabetes - in younger Covid-19 patients are linked to many fatalities. It is believed that as many South Africans suffer from hypertension and diabetes as from HIV - some seven million people. That is one in eight of the population. Some of them are undiagnosed. Two-thirds of coronavirus deaths in South Africa so far are among people aged under 65, according to Prof Madhi. "Obesity is a big issue, along with hypertension and diabetes," he said.  Although demographic differences make it hard to make direct comparisons between countries, over half of younger South Africans who are dying from Covid-19 have some other illness - roughly twice the rate seen in Europe.  A busy antenatal clinic in Johannesburg recently closed down following reports that one member of staff had been exposed to a coronavirus patient. Twelve nurses were sent home and told to self-isolate. The move has been quietly condemned by many doctors who see it as evidence of a wider climate of unnecessary fear and over-caution among medical staff which is in danger of crippling the country's health system and undermining its fight against the virus.  "There needs to be clear guidance on what sort exposure is significant. We have not adequately demystified this virus," said Prof Madhi, who stressed that a person needed to spend 15 minutes or more in close proximity to a confirmed case to be considered at serious risk of infection. Unions have been understandably robust in seeking to protect their members and to raise concerns where personal protection equipment (PPE) has been lacking.  But several medical workers told me that tougher discipline was needed to enforce hygiene protocols among staff - along with better education and training about managing risk. "Fear is the predominant factor. Morale is definitely low," said one hospital doctor, on condition of anonymity.  "But you also find people who are looking to get quarantined, who are very happy to take a two-week paid holiday" in self-isolation. This week South Africa announced that religious groups could resume worship in gatherings of no more than 50 people.  The move was clearly a political concession by a government under pressure to ease lockdown restrictions and that understands that to retain public trust over the longer-term it must show signs of give and take. But the decision carries significant risks. Religious gatherings - often attracting older people - are known globally to be hot spots for spreading the virus. By choosing to ignore that fact, the government may be undercutting its own messaging. "It undermines any pretence that the regulations are rules are science-based," said political scientist and commentator Richard Calland. One option for the government might have been to bar anyone over 65 from attending a religious service. Instead it has told religious leaders to implement strict social-distancing and hygiene policies in their churches and mosques. Will they comply?  All non-authoritarian governments eventually have to rely on the public's willingness to obey, not just the broad spirit of any regulations, but - as the tea room troubles indicate - the granular detail of clean prayer mats, no-contact services and no more than one person for every 2.5 sq m (about 26 sq ft) of church hall.  South Africa's official opposition, the Democratic Alliance (DA), has been struggling to make itself heard during the lockdown.  A crisis of this magnitude inevitably pushes opposition parties to the sidelines and, one could argue, they would do well to stay there.  When the DA has sought to attract attention to itself, it has shown signs of flip-flopping on policy.  "They should be playing a much longer game, looking to win the peace, not the war," said Mr Calland, citing the example of Clement Atlee, who swept to power in the UK, defeating Winston Churchill in the immediate aftermath of World War Two. The much smaller, populist Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) has already indicated how it plans to win political capital from the crisis, by opposing any easing of the lockdown (its racialised antipathy to foreign investment and to big business freeing it from serious concern about the economic impact). It will presumably seek to blame President Cyril Ramaphosa for the inevitable rise in infections and deaths.  Mr Ramaphosa's own enemies within the governing African National Congress (ANC) - currently silenced - may well make common cause with the EFF on that issue. The blame game will be a brutal one across the continent. Will the power of incumbency - such an important factor in African politics and beyond - prove to be a strength or a weakness with Covid-19? When South Africa banned the sale of alcohol during the lockdown, many people accepted it as a harsh, but perhaps necessary step to limit domestic abuse, prevent violence, and thus keep hospital beds free for coronavirus patients.  But over time, frustration - with the ban, and with the brutal and haphazard enforcement of it - has grown and the clampdown is now set to be partly lifted. So far so good. But in tandem with the alcohol ban, South Africa put a stop to all cigarettes sales too. And that will remain in force indefinitely.  The government insists its decision is based on scientific evidence, but few people seem to believe that is what is really guiding ministers. Instead many suspect that officials are using the lockdown as cover to introduce their own pet projects.  The ban is playing into the hands of powerful criminal syndicates controlling contraband cigarettes, and is costing the government a fortune in lost tax revenues.  But perhaps more importantly, it is undermining the credibility of the lockdown regulations themselves - making compliance, as the country moves to ease some restrictions on movement, less likely. For weeks, it seemed, everyone was talking about finding and building ventilators. But the experience of frontline doctors in Cape Town has already shown that simpler, cheaper and less-intrusive devices can play a far more important role.  Countries need to plan according to their limited resources. "The investment in ventilators was a huge waste," said Prof Madhi, who, like colleagues in Cape Town, stressed the importance of high-flow nasal oxygen machines that work more efficiently than more traditional oxygen masks.  He said he had been "raising the alarm" about the need to improve South Africa's supply of oxygen "for about six weeks". Hospitals in Cape Town are also following the international example of "proning" - lying patients face down in order to improve oxygen supply to their lungs. The principal of looking for simpler solutions applies to staffing too, with many doctors urging the health authorities to focus on bringing final-year medical students, and perhaps retired staff, into an overstretched system, rather than importing expensive foreign doctors from places like Cuba.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window As the US grapples with the coronavirus outbreak, President Donald Trump and and his likely election rival, Joe Biden, have been locking horns over the handling of the crisis. They've traded accusations about access to China for US health experts, and restrictions on flights from China following the outbreak. We've been looking at some of these claims and counter-claims. President Trump failed to get US health officials into China to inspect the outbreak Mr Biden has said there was "no effort" by the president to get US officials into China to inspect the initial outbreak, and also claimed that "Trump never got a CDC team on the ground in China."  But the Trump administration says it did try. Health Secretary Alex Azar told journalists in late January that the US had offered on 6 January to send a team from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) - an offer that was repeated later that month and in February. The CDC is the top government body responsible for protecting public health. Two US experts did get into China as part of a multinational delegation from the World Health Organization, which went in mid-February. These were Weigong Zhou from the US CDC, and Clifford Lane from the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.  It's also worth adding that the CDC itself has had an office in China for decades (more on this further down). Trump allowed 40,000 people to travel to US from China after the travel ban President Trump and Mr Biden have also clashed over how airtight the restrictions introduced on travel from China are. Mr Trump issued an order on 31 January which stopped foreign nationals who had been in China in the previous two weeks from entering the US. This came into effect on 2 February.  An advert by the Biden campaign claims the president let 40,000 travellers into the US from China after he signed the order. President Trump has hit back, saying these were US citizens coming home.  The order does have exemptions for US citizens, legal residents, and non-citizen relatives with close ties. Flight data analysed by the New York Times shows 40,000 people arrived in the US directly from China in the two months after President Trump's restrictions. We don't know how many of these were US citizens, but it is unlikely they all were  - as President Trump claims - with other exemptions also applying. President Trump cut the numbers of US disease experts in China before the outbreak This claim by Mr Biden refers to the presence of a CDC office inside China, which it's maintained for decades. Joe Biden said: "We had over 44, if I'm not mistaken, people from the CDC in China, to observe what was going on. The president brought home the vast majority of them and I think left only four in place." Mr Biden is right that overall numbers of CDC staff in China have come down significantly, but he's not correct about the numbers.  The CDC website says that as of March this year there were 14 staff in total working in China - three from the US and 11 employed locally. That's down from 47 CDC staff a year earlier, eight of whom were US employees and 39 of whom were locally recruited. Mr Biden further alleges that a key US expert role inside China has not been filled. He said: "We had an American official stationed inside the Chinese disease control agency serving as our eyes and ears. President Trump left the position vacant as the outbreak hit." It's true that the last American - a CDC employee -  left her role in China's disease control agency in 2019 before the coronavirus emerged, and was not replaced. When President Trump was asked about this on 22 March, he said that media reports about the CDC were "100 percent wrong" and then referred the question to Robert Redfield, the CDC director, who was with him.  Mr Redfield said the CDC "China office is actually being augmented, as we speak," but didn't explain why this particular role had ceased. Biden called Trump xenophobic for China travel ban President Trump claims Mr Biden "went crazy" and called him "xenophobic" for banning people entering the US from China. When the order was announced, Mr Biden did say it wasn't the time for "Donald Trump's record of hysterical xenophobia", and the next day tweeted a similar message. The Biden campaign says this wasn't a reference to the travel restrictions, but to the president's overall record in office. Mr Biden has never specifically said he opposed travel restrictions per se, but he did say in March that "travel restrictions based on favouritism and politics, rather than risk, will be counter-productive". He publicly supported the travel ban in early April, with his campaign saying: "Science supported this ban, therefore he did too." President Trump has also said Mr Biden wrote him a letter of apology regarding his comments about the China travel restrictions, but this isn't true, according to the Biden campaign. Read more from Reality Check Send us your questions Follow us on TwitterShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The armies of the world's two most populous nations are locked in a tense face-off high in the Himalayas, which has the potential to escalate as they seek to further their strategic goals. Officials quoted by the Indian media say thousands of Chinese troops have forced their way into the Galwan valley in Ladakh, in the disputed Kashmir region.  Indian leaders and military strategists have clearly been left stunned. The reports say that in early May, Chinese forces put up tents, dug trenches and moved heavy equipment several kilometres inside what had been regarded by India as its territory. The move came after India built a road several hundred kilometres long connecting to a high-altitude forward air base which it reactivated in 2008. The message from China appears clear to observers in Delhi - this is not a routine incursion. "The situation is serious. The Chinese have come into territory which they themselves accepted as part of India. It has completely changed the status quo," says Ajai Shukla, an Indian military expert who served as a colonel in the army. China takes a different view, saying it's India which has changed facts on the ground.  Reports in the Indian media said soldiers from the two sides clashed on at least two occasions in Ladakh. Stand-offs are reported in at least three locations: the Galwan valley; Hot Springs; and Pangong lake to the south. India and China share a border more than 3,440km (2,100 miles) long and have overlapping territorial claims. Their border patrols often bump into each other, resulting in occasional scuffles but both sides insist no bullet has been fired in four decades. Their armies - two of the world's largest - come face to face at many points. The poorly demarcated Line of Actual Control (LAC) separates the two sides. Rivers, lakes and snowcaps mean the line separating soldiers can shift and they often come close to confrontation. The current military tension is not limited to Ladakh. Soldiers from the two sides are also eyeball-to-eyeball in Naku La, on the border between China and the north-eastern Indian state of Sikkim. Earlier this month they reportedly came to blows.  And there's a row over a new map put out by Nepal, too, which accuses India of encroaching on its territory by building a road connecting with China. There are several reasons - but competing strategic goals lie at the root, and both sides blame each other. "The traditionally peaceful Galwan River has now become a hotspot because it is where the LAC is closest to the new road India has built along the Shyok River to Daulet Beg Oldi (DBO) - the most remote and vulnerable area along the LAC in Ladakh," Mr Shukla says. India's decision to ramp up infrastructure seems to have infuriated Beijing. Chinese state-run media outlet Global Times said categorically: "The Galwan Valley region is Chinese territory, and the local border control situation was very clear."  "According to the Chinese military, India is the one which has forced its way into the Galwan valley. So, India is changing the status quo along the LAC - that has angered the Chinese," says Dr Long Xingchun, president of the Chengdu Institute of World Affairs (CIWA), a think tank. Michael Kugelman, deputy director of the Asia programme at the Wilson Center, another think tank, says this face-off is not routine. He adds China's "massive deployment of soldiers is a show of strength". The road could boost Delhi's capability to move men and material rapidly in case of a conflict. Differences have been growing in the past year over other areas of policy too.  When India controversially decided to end Jammu and Kashmir's limited autonomy in August last year, it also redrew the region's map.  The new federally-administered Ladakh included Aksai Chin, an area India claims but China controls. Senior leaders of India's Hindu-nationalist BJP government have also been talking about recapturing Pakistan-administered Kashmir. A strategic road, the Karakoram highway, passes through this area that connects China with its long-term ally Pakistan. Beijing has invested about $60bn (£48bn) in Pakistan's infrastructure - the so-called China Pakistan Economic corridor (CPEC) - as part of its Belt and Road Initiative and the highway is key to transporting goods to and from the southern Pakistani port of Gwadar. The port gives China a foothold in the Arabian Sea.  In addition, China was unhappy when India initially banned all exports of medical and protective equipment to shore up its stocks soon after the coronavirus pandemic started earlier this year.  "We routinely see both armies crossing the LAC - it's fairly common and such incidents are resolved at the local military level. But this time, the build-up is the largest we have ever seen," says former Indian diplomat P Stobdan, an expert in Ladakh and India-China affairs. "The stand-off is happening at some strategic areas that are important for India. If Pangong lake is taken, Ladakh can't be defended. If the Chinese military is allowed to settle in the strategic valley of Shyok, then the Nubra valley and even Siachen can be reached." In what seems to be an intelligence failure, India seems to have been caught off guard again. According to Indian media accounts, the country's soldiers were outnumbered and surrounded when China swiftly diverted men and machines from a military exercise to the border region. This triggered alarm in Delhi - and India has limited room for manoeuvre. It can either seek to persuade Beijing to withdraw its troops through dialogue or try to remove them by force. Neither is an easy option.  "China is the world's second-largest military power. Technologically it's superior to India. Infrastructure on the other side is very advanced. Financially, China can divert its resources to achieve its military goals, whereas the Indian economy has been struggling in recent years, and the coronavirus crisis has worsened the situation," says Ajai Shukla. History holds difficult lessons for India. It suffered a humiliating defeat during the 1962 border conflict with China. India says China occupies 38,000km of its territory. Several rounds of talks in the last three decades have failed to resolve the boundary issues.  China already controls the Aksai Chin area further east of Ladakh and this region, claimed by India, is strategically important for Beijing as it connects its Xinjiang province with western Tibet.  In 2017 India and China were engaged in a similar stand-off lasting more than two months in Doklam plateau, a tri-junction between India, China and Bhutan. India objected to China building a road in a region claimed by Bhutan. The Chinese stood firm. Within six months, Indian media reported that Beijing had built a permanent all-weather military complex there.  This time, too, talks are seen as the only way forward - both countries have so much to lose in a military conflict. "China has no intention to escalate tensions and I think India also doesn't want a conflict. But the situation depends on both sides. The Indian government should not be guided by the nationalistic media comments," says Dr Long Xingchun of the CIWA in Chengdu. "Both countries have the ability to solve the dispute through high-level talks." Chinese media have given hardly any coverage to the border issue, which is being interpreted as a possible signal that a route to talks will be sought. Pratyush Rao, associate director for South Asia at Control Risks consultancy, says both sides have "a clear interest in prioritising their economic recovery" and avoiding military escalation. "It is important to recognise that both sides have a creditable record of maintaining relative peace and stability along their disputed border."Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window For years, Twitter resisted calls to treat President Trump just like any other user. Then this week, everything changed. On Tech Tent, we examine the conflict between the president and his favourite social media platform. It began on Wednesday. Twitter had been under fire for allowing tweets in which the president shared a far-fetched conspiracy theory about an alleged crime involving a TV presenter and former Republican congressman.  But instead of taking action on those tweets, it fact-checked two others - about postal voting under a new policy which seeks to deter content which might suppress voting. Social media expert Chris Stokel-Walker tells Tech Tent that if Twitter thought limiting action to the area of elections was a cautious first step, it was wrong. "As soon as you start engaging in any sort of moderation or comment on politics, you run the risk of potentially alienating 50% of your audience - and given our very politically fractious times, that is more of a risk than ever," he said. Having taken that first step, and seeing President Trump immediately go nuclear and threatening to go so far as to shut the social media platform down, Twitter might have been tempted to go quiet for a bit. Instead, it chose escalation.  In the early hours of Friday morning, in a tweet about the protests in Minneapolis over the death of a black man, Mr Trump warned: "when the looting starts, the shooting starts".  Twitter's moderation team swung into action - after consulting CEO Jack Dorsey - and obscured the tweet with a message saying that rules on glorifying violence had been broken. Users could still see the tweet by clicking through that message, but sharing it was made harder.  A few hours later, as the president woke up, the official White House account simply repeated the offending tweet. We watched with bated breath to see what would happen and, sure enough, Twitter's moderators slapped the same warning on the tweet. It is difficult to see either side backing down now.  The White House is busy scouring Twitter to find examples of other world leaders who have glorified violence without any comeback. Others are finding all sorts of old Trump tweets that appear to have broken the rules by, for instance, spreading misinformation about treatments for coronavirus. Jack Dorsey, who had appeared very reluctant to apply anything but the most light-touch regulation, now finds himself faced with the unappealing prospect of cracking down on world leaders far and wide. Meanwhile, there is not exactly much solidarity being shown by Facebook. In general, it has been a more tightly-moderated platform than Twitter, but Mark Zuckerberg has made it clear he has no intention of following Jack Dorsey's lead when it comes to fact checking politicians. Donald Trump's Facebook page has simply replicated the posts which fell foul of Twitter - with no sign of fact-checking or finger-wagging. "This is the kind of thing that Donald Trump revels in," says Chris Stokel-Walker, "an ex-reality TV star who likes to stir the pot. He's now managed to set Mark Zuckerberg and Jack Dorsey against each other." For all the rage about freedom of speech from the president - and remember Twitter as a private company can do what it likes in that area - he seems unlikely to kill what has become his main platform for getting his message out.  Like the fighting couple in some dodgy romcom, Trump and Twitter need each other - though one suspects Jack Dorsey might be tempted to throw the President out and change the locks.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window "I am an expert bomb maker.  I can make bombs in just five minutes."   Ali Fauzi was a key member of Jemaah Islamiyah, a militant group with links to al-Qaeda, which was responsible for Indonesia's worst attack - the 2002 Bali bombing that killed more than 200 people.  "My brothers carried out the Bali bombing. It was huge bomb in the heart of the island's tourist district."  The group went on to carry out a string of bombings in Indonesia. They were deadly attacks on major hotels and Western embassies. The seemingly sleepy village of Tenggulun in Lamongan, East Java was the group's base camp.  Now Ali Fauzi's mission is very different. He works to help former jihadis leave a life of violence and to stop new recruits from joining the next wave of militant groups in South East Asia. "The reality is that it is much easier to recruit people to terrorist groups," he says. "They only have to pull a trigger and lots of people will join them but the process of deradicalisation takes time. It has to be done step by step." And his new mission has come at a high personal cost. "The threats against me are intense, it's not just verbal attacks but death threats. But, honestly, I am not scared because I know what I am doing is right. I am ready and prepared to die doing this." It was videos of foreign wars - in Afghanistan, Bosnia and the Palestinian Territories, watched on mobile phones from their quiet Javanese village - that motivated Ali Fauzi and his brothers to join militant groups. "We saw videos of the brutal attacks on civilians. I wanted to carry out jihad to protect the Muslim people from the bullies. With young, hot blood I wanted to fight back." While his brothers went to fight alongside the mujahideen, in Afghanistan, Ali Fauzi stayed closer to home, joining Islamic militants fighting for a Muslim homeland in the southern Philippines.  "I really wanted to die there. I imagined my own death all the time," he says. "I believed that if I was killed in battle I would go straight to heaven and be met by angels there. That's what our mentors told us every day." When his brothers returned from Afghanistan, they put into practice what they had learnt abroad.  In October 2002, they were among a group that detonated two bombs targeting nightclubs in the Kuta area of Bali, the island popular with international tourists.  "I saw it on TV and I was shocked, there were so many dead bodies," says Ali Fauzi. "It led the authorities right to us." Two of his brothers, Ali Ghufron and Amrozi, were executed while his third, Ali Imron, is behind bars for life.   Ali Fauzi, who insists he was not involved in the Bali bombing, spent three years in jail for other terror-related offences. That's when his life took on a dramatically new direction. "Police treated me very humanely. If they had tortured me then maybe seven generations after me would be fighting the Indonesian government," he says. "I hated the police, we thought of them as Satan. That's what we were taught. But the reality was completely different. That's when my whole perspective completely changed." He also met victims of bombings his group had carried out.   "I cried. My heart melted, seeing the horrific effect our bombs had. That's what made me really want to change from an agent of war to become a warrior for peace." As the evening call to prayer rings out across the Tenggulun village, prayer mats are rolled out in a square at the side of the village's main mosque. They are just next to the office of Circle of Peace, the foundation Ali Fauzi set up in 2016 to divert people away from extremism. The prayer event tonight is led by two bomb victims, guests of honour in this village which was once the base camp for the militant groups that carried out the attacks that destroyed their lives.  "I often bring victims to the community," Ali Fauzi says, "as meeting them was the thing that destroyed my ego."  On the screen on the side of the stage a graphic video shows the aftermath of all the bombs in Indonesia. It's an extraordinary meeting. In the audience are police who arrested members of this community, as well as those who have served time in jail on terrorism offences. They are listening to the victims of the bombing talk, through tears, about the pain they have suffered. In the audience is 33-year-old Zulia Mahendra. He was a teenager when his father, Amrozi, was arrested, sentenced to death and then later executed for the Bali bombing.   Amrozi was dubbed the "smiling assassin" by the media because he showed no remorse during the trial, grinning throughout and defiant to his death. A season of stories about bringing people together in a fragmented world. After the meeting, Mahendra greets the two bomb victims. They hug and hold hands, and he repeatedly says sorry.  "I want to say sorry, not because I am wrong. But he was my father and these are the victims of my family's actions. I have a responsibility to say sorry, on behalf of my father."  Mahendra, too, has gone through an astonishing transformation. "When my father was executed, I wanted revenge. I wanted to learn how to make bombs too," he admits.  "But over time and with guidance from my uncles - Ali Fauzi and Ali Imron - they made me realise it was the wrong thing to do. And I joined their project to help other terrorists change." "How I became who I am today was a very, very long journey," says Mahendra. "But I came to a place where I understood that jihad is not killing people or fighting, it can mean working hard for your family." One night, Mahendra says, he looked tearfully at his sleeping child and thought about his father.  "I didn't want my child to have to go through what I have. If I continued on my father's path, my child too would be abandoned. I knew that the right jihad was to look after them - to protect them." But he says he has friends who have joined splinter militant groups in Indonesia, loosely linked to the Islamic State (IS) group. "There are lots of reasons why a person goes in that direction - their economic situation, not having anything to do...  what they are taught and who they are influenced by." Ali Fauzi knocks at the door of the Lamongan jail. This is a familiar place for him, having come here many times to meet family members serving time but also to work with new inmates to try and turn their life around.  "My deradicalisation work is not based on theory. It's from life experience. I was a fighter and a terrorist, so I come into the cells as a friend." But he faces resistance and is viewed by some as a traitor for working with the police. "They say that I am even more of a kafir [unbeliever] than the police or jail guards. I regularly face online abuse and threatening phone calls. But it's okay. I can handle it," he says with a smile.  "Out of the 98 people we have worked with since 2016, two have come out of jail and gone straight back to their militant ways." "Deradicalisation is not easy because you are dealing with people's emotions and way of thinking, you have to give them the right medicine. And sometimes we get it wrong."  Sometimes they get it right.  Sumarno, he says, is one of his success stories. He takes me to a dry field, at the side of the road outside the village. It was here that Sumarno says he hid weapons belonging to Jemaah Islamiyah, after the Bali bombing. After serving a three-year jail sentence, Ali Fauzi helped Sumarno set up a small business - a travel company offering pilgrimage packages to Mecca.  "Now I want to give back to society," says Sumarno. "With this travel company, I hope that I can leave a life of violence behind me." Sitting in his smart air-conditioned office in Paciran, a 20-minute drive from the village, he says he was nervous at first about telling his clients about his violent past, even careful not to say which village he was from.  But now he starts the tour with what he calls his story of redemption.   "I say I am the cousin of Ali Gufron and Amrozi who were executed for carrying out the Bali bombings. I tell them: 'I was part of their group. But thanks be to Allah I have been healed from that rotten way of thinking. And I am your tour guide to Mecca.'" In a room at the side of the village mosque, an after-school club takes place. Children dressed in colourful clothes recite the Koran. Some of their parents are behind bars on terrorism charges. The teachers include Ali Fauzi's wife, Lulu, and Zumrottin Nisa, who is married to Ali Imron. "We stress to them that not everyone believes the same thing," says Lulu. "That there are people in our community who are non-Muslim and we have to treat them with respect as long as they don't try to interfere with our faith." But she says they haven't convinced everyone.  "There are those for and against our new mission. Those that are still militant don't like us now. They stay away from us," she says. "We used to be one group with the same mission but we changed after the Bali bombing killed so many innocent people, many of them Muslims. There are others who haven't changed." In May last year, a family of suicide bombers attacked three churches in East Java.   The father went after one, his teenage sons went after another, and his wife and two daughters, age 12 and nine, blew themselves up at the third.  The attackers were part of the Jamaah Ansharut Daulah (JAD) network, which is loosely linked to IS. JAD has carried out a series of lone wolf attacks against Indonesian security forces and religious minorities. The most recent was a knife attack, by a young couple, against the country's top security officer, Wiranto.  In the Circle of Peace office, Lulu Fauzi says she is shocked women are taking such an active part.  "My husband is working hard to make sure former terrorism inmates don't go back. He is bringing them together and he has been able to turn around many people. "But many people are still radical. We can never really wipe it out," she says.  As we drive through the village, Ali Fauzi's phone is constantly ringing. He takes a call from someone who has recently been released, having served time on terrorism charges. The person needs help getting housing. Another call is from a mother whose son is being questioned by the police. "Dozens of people from our community went to fight with the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq," he says. "Not long ago, a member of IS was detained by the police here. So militant groups still exist and they still threaten Indonesia."  Now he's on the side of what he describes as a battle against extremism and intolerance.  "If we work hard and involve the whole community, then I am still hopeful that we can win this war."Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window It's now part of daily life for many of us - struggling to work out what someone in a supermarket or at work is saying when they're wearing a face mask.  But for people who are deaf or have hearing loss, masks can prevent them understanding anything at all.  "You might as well be speaking in French," says Fizz Izagaren, a paediatric doctor in the UK who has been profoundly deaf since the age of two. "I can hear one or two words but it's random, it makes no sense… When someone is wearing a face mask I've lost the ability to lip read and I've lost facial expressions - I have lost the key things that make a sentence." It is a problem she shares with the some 466 million people around the world who, according to the World Health Organization, have disabling hearing loss.  Standard face masks, which have become widespread as countries try to stop the spread of coronavirus, muffle words and obscure the mouth.  But now charities and manufacturers alike are coming up with a solution. Main dans la Main (Hand in Hand), an association which supports deaf and hearing impaired people in Chevrières, northern France, is among the organisations around the world that have created a mask with a transparent window.  Its founder Kelly Morellon worked with her mother Sylvie to devise a design that covers the nose but makes the mouth visible, and can be washed at a high temperature to reduce infection. "The basic aim of these transparent masks is to allow deaf and hearing impaired people to read the lips of someone speaking to them," Kelly told the BBC.  "But they are also very useful for autistic people, people with learning difficulties and small children who might be scared of masks or need to be able to see facial expressions. "In any case, a transparent mask allows you to see each other's smiles, and at this sad time this could not be more important." Unlike some companies around the world - in Scotland, the US and Indonesia, for instance - Kelly and her mother are not able to produce their masks on a commercial basis.   Instead, they are advising people on how to make their own and there are multiple guidelines online to help. Their top tip is to use a little washing up soap to stop the plastic screen fogging up. But one setting where homemade masks are not suitable - but where both PPE and communication are vital - is in hospitals. There is just one company in the US that has secured Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval to make clear masks for clinical use.  Five hundred of these masks are being used at Brigham and Women's hospital in the US city of Boston. At the moment they are being reserved for staff to wear when they are speaking to patients with hearing loss, or vice versa. Sign language interpreters, who use facial expressions and lip movements alongside body movements to create more complex and culturally rich signs, also wear them. "When we saw the Covid-19 pandemic beginning… we soon realised there was going to be a challenge because of the escalated use of PPE and how that would create communication barriers," said Dr Cheri Blauwet, who leads the disability task force at the Brigham. "We've had glowing feedback from patients and we're getting broader requests from other parts of the hospital, especially the paediatric floors." In the UK, there are no approved manufacturers providing clear masks to hospitals. And the sole US manufacturer is not taking any more orders as it deals with overwhelming demand.  Fizz Izagaren, a paediatric registrar at Frimley Park Hospital in Surrey in the UK who is also deaf, says standard masks prevent her from taking patients' histories verbally. She also says she feels isolated at work because she is not able to speak to her colleagues. "Clear masks should be the norm for everyone in a healthcare setting," she says. She is now working with a product designer to try to come up with a mask that the NHS could use widely. But even once a design and a manufacturer are found, this could take time to roll out. In the meantime, there are concerns the current PPE could stop medical staff getting the required consent from patients.                                                                                                                                                                              An intensive care nurse working in London, who is profoundly deaf, told the BBC she had one experience where a patient, who also had hearing loss, was not able to understand her or her colleagues when they were explaining a procedure. The patient could not give consent and the procedure could not go ahead. "[Clear masks] would make things a lot easier for me," she said. "I would be able to do my jobs properly and safely. I would have more independence rather than having to rely on others." In the UK, eight charities have written to NHS bosses calling for clear masks to be commissioned, warning of "potentially dangerous situations" arising from communication problems. NHS England has not yet responded to the letter, or to the BBC's request for comment.  The UK government says it is supporting CARDMEDIC, which provides digital flashcards and other communication aids to NHS Trusts. There are also apps that transcribe speech into text on a mobile phone.  But deaf workers say these workarounds are not always suitable for sensitive or emergency situations. "As masks become more widespread in the community - it's going to get harder and harder," Dr Izagaren says. "I'm worried the public are going to get more and more frustrated and there will be more discrimination towards the deaf community." It is not just people with hearing loss who could benefit, she says.  Experts suggest that other professions such as taxi drivers or even teachers may find clear masks useful as the coronavirus crisis continues.  A niche product initially designed to help the deaf community, could in fact make everyone's lives better. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Imagine breaking free. You sell your possessions, buy a van, pack it with what you need, and go. For months or years you live a frugal life, going wherever you want. But for thousands who made this dream a reality, coronavirus brought them to a sudden halt, writes Paula Dear, and left them stranded with a van and a vanload of kit on the far side of the world. For Radka and Ivar the plan began to form when they met in 2016. Both working as personal carers for a disabled man in Trondheim, central Norway, they would cross paths as she finished the night shift and he took over for the day. "We met for like five minutes, to change the shift. I was very charming in the morning," jokes Radka. "And then you would stay for breakfast sometimes," Ivar adds. Radka was the more experienced traveller. She had previously hitchhiked from Russia to south-east Asia and was preparing to do the same from Argentina to Alaska. But after falling in love with Ivar, who was in the process of retraining as a nurse, she faced a dilemma. "There were lots of conversations. I said, 'You have to promise me that once you're done studying you'll go with me.' It was a deal-breaker, and Ivar adopted my dream very quickly!" she says. In the meantime, Radka took a six-week trip to Patagonia with a friend, and at one point hitched a lift with a woman called Silvia from Ushuaia in Argentina, the world's southernmost city. They stayed in touch, and three years later this would turn out to be a critical stroke of luck. Radka and Ivar's plan slowly morphed from backpacking to travelling the Americas by van, and they picked up a second-hand Toyota Hiace. With help from Radka's dad, they built a basic bed and kitchen in the back, and storage for their gear - including climbing and freediving equipment, bicycles and an inflatable canoe. "We needed a van because Ivar has a shedload of sports stuff," says Radka. "But also it's the freedom of it. When we are inside the van, with gas for two months and food for several weeks, we can be totally off grid. We thought it would be great to have comfort and the ability to drive wherever we want." Ivar, who'd previously been a climbing instructor, studied hard for his nursing degree and they worked "every single job that came our way" to save money, says Radka, who would often finish a nightshift and go on to do cleaning jobs before having four hours off ahead of the next nightshift. She developed terrible sleeping problems, she says: "I burnt out and made myself ill. But I did it because I had a dream, and I wanted to make it come true." In the flurry of preparations, they were still making last-minute modifications to the van on the day they drove it to the port in Germany for its voyage across the Atlantic and through the Panama Canal to Chile. Six weeks later, in early January they were in San Antonio to collect it and begin their epic journey. It was the height of summer and their plan was to loop down at a leisurely pace to the southern tip of Argentina - the symbolic start of their one-to-two year trip - and then drive north, all the way to Alaska. So, stopping frequently, they slowly headed south, enjoying hikes in the Chilean island of Chiloé and Argentinian trekking hub of El Chaltén, and a trip to the 5km-wide Perito Moreno glacier. Camping out in nature soon started to smooth out Radka's erratic sleeping patterns. El Chaltén was "absolutely amazing", says Radka, who had long fantasised about photographing the famous fiery reds and burnt oranges and yellows of the Patagonian autumn, which by this time was already beginning. "But the weather forecast was bad, so we said, 'Let's go to Ushuaia and when we come back this way it's going to be even nicer colours,'" Ivar says. By this stage they were hearing reports of Covid lockdowns in Europe, but were reassured by friends in Argentina and Chile that similar moves seemed unlikely there. "We were discussing whether we should go to Ushuaia or not, because it's locked in with a Chilean part above it. But there really wasn't any news, and when we asked people they said it was just recommended to wash your hands, no more. So we decided to go. And then it all happened really quickly and we couldn't get back out," says Ivar. Hours after they arrived on 15 March, the borders unexpectedly closed, trapping them on the Argentinian side of Tierra del Fuego island, which can only be exited via a Chilean ferry. With people being ordered to stay at home or in hotels they decided to drive out of the city and wait out the initial 14-day lockdown in their van. As camping was banned, they had to conceal their plans from the police when they encountered a checkpoint at the edge of Ushuaia. An hour north, at a forest lake called Laguna Margarita, they found a spot to wild-camp. "We were afraid someone would see us and report us. But we were really deep in the woods, and nobody came," says Ivar. When the weather allowed, they paddled on the lake or went running. Ivar taught Radka how to rope-climb in the trees. It was tough going at times, too. The wind and rain often forced them inside and there wasn't enough sun to replenish their solar-generated electricity. On day two they ran out of cooking gas, and they were washing in near-freezing water.  But they weren't too worried. Once the two-week confinement was over, they would return to El Chaltén and wait out the crisis - they could happily spend months hiking in the national park's mountains. The lack of gas, however, forced them to drive back towards Ushuaia, and when they picked up a phone signal again it became obvious the crisis was deepening. National parks had closed. They read increasingly desperate reports from fellow nomads on Facebook forums. Moreover, they were "really afraid" they would get into trouble from the police for camping in the car during lockdown. "We didn't know how to explain where we'd been for those two weeks, or where we were going," says Radka. She messaged Silvia, the woman who had given her a ride in 2016. Could she vouch for them or provide an address? En route back to Ushuaia they hit a police checkpoint. "They were filming us and the car, asking where we had been, where we were going. We tried to tell them we'd been camping but we don't speak good Spanish. I'm not sure they understood," says Ivar. "We were so stressed we then took off in the wrong direction. When we turned back we were met by two police cars with sirens." The officers weren't pleased. "They said they would escort us to our hostel in Ushuaia. They didn't realise we didn't have one."  On the way Radka tried Silvia again, and luckily she responded. Within the half-hour drive she had secured them a friend's rental apartment, and they were escorted right to the door by the police. Two weeks of lockdown in the apartment followed. It was much like those seen elsewhere, with trips to the supermarket or pharmacy allowed, and little else. "For the first few days we felt OK, binge-watching TV series, enjoying hot showers. But we started to realise this was not going to be a situation for a couple of weeks, and that we really couldn't afford to pay for accommodation for up to six months, because even if they then opened the borders, we'd be out of money. We were quickly getting more and more tired and depressed, and I started having problems sleeping again," says Radka, tearfully. "When you are at home, I imagine you find things to keep yourself busy - clean or paint or bake, whatever. But being in a foreign flat in a foreign country where you were not planning to stay, it's maybe different," says Radka. "You can't focus on doing something new. You spend your day researching every desperate possibility to get out of there. We were even looking at whether it was possible to sail across the ocean! And when each one is a dead end it feels like such a waste of energy and motivation." Ivar adds: "It's like waiting in a bus stop, when you don't know exactly when you're going to leave and it's not the place you want to be." But the decision to leave wasn't straightforward. It slowly crept up on them, says Ivar: "It kind of evolved from possibly going home because it's going to be boring to wait, to realising if we stay three of four more months our well-being might suffer." When Radka received an SMS from the embassy to say there were repatriation flights from the capital, Buenos Aires, she felt an irresistible pull homewards. "I felt a bit like a failure when I started to consider going back. We have friends who are staying. It was like we were giving up. But everybody's situation is different." Radka and Ivar are part of a sizeable community of people who travel and live in vehicles for months or years at a time - sometimes permanently - and are known as "overlanders" or "vanlifers". Some work as they go along, or stop for a while to volunteer, others have already retired. Ask them to #stayathome and, well, it can be a bit complicated. Where? You might think that as they are equipped to live off-grid, they would be fine during lockdown. In reality, their lifestyle choice depends on the ability to move around, camp, and access services like water, power, gas and toilets. With regional and national borders closed, most campsites shut and wild camping banned, "outsiders" being discouraged in many areas, and bureaucratic headaches over visas and complicated vehicle permits, thousands of travellers around the world are either trapped or having to abandon their homes on wheels and return "home". In some ways, Covid-19 has been like a game of musical chairs for overlanders, who have found themselves in varying situations depending on where they happened to be when the music stopped. Around 10,000km north of Ushuaia, in the Colombian city of Medellín, Berliners Anne and Martin are living in their VW Westfalia camper in the driveway of a hostel, where they can use the toilets and showers. That wouldn't be allowed in many places under lockdown but they happened to be staying there while fixing some mechanical issues, when the crisis began. The owners allowed them to stay and they decided to sit it out in their van. "For us there was never a question of leaving the van behind," says Anne. "We also didn't really see the point of returning back to Europe as the number of infected people was much higher than here. We don't have a home, as we moved out of our apartment and sold all our belongings. We could stay at our parents' places but, in our mid-30s, it's not really our goal. "The days are getting really long and repetitive. We are safe and healthy, but we are stuck. We miss being on the road," she says. Radka and Ivar missed it too, but they couldn't see a light at the end of the tunnel. Luckily, the airport in Ushuaia re-opened and they booked a flight to Buenos Aires. The van and their gear would have to stay behind. But with strict rules in most countries, including Argentina, about how long a foreign-plated car can remain there, they had just one day to work out the logistics and find a place to park it. Again, through Silvia's network they managed to secure written permission from a resident who would allow the van to be parked at his house, and a letter from the customs authorities enabling them to leave it behind until the crisis is over. "It was a stressful day. We really hope that everything is OK with the papers," says Ivar. "It's incredible how it worked out, although when we parked the van and left it there I was nervous about handing the keys over because we had never met the guy. There's a part of us that's afraid we won't see the van again. Maybe we'll show up and they'll be like, 'What car?!'" After they arrived in Buenos Aires, their repatriation flight was refused permission to fly. Just before the next flight, a week later, they were told they hadn't made the list. For nearly three weeks the couple waited in a cheap hostel room in the city, feeling increasingly despondent. They started to question whether they really would get out. Finally, on 7 May, they boarded a Norwegian Air flight to Oslo, costing them €1,300. Back in Norway, they had to complete 10 days of quarantine, but were lucky to have access to a rural family cabin, where they sat it out in peace. "We have gone through all the emotions… but right now we're just really happy to be back in Norway," says Ivar. "On a scale of one to 10, the disappointment is 11," says Radka. "The longer we stayed and the worse I felt, I said 'OK I admit it, I can't imagine spending another four months like this, so I'm willing to spend some of our savings on going home to Norway where people have a bit more freedom.' I was going crazy." The self-confessed pessimist of the pair, she worries about whether they can gather the funds to return to Argentina and, if they do, whether tourists will still be welcomed under the "new normal". "And I feel like we have lost time. If we start the trip again in, say, January, that was a time when we were supposed to be somewhere else [in our life]. I have a hard time letting go." A few months in Norway will give them some perspective, says Ivar. "We would have felt worse if it was something that we should have seen coming. I think we did everything we could, and I am at peace with that. I feel like we're pretty lucky compared with many other people. I know we will continue the journey." Many overlanders who have abandoned their vehicles are risking penalties, from fines to confiscation, for failing to drive their van out of the country by the time agreed when they entered. When you drive into a country you usually temporarily import the vehicle for a fixed period, after which penalties begin to be imposed. Armin and Tanja, from Germany, were driving their 2004 Mitsubishi camper through Tanzania, as part of a planned two-year trip through the Balkans, Africa and South America, when the pandemic struck. Initially hoping to stick it out, they eventually decided to take one of the last repatriation flights out. "We found a place to store the car safely on private ground. If we hadn't have found that place we definitely would not have left our camper behind," says Armin. Their carnet de passage - a type of vehicle permit that has a cash deposit related to the value of the car - will expire in June. Attempts to arrange special dispensation with the customs authorities before they left were unsuccessful, and they have so far been unable to get hold of the right people in Tanzania to help them. "The penalty for an expired carnet in Tanzania would be €1,400 in our case, as it is 20% of the carnet car value. We are lucky that we have quite an old car but still we hope to get out of this without paying. We will ask for a flexible solution," says Armin. The delay has caused them to cut out the South America leg of their world trip, but they hope to return to Africa by September. Read Radka and Ivar's blog here How a man met a woman and they set off on a journey across six continents in one amazing, unbreakable car. Gunther, Christine and Otto - a love story (2014)Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window A Belgian prince has contracted coronavirus after attending a party during lockdown in Spain, the country's royal palace says.  Prince Joachim, 28, travelled from Belgium to Spain for an internship on 26 May, the palace said.  Two days later, he went to a party in the southern city of Córdoba, before testing positive for Covid-19. Spanish reports suggest the prince, a nephew of Belgium's King Philippe, was among 27 people at the party.  Under Córdoba's lockdown rules, a party of this size would be a breach of regulations, as gatherings of no more than 15 people are currently permitted. Spanish police have launched an investigation into the party. Those found to have flouted lockdown rules could be fined up to €10,000 (£9,000; $11,100). Everyone who attended the party is said to be in quarantine. Prince Joachim, the youngest son of Princess Astrid and 10th in line to the Belgian throne, is said to have mild coronavirus symptoms.  Rafaela Valenzuela, a representative of the Spanish government in Córdoba, condemned the party, calling those who attended "irresponsible".  "I feel surprised and angry. An incident of this type stands out at a moment of national mourning for so many dead," she said. The party was first covered by Spanish newspaper El Confidencial, which cited a document from the Andalucian authorities but did not name the prince. Belgian media have since confirmed with the palace that Prince Joachim was in Spain, where he remains.  The prince is known to have a long-standing relationship with a Spanish woman, reported to be Victoria Ortiz.  Spain is in the process of emerging from one of the strictest lockdowns in Europe. It outlined a four-stage plan on 4 May to start easing the lockdown, which saw children under 14 confined to their homes for six weeks. The country said it was moving to a second phase from 1 June for 70% of Spaniards, leaving only major cities under tighter restrictions. Spain has among the highest number of coronavirus cases and deaths in the world. As of Saturday, the country had 239,228 infections and 27,125 deaths, according to a tally by Johns Hopkins University.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has said he will postpone this year's G7 summit and invite leaders of other countries to participate in the talks. "I don't feel that... it properly represents what's going on in the world. It's a very outdated group of countries," Mr Trump said on Saturday. The G7 group, which the US hosts this year, includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the UK.  The president said Russia, South Korea, Australia and India should be invited. Speaking to reporters on board the presidential plane Air Force One, Mr Trump said that he was delaying the summit - which was scheduled to take place later in June  - until September.  Last week, Mr Trump said it might be possible to hold a gathering at the White House and potentially parts of Camp David, the US presidential country retreat, despite concerns over the coronavirus pandemic. German Chancellor Angela Merkel later rejected the president's invitation to attend a summit in person because of the outbreak.  Her spokesman thanked Mr Trump, but said the German leader "cannot agree to her personal participation, to a journey to Washington". On Friday, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson "agreed on the importance of convening the G7 in person in the near future" following a conversation with the US president, the White House said in a statement.  The G7 - or Group of Seven - leaders were scheduled to meet by videoconference in June in response to Covid-19. The group is made up of the seven of the world's largest economies. It regards itself as "a community of values", with freedom and human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and prosperity and sustainable development as its key principles.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The private rocket company SpaceX has sent two Nasa astronauts into orbit. It's the first time since the retirement of the shuttles nine years ago that an American crew has made the journey from US territory. Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken are not only trialling a new capsule system, they are also initiating a new business model for Nasa. The agency will no longer own the vehicles it uses but merely purchase the "taxi" service offered by SpaceX. It's hoped companies other than tech billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX outfit will come in to expand the market. The aerospace giant Boeing already has a contract with Nasa to do so.  Mr Musk himself said he was overcome with emotion watching his hardware take the astronauts to orbit.  "I think this is something that should get people right in the heart, of anyone that has the spirit of exploration. And the US is the distillation of the spirit of exploration," he told reporters. The new capability the CEO is offering will end the reliance of Nasa on Russian rockets and capsules to get its people to the International Space Station (ISS). It was a point picked up on by President Donald Trump, who came to Florida to watch the launch. "Past leaders put the US at the mercy of foreign nations to send our astronauts into orbit. Not anymore," he said. "Today we once again proudly launched American astronauts on American rockets - the best in the world - from right here on American soil." Hurley's and Behnken's Dragon ship left Earth atop its Falcon-9 rocket precisely on time - at 15:22 EDT (19:22 GMT / 20:22 BST). Meteorologists had forecast only a 50:50 chance of favourable conditions around Florida's Kennedy Space Center at lift-off, but, as luck would have it, the weather window stayed open and the SpaceX controllers grabbed their opportunity. The Falcon soared off the spaceport's famous 39A pad to head northeast out over the Atlantic. After two-and-a-half minutes, the lower-stage of the vehicle had separated to return to a drone ship at sea. And after a further six minutes, the crew were safely inserted into orbit.  Hurley and Behnken are set to arrive at the ISS on Sunday. They'll use some of the intervening hours to test equipment and procedures in their capsule, including doing some manual flying.  Although the Dragon capsule is a fully automated vehicle capable of finding its own way to the ISS, the crew needs to prepare for all eventualities and that means knowing exactly how the ship will behave in their hands. Uniquely, the Dragon has no control stick; all flight commands must be entered via a touchscreen panel. One of their first tasks in orbit was simply to name their ship - in the tradition of past US spacefarers, all the way back to the Mercury programme. Radioing down to Earth, they announced it would be called Endeavour.  Doug Hurley said: "We chose Endeavour for a few reasons: One, because of this incredible endeavour that Nasa, SpaceX and the US have been on since the end of the shuttle programme back in 2011. The other reason is a little more personal to Bob and I. We both had our first flights on shuttle Endeavour and it just meant so much to us to carry on that name." Endeavour was the ship commanded by British explorer James Cook on his voyage to Australia in the late 18th Century. Hurley's and Behnken's stay at the ISS is not known currently, but is likely to be somewhere between one and four months.  Assuming their return to a splashdown in the Atlantic is as smooth as the launch, Nasa and SpaceX will move directly into the full terms of their new relationship. The company has a $2.6bn (£2.1bn) contract with the agency to fly six operational crew missions to the ISS.  The first of these should occur at the end August, or very soon after; and will see four astronauts climb aboard a Dragon rather than just the two we saw on this occasion. Saturday's launch went ahead against the background of the coronavirus crisis.  Crowds were encouraged not to assemble near the Kennedy complex, and Nasa itself severely limited the number of guests invited on to the spaceport. As for the astronauts, they would ordinarily observe a quarantine before flight. But again Nasa reduced the number of people the men could come into contact with in the weeks running up to launch, and those that had to get close were instructed to wear masks. For SpaceX, Saturday marked another significant milestone for the company which was founded just 18 years ago. The firm has upended the launcher industry with its reusable vehicles and is now pioneering a new market-driven approach to human spaceflight. It hasn't all been plain sailing - as evidenced by a spectacular explosion at the  firm's prototyping facility in Boca Chica, Texas, on Friday. But the company has routinely proved naysayers wrong, and Nasa believes its relationship with Elon Musk will save billion of dollars that can be diverted to the more complex task of getting people back to the Moon and then to Mars.     "We want to establish a commercial environment in low-Earth orbit so that we can focus on the hard job of exploring beyond our home planet, to establish a sustained presence on the Moon and get to Mars to establish a presence there," said Bob Cabana, the director at Kennedy.  "We can't do that if we're locked here in low-Earth orbit, and commercial crew - that's the beginning of a whole new era of spaceflight." Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The US has been convulsed by nationwide protests over the death of an African-American man in police custody. George Floyd, 46, died after being arrested by police outside a shop in Minneapolis, Minnesota. Footage of the arrest on 25 May shows a white police officer, Derek Chauvin, kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck while he was pinned to the floor. Mr Chauvin, 44, has since been charged with murder. The key events that led to Mr Floyd's death happened within just 30 minutes. Based on accounts from witnesses, video footage and official statements, here's what we know so far.  It began with a report of a fake $20 (£16.20) bill. A report was made on the evening of 25 May, when Mr Floyd bought a pack of cigarettes from Cup Foods, a grocery store. Believing the $20 bill he used to be counterfeit, a store employee reported it to police.  Mr Floyd had been living in Minneapolis for several years after moving there from his native Houston, Texas. He had recently been working as a bouncer in the city but, like millions of other Americans, was left jobless by the coronavirus pandemic.  Mr Floyd was a regular at Cup Foods. He was a friendly face, a pleasant customer who never caused any trouble, the store owner Mike Abumayyaleh told NBC.  But Mr Abumayyaleh was not at work on the day of the incident. In reporting the suspicious bill, his teenage employee was just following protocol. In a call to 911, made at 20:01, the employee told the operator he had demanded the cigarettes back but "he [Floyd] doesn't want to do that", according to a transcript released by authorities. The employee said the man appeared "drunk" and "not in control of himself", the transcript says.   Shortly after the call, at around 20:08, two police officers arrived. Mr Floyd was sat with two other people in a car parked around the corner. After approaching the car, one of the officers, Thomas Lane, pulled out his gun and ordered Mr Floyd to show his hands. In an account of the incident, prosecutors do not explain why Mr Lane thought it necessary to draw his gun. Mr Lane, prosecutors said, "put his hands on Mr Floyd, and pulled him out of the car". Then Mr Floyd "actively resisted being handcuffed". Once handcuffed, though, Mr Floyd became compliant while Mr Lane explained he was being arrested for "passing counterfeit currency".  It was when officers tried to put Mr Floyd in their squad car that a struggle ensued.  At around 20:14, Mr Floyd "stiffened up, fell to the ground, and told the officers he was claustrophobic", according to the report.  Mr Chauvin arrived at the scene. He and other officers were involved in further attempt to put Mr Floyd in the police car. During this attempt, at 20:19, Mr Chauvin pulled Mr Floyd out of the passenger side, causing him to fall to the ground, the report said.  He lay there, face down, still in handcuffs. That's when witnesses started to film Mr Floyd, who appeared to be in a distressed state. These moments, captured on multiple mobile phones and shared widely on social media, would prove to be Mr Floyd's last. Mr Floyd was restrained by officers, while Mr Chauvin placed his left knee between his head and neck. "I can't breathe," Mr Floyd said repeatedly, pleading for his mother and begging "please, please, please". For eight minutes and 46 seconds, Mr Chauvin kept his knee on Mr Floyd's neck, the prosecutors' report says. About six minutes into that period, Mr Floyd became non-responsive. In videos of the incident, this was when Mr Floyd fell silent, as bystanders urged the officers to check his pulse. Kueng did just that, checking Mr Floyd's right wrist, but "couldn't find one". Yet, the officers did not move.  At 20:27, Mr Chauvin removed his knee from Mr Floyd's neck. Motionless, Mr Floyd was rolled on to a gurney and taken to the Hennepin County Medical Center in an ambulance.  He was pronounced dead around an hour later. On the night before his death, Mr Floyd had spoken to one his closest friends, Christopher Harris. He had advised Mr Floyd to contact a temporary jobs agency. Forgery, he said, was out of character for Mr Floyd. "The way he died was senseless," Harris said. "He begged for his life. He pleaded for his life. When you try so hard to put faith in this system, a system that you know isn't designed for you, when you constantly seek justice by lawful means and you can't get it, you begin to take the law into your own hands."Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window As the crisis has unfolded, scientists have discovered more evidence about a strange and worrying feature of the coronavirus. While many people who become infected develop a cough, fever and loss of taste and smell, others have no symptoms at all and never realise they're carrying Covid-19.  Researchers say it's vital to understand how many are affected this way and whether "silent spreaders" are fuelling the pandemic. When people gathered at a church in Singapore on 19 January, no-one could have realised that the event would have global implications for the spread of coronavirus. It was a Sunday and, as usual, one of the services was being conducted in Mandarin. Among the congregation at The Life Church and Missions, on the ground floor of an office building, was a couple, both aged 56, who'd arrived that morning from China. As they took their seats, they seemed perfectly healthy so there was no reason to think they might be carrying the virus. At that time, a persistent cough was understood to be the most distinctive feature of Covid-19 and it was seen as the most likely way to transmit it. Having no symptoms of the disease should have meant having no chance of spreading it.   The couple left as soon as the service was over. But shortly afterwards, things took a turn for the worse, and in a wholly confusing way. The Chinese wife started to become ill on January 22, followed by her husband two days later. Because they had flown in from Wuhan, the epicentre of the outbreak, that was no big surprise. But over the following week, three local people also came down with the disease for no obvious reason, leading to one of Singapore's first and most baffling coronavirus cases. Working out what had happened would lead to a new and disturbing insight into how the virus was so successfully finding new victims. "We were extremely perplexed," says Dr Vernon Lee, head of communicable diseases at Singapore's Ministry of Health. "People who didn't know each somehow infected each other," while showing no sign of illness. This new batch of cases simply did not make sense, according to what was known about Covid-19 back then. So Dr Lee and his fellow scientists, along with police officers and specialist disease trackers, launched an investigation, generating detailed maps showing who was where and when. This involved the very best of the process known as contact tracing - a version of which is getting under way now in the UK. It's seen as a vital system for tracking down everyone involved in an outbreak and helping to stamp it out, and Singapore is renowned for the skill and speed with which this is carried out. Amazingly, within a few days, investigators had spoken to no fewer than 191 members of the church and had found out that 142 of them had been there that Sunday. They quickly established that two of the Singaporeans who became infected had been at the same service as the Chinese couple.  "They could have spoken to each other, greeted each other, during the usual activities of a church service," says Dr Lee. That was a useful start and would explain in theory how the infection could have been passed on, apart from one key factor. It did not answer the crucial question of how the virus could have been transmitted by the two Chinese people when at that stage they had shown no indication of having the disease. And on top of that was an even greater puzzle. It was confirmed that the third Singaporean to become infected, a 52-year-old woman, had not been at the same service as the others. Instead she had attended another event in the same church later that day, so how could she have picked up the virus? Investigators resorted to going through the CCTV recordings made at the church that Sunday to search for clues. And they stumbled across something completely unexpected - the woman who'd attended the later service, after the Chinese couple had left, had sat in the seats they had used several hours earlier. Somehow, despite having no symptoms and not feeling ill, the Chinese husband and wife had managed to spread the virus. Maybe they'd had it on their hands and touched the seats, maybe their breath carried the infection and it landed on a surface, it's not clear, but the implications were huge. For Dr Lee, piecing everything together, there was only one possible explanation - that the virus was being passed by people who had it without even realising. This was a revelation that would be relevant the world over because the central message of all public health advice on coronavirus has always been to look out for symptoms in yourself and others. But if the virus was also being spread by people without symptoms, silently and invisibly, how could the disease be stopped? He remembers the moment, while working in his office, when the reality dawned on him. "Every time you make a scientific discovery, it is like a 'eureka' moment when you realise that this is something important that you've uncovered, through the hard work of many individuals and teams." What was revealed was what's known as "pre-symptomatic transmission" where someone is unaware of being infected because the cough, fever and other classic symptoms have yet to begin.  Along with many others, this study highlighted a critical period of 24-to-48 hours before the visible onset of the disease in which people can be highly infectious, perhaps even their most infectious. Being aware of that is potentially invaluable, because as soon as you realise you're ill then everyone you've been in close contact with can be warned to stay at home. That would mean that they would be isolating during the key phase of infection before their own symptoms start. But exactly how the disease can be transmitted without a cough to project droplets containing the virus is still open to debate. One option is that simply breathing or talking to someone can do the job. If the virus is reproducing in the upper respiratory tract at that time then it's possible that some of it will emerge with each exhalation. Anyone close enough, especially indoors, could easily pick it up. And another potential form of transmission is by touch - the virus gets onto someone's hands and they touch another person or a door handle - or a seat in a church. Whatever the route, the virus is clearly exploiting the fact that people are bound to be less vigilant if they're not aware that they might be infected. This is an even more mysterious scenario, and one that scientists simply have no definitive answer to. It's one thing to know that people can be infectious before their symptoms show, quite another when they become infected but never have any sign of it. This is what's known as being "asymptomatic" because you are a carrier of the disease but do not suffer in any way yourself. The most famous case is that of an Irish woman who was working as a cook in New York at the beginning of the last century. Wherever Mary Mallon was employed, in house after house, people became ill with typhoid and at least three, maybe many more, died of it, but she was completely unaffected. Eventually a connection was established and it was confirmed that she was the unwitting spreader of the disease. Reporters dubbed her "Typhoid Mary", a label she always resented, but the authorities took no chances and kept her in confinement for 23 years until her death in 1938. Staff nurse Amelia Powell was shocked when she found out that she is asymptomatic. She was at work on her hospital ward at Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge in April when a doctor rang to give her the result of a swab test. She had been feeling normal and safe behind the personal protective equipment she had to wear while caring for patients with Covid-19. But suddenly all those assumptions were undermined because, to her horror, she had tested positive.  "It was a bit like hearing that someone in the family had passed, it was surreal. "I thought, 'This can't be right, not me, I'm absolutely fine,'" says 23-year-old Amelia.  She had to leave her post straightaway to go into isolation at home. "I was worried because I've seen the other side, with patients deteriorating very quickly with it, so I did wonder if this would happen to me." But, to her surprise, at no point did she feel unwell. "I had nothing, literally - I was exercising indoors, eating normally, sleeping normally."  At the moment it's impossible to know how many cases of infection exist but remain hidden from view. The discovery that Amelia was infected was only revealed because she was part of a study of all the staff at her hospital. It produced the surprising result that as many as 3% of more than 1,000 people were positive while showing no symptoms at the time of the test. An even greater proportion of asymptomatic cases was found on the Diamond Princess cruise ship which had been sailing off the coast of Japan earlier this year. Later branded "a petri dish for infection", it had around 700 cases.  Researchers found that three quarters of the people who had tested positive had no symptoms.  And at a care home in Washington state more than half the residents were positive but had no sign of the illness. Different studies suggest a huge range of possibilities for how many cases are asymptomatic stretching from 5% to 80% of cases. That was the conclusion of an analysis by Prof Carl Heneghan of the University of Oxford and colleagues who looked at 21 research projects. The upshot, they said, was that "there is not a single reliable study to determine the number of asymptomatics". And they said that if the screening for Covid-19 is only carried out on people with symptoms - which has been the main focus of UK testing policy - then cases will be missed, "perhaps a lot of cases". The biggest concern of Amelia, the nurse, was that she might have unwittingly transmitted the virus either to those she works with or to the patients who depend on her help.  "I don't think I passed it on because all the colleagues I work with tested negative but it was worrying to think how long I'd been positive for," she says. "But we still don't know if people who are asymptomatic are contagious or not - it's very bizarre and the information about it at the moment is minimal." One study in China which found that the number of asymptomatic cases was actually greater than those with symptoms had a warning for the authorities. "As 'silent spreaders'," the scientists wrote, "asymptomatic carriers warrant attention as part of disease prevention and control." The team that studied that Diamond Princess reckoned that asymptomatic cases were likely to be less infectious than people with symptoms but even so they're estimated to have caused a significant number of cases.  To try to get an answer, scientists in Norwich are pushing for the population of the entire city to be tested. "Asymptomatic cases may be the 'dark matter' of the epidemic," according to Prof Neil Hall, head of the Earlham Institute, a life science research centre, who's leading the initiative. Dark matter is the invisible substance believed to make up most of the matter in the universe, and it's yet to be identified. Prof Hall worries that asymptomatic cases may actually be driving the pandemic, keeping it going despite public health measures. "If you have people who don't know they're ill while using public transport and health care facilities, inevitably that's going to increase transmission," he says. "Any intervention that's only based on people coming to primary health care when they have symptoms will only deal with half the problem."  A team of scientists in California believes that not knowing who's carrying the virus without symptoms is the "Achilles Heel" of the fight against the pandemic. In their view, the only way to stop the disease from spreading is to find out who's infected regardless of whether they think they are or not. That was also the recommendation of MPs on the Commons Science and Technology Committee in a letter to the Prime Minister Boris Johnson. They wrote that the risk of asymptomatic transmission has "a profound consequence for the management of the pandemic". And they said that anyone looking after vulnerable people - such as health workers or care workers - should be given regular testing. A similar approach is being adopted on a far larger scale in the Chinese city of Wuhan, where the pandemic is thought to have begun. As many as 6.5 million people there were tested in as little as nine days in a mass screening programme designed to detect the disease - including in those showing no symptoms. As lockdown measures are eased and more people start to use public transport, return to work or go shopping, getting to grips with the invisible risk matters more than ever. At the moment, there is no way of telling who among the growing crowds may be carrying the virus without knowing. That's why governments the world over say it's essential that everyone cooperates with efforts to trace the contacts of anyone infected and then quickly self-isolates. They also advise that the best defence remains social distancing - to keep apart wherever you can. But where that isn't possible, the recommendation is to cover your face, even with a mask that's homemade. When the US government announced this policy, it highlighted the discoveries made in the church in Singapore back in January. The logic is that this is not about protecting yourself, it's about protecting others from you, in case you're infected but don't know it. Many health professionals worry that masks might distract people from hand washing or social distancing, or increase the risk of contamination if they're clumsily handled. But more and more governments, most recently that of the UK, have become convinced of the benefits.  Not that face coverings will halt the pandemic on their own. But because there's still so little we know about asymptomatic transmission, almost anything is worth a try. When you talk to intensive care doctors across the UK, exhausted after weeks of dealing with the ravages of Covid-19, one phrase emerges time after time: "We've never seen anything like this before." They knew a new disease was coming, and they were expecting resources to be stretched by an unknown respiratory infection which had first appeared in China at the end of last year. "It felt in some ways like we were trying to prepare for the D-Day landings," says Barbara Miles, clinical director of intensive care at Glasgow Royal Infirmary, "with three weeks to get ready and not a great deal of knowledge about what we would be facing". Read a summary, often in their own words, of what doctors have learnt about how Covid-19 attacks the human body.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violent protests over the death of an unarmed African-American man in the hands of police officers in Minnesota "are no longer in any way" about his killing, the state's governor has said. Tim Walz spoke after a night of unrest in several US cities over the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. He said that as a result he was taking the unprecedented step of mobilising the state's entire National Guard. There are also reports that military police units could deploy. An ex-Minneapolis policeman has been charged with murder over the death of Mr Floyd, 46, in police custody on Monday. Derek Chauvin, 44 and white, was shown in footage kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for several minutes, even after he said he couldn't breathe. He and three other officers have since been sacked. The video went viral online, reigniting US anger over police killings of black Americans, and reopening deep wounds over racial inequality across the nation. On Friday night protesters clashed with police in cities including New York, Atlanta and Portland. In Washington DC, the White House was briefly locked down. In Houston, where George Floyd grew up, a 19-year-old protester told the Associated Press: "My question is how many more, how many more? I just want to live in a future where we all live in harmony and we're not oppressed." In Minnesota, "our great cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul are under assault," Governor Walz said. "The situation in Minneapolis is now about attacking civil society, instilling fear and disrupting our great city." He said violence on Friday night had made "a mockery of pretending this is about George Floyd's death, or inequities or historical traumas to our communities of colour".  He and other officials have suggested that many violent protesters came from outside the state to cause trouble, but did not give details.  On Saturday, President Donald Trump said Mr Floyd's death had "filled Americans with horror, anger and grief".  "I stand before you as a friend and ally to every American seeking peace," he said in a televised address from Cape Canaveral in Florida, following the launch into orbit of two Nasa astronauts by billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX company.  The president denounced the actions of "looters and anarchists", saying that what was needed was "healing not hatred, justice not chaos".   "I will not allow angry mobs to dominate - won't happen," he added. Mr Trump earlier praised the US Secret Service for securing the White House but said if protesters breached the perimeter they "would have been greeted with the most vicious dogs, and most ominous weapons, I have ever seen". He blamed violence on "organised groups".  Minnesota remains the most volatile region, with curfews ordered for the Twin Cities of Minneapolis-Saint Paul from 20:00 to 06:00 on Friday and Saturday evening. Protesters defied the curfew on Friday. Fires, many from burning cars, were visible in a number of areas and television pictures showed widespread looting.  Hundreds of troops from the National Guard, a reserve military force that can be called on by the US president or state governors to intervene in domestic emergencies, moved in late at night. Minnesota officials said tens of thousands of people turned out on Friday and they are expecting more unrest on Saturday night.  As a result, Gov Walz said he was activating all National Guard troops available in the state  - reportedly up to 13,000 - for the first time in history to respond to rioters. The Pentagon said some US military units were on alert to support Minnesota if asked. There are long-standing tensions between the black community and police in Minneapolis. Another black man, Philando Castile, was shot and killed in 2016 during a traffic stop close to the epicentre of these protests in a case that gained international attention. African-Americans also suffer significant socio-economic inequalities, entrenched segregation and a higher level of unemployment than the white community.  In Atlanta, Georgia, where buildings were vandalised, a state of emergency was declared for some areas to protect people and property.  Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms issued an impassioned plea, saying: "This is not a protest. This is not in the spirit of Martin Luther King Jr. You are disgracing our city. You are disgracing the life of George Floyd." In New York's Brooklyn district, protesters clashed with police, throwing projectiles, starting fires and destroying police vehicles. A number of officers were injured and many arrests made. The mayor of Portland, Oregon, has declared a state of emergency amid looting, fires and an attack on a police precinct. An immediate curfew until 06:00 local time (13:00 GMT) was imposed and it will restart at 20:00. On Monday night, police received a phone call from a neighbourhood grocery store alleging that George Floyd had paid with a counterfeit $20 note. Officers responded and were attempting to put him in a police vehicle when he dropped to the ground, telling them he was claustrophobic. According to police, he physically resisted officers and was handcuffed. Video of the incident does not show how the confrontation started.  With Mr Chauvin's knee on his neck, Mr Floyd can be heard saying "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me". According to a preliminary autopsy by the county medical examiner, the police officer had his knee on Mr Floyd's neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds - almost three minutes of which was after Mr Floyd became non-responsive. Nearly two minutes before Mr Chauvin removed his knee the other officers checked Mr Floyd's right wrist for a pulse and were unable to find one. He was taken to hospital and pronounced dead around an hour later. The preliminary autopsy, included in the criminal complaint against Mr Chauvin, did not find evidence of "traumatic asphyxia or strangulation". The medical examiner noted Mr Floyd had underlying heart conditions and the combination of these, "potential intoxicants in his system" and being restrained by the officers "likely contributed to his death". Mr Chauvin was charged on Friday with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter over his role in Mr Floyd's death. Mr Floyd's family and their lawyer, Benjamin Crump, said that this was "welcome but overdue". The family said they wanted a more serious, first-degree murder charge as well as the arrest of the three other officers involved.  Hennepin County Prosecutor Mike Freeman said he "anticipates charges" for the other officers but would not offer more details.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump has been criticised at home and abroad after announcing he is ending US ties with the World Health Organization (WHO).  The EU urged him to reconsider the decision, while Germany's health minister called it a "disappointing setback for international health". The head of the US Senate's health committee, a Republican like Mr Trump, said now was not the time to leave. Mr Trump said the WHO had failed to hold China to account over coronavirus. The WHO, a UN agency that helps countries promote healthcare and tackle outbreaks of disease, has faced regular criticism from the US president over its handling of the outbreak. He suspended US funding to the WHO last month and on Friday permanently halted the payment, which last year stood at more than $400m (£324m; €360m), the largest single contribution at around 15% of its total budget. European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and top EU diplomat, Josep Borrell, said in a statement: "In the face of this global threat, now is the time for enhanced co-operation and common solutions. Actions that weaken international results must be avoided. "We urge the US to reconsider its announced decision." German Health Minister Jens Spahn described the setback as "disappointing" although he accepted the WHO "needs reform". "The EU must take a leading role and engage more financially," he said. A spokesperson for the UK said: "Coronavirus is a global challenge and the World Health Organization has an important role to play in leading the international health response. We have no plans to withdraw our funding." The chair of the US Senate Health Committee, Lamar Alexander, said the move could hamper the discovery of a vaccine against Covid-19 and urged a reversal of the decision in the "strongest terms possible". "Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis has been dealt with, not in the middle of it," he said. Ex-presidential candidate and US Senator Elizabeth Warren tweeted: "President Trump's decision to leave the @WHO during a global pandemic alienates our allies, undermines our global leadership, and threatens the health of the American people." Anders Nordstrom, a former WHO acting director general, said he was "deeply concerned" the move would increase political tension at a time when "we need to have global solidarity". South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize called the decision "unfortunate".  WHO member states agreed on 19 May to set up an independent inquiry into the global response to the pandemic. Speaking  at the White House, Mr Trump said: "Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs."  It is not clear when any US withdrawal might take place. A 1948 agreement between the US and WHO allows for one year's notice before pulling out.  Mr Trump has accused China of trying to cover up the outbreak of coronavirus, which occurred in the city of Wuhan late last year. He also says that "China has total control over the World Health Organization". The president accused China of pressurising the WHO to "mislead the world" about the virus, without elaborating. "The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government," he said. The US will redirect its funds for the WHO  to other health groups. More than 102,000 people in the US have lost their lives to Covid-19 - by far the biggest death toll in the world.  Opponents say Mr Trump is trying to deflect criticism of his handling of the pandemic ahead of his re-election bid this year. Meanwhile, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has said that Mr Trump is trying to mislead the public, smear China and "shift the blame for [the US's] own incompetent response".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Vulnerable people in England who have been asked to remain at home since the coronavirus lockdown began are to be allowed outdoors once a day with members of their household from Monday. Those living alone will be able to meet one other person from another household while maintaining social distancing. The guidance - in place for 10 weeks - had indicated shielding measures would remain until 30 June. Support for shielders, such as food and medicine deliveries, will continue. Communities Secretary Robert Jenrick will announce the details at Sunday's government Downing Street press conference. Around 2.2 million people were asked to stay at home as lockdown began, because they were identified as being at particularly high risk of needing hospital treatment for coronavirus symptoms. Most were notified by their GP. They included solid organ transplant recipients, cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy, pregnant women with heart disease and people with severe respiratory conditions such as cystic fibrosis and severe asthma. Not all elderly people were asked to shield. Some were later removed from the shielding list if they no longer met the requirements. Prime Minister Boris Johnson said that "thousands of lives" had been saved by those who had shielded themselves. "We have been looking at how we can make life easier for our most vulnerable, so today I am happy to confirm that those who are shielding will be able to spend time outside with someone else, observing social distance guidelines," he said. Some scientists have expressed concerns about England's easing of lockdown rules while infection rates remain at around 8,000 per day according the Office for National Statistics. "Many of us would prefer to see the incidence down to lower levels before we relax measures," said Professor John Edmunds, from the London School of Tropical Hygiene and Medicine and one of the government's top advisors. "Covid-19 spreading too fast to lift lockdown in England," tweeted Jeremy Farrar, director of the Wellcome Trust. England's Deputy Chief Medical Officer Prof Jonathan Van-Tam said the consensus among scientists was that the new measures were not expected to push the rate of infection above the key R value of 1.0. However, he urged the public to be "sensible and proportionate with the freedom we have wanted to give people", saying the UK is "at a dangerous moment" and the easing of lockdown "has to go slowly".  Reacting to the change, Phil Anderson from the MS Society said thousands of the more than 130,000 people with MS in the UK had been feeling "forgotten" after months of shielding.  He said they were concerned the news had come "out of the blue" and extremely vulnerable people would want to hear "a lot more about the scientific evidence showing this will be safe for them". He also called for better mental health support for everyone who needs it. Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Forbes magazine has struck reality TV star and entrepreneur Kylie Jenner from its list of billionaires, and accused her family of inflating the value of her cosmetics business. Forbes said the family went to "unusual lengths" to present its youngest member as richer than she was. In tweets, Jenner dismissed the article as "inaccurate statements and unproven assumptions lol". "I've never asked for any title or tried to lie my way there," she wrote. "I can name a list of 100 things more important right now than fixating on how much money I have," she added. The move reverses the status Forbes conferred on Jenner in 2019, when it declared her a self-made billionaire. The description sparked controversy, with critics scoffing at the "self-made" title and pointing to her upbringing as a Kardashian family reality TV star. Forbes, which is known for its widely cited billionaire rankings, credited Jenner's status to the success of her cosmetics company, which she founded in 2015 and which includes Kylie Cosmetics and Kylie Skin. Jenner last year announced she was selling a 51% stake in the company to beauty giant Coty for $600m.  Forbes said the family's accountant had provided it with tax returns that suggested the firm had done more than $300m in sales in 2016 and that publicists claimed sales of $330m the following year. But information shared by Coty, which is publicly traded, showed Jenner's firm is "significantly smaller and less profitable than the family has spent years leading the cosmetics industry and media outlets, including Forbes, to believe", Forbes said. Coty's presentation to investors about the business suggested the firm did only $125m in sales in 2018. "If Kylie Cosmetics did $125 million in sales in 2018, how could it have done $307 million in 2016 (as the company's supposed tax returns state) or $330 million in 2017?" Forbes asked in the article. Despite the magazine's downgrade, Jenner is hardly hurting. Forbes said she pocketed $340m from the sale of her business. It now estimates her net worth at "just under $900m". Forbes writers have previously accused other would-be billionaires of inflating their riches, including US Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross and President Donald Trump.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Tensions between Minneapolis' black community and the police did not start with the death of George Floyd. They have been years in the making. On a hot Thursday morning in the Longfellow neighbourhood of Minneapolis, a 28-year-old father named Nuwman stood outside the Minneapolis Police Department's Third Precinct drinking a large coffee as smoke wafted past from the smouldering ruins of nearby buildings.  It was day three of protests over the death of 46-year-old George Floyd, after a white police officer named Derek Chauvin kneeled on his neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds. Floyd begged for his life before falling unconscious and dying in the street, in full view of witnesses and a rolling mobile phone camera. Four officers, including Chauvin, were fired from the department for their involvement. The previous night, tensions ignited, and for the first time the city saw looting, arson and violence. At least one man died in a shooting at a pawn shop. "This is everyday. Everyday that these police officers have enforced their protocol has led up to this," said Nuwman, his voice rising with emotion over the din of protesters and sirens. "This is not just a singular moment. This is a cataclysm. A combination of all the things that happened before." That night, protesters stormed the precinct as police cruisers flew out of the rear parking lot, abandoning it to demonstrators who quickly moved from room to room lighting blazes.  The following afternoon, a Friday, saw the arrest of Chauvin by Minnesota's Bureau of Criminal Apprehension. Chauvin has been charged with murder. This is not the first instance of a controversial, police-involved killing in the region. In 2016, Philando Castile was shot and killed by a police officer in a neighbourhood just 15 minutes away from the current epicentre of protest.  In 2017, a Minneapolis officer was charged with the shooting death of Justine Damond after she called to report a possible sexual assault. In 2015, protests erupted over the shooting death of Jamar Clark, a 24-year-old man who was being pursued by Minneapolis officers. All three deaths sparked protest movements and yielded mixed results in terms of prosecution. Yanez was tried and acquitted. Mohamed Noor, Damond's shooter, was sentenced to 12.5 years. No charges were brought in Clark's case.  For some, Floyd's death was the continuation of those stories. "WE SHOULD HAVE BURNT THE CITY DOWN FOR PHILANDO CASTILE," one person posted on social media.  But in some ways, the pictures beamed around the world this week tell a story that's unique.  Demonstrations are occurring in the midst of a historic, global pandemic. The sheer amount of property damage and arson has been staggering. The swiftness with which officers were fired, and the speed in which Chauvin was arrested and charged surprised many. But Minneapolis - while a prosperous city that celebrates liberal policies and politicians - has struggled for years with socioeconomic inequality and segregation. It's a phenomena that's been dubbed the "Minnesota paradox".  The Twin Cities, as Minneapolis and St Paul are known, are still overwhelmingly white - about one-quarter of the population is non-white - and its neighbourhoods are still highly segregated. Most people of colour live on the cities' north sides.  They were shaped by racist red-lining policies dating to the early 20th Century, when black families were not allowed to buy homes in certain neighbourhoods. In the 1960s, the state built a major highway that cut through and destroyed a thriving black community known as Rondo in St Paul.  According to a 2018 study, the rate of black homeownership in the Twin Cities is among the lowest in the nation. Even before the pandemic caused massive layoffs, 10% of black residents were unemployed compared to 4% of whites. That disparity ranks as one of the nation's worst.  In 2016, the average white household in the Twin Cities made about $76,000 a year, while the average black household earned just $32,000. Thirty-two percent of black Twin Citians fell below the poverty line, while only 6.5% of whites did.  Racial disparities persist in the way the community is policed.  After Philando Castile was killed, data released about police traffic stops in the area showed that 44% of stops were black drivers, though the population was only 7% black.  According to the Minneapolis police department's own data, in 2018 55% of drivers stopped for "equipment violations" were black.  As Covid-19 ravages the area, these disparities are sure to worsen, as thousands lose their jobs, and their homes to evictions and foreclosures.  On Friday afternoon, residents of both St Paul and Minneapolis headed into the streets carrying brooms and pails, and slowly began to literally pick up the pieces of the town.  Following the announcement that former officer Chauvin had been jailed and charged with third-degree murder and manslaughter, protesters at Minneapolis City Hall let up a cheer.  But it was quickly replaced by a new demand: "One down, three to go." Follow Jessica on TwitterShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violent protests over the death of an unarmed African-American man in the hands of police officers in Minnesota "are no longer in any way" about his killing, the state's governor has said. Tim Walz spoke after a night of unrest in several US cities over the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. He said that as a result he was taking the unprecedented step of mobilising the state's entire National Guard. There are also reports that military police units could deploy. An ex-Minneapolis policeman has been charged with murder over the death of Mr Floyd, 46, in police custody on Monday. Derek Chauvin, 44 and white, was shown in footage kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for several minutes, even after he said he couldn't breathe. He and three other officers have since been sacked. The video went viral online, reigniting US anger over police killings of black Americans, and reopening deep wounds over racial inequality across the nation. On Friday night protesters clashed with police in cities including New York, Atlanta and Portland. In Washington DC, the White House was briefly locked down. In Houston, where George Floyd grew up, a 19-year-old protester told the Associated Press: "My question is how many more, how many more? I just want to live in a future where we all live in harmony and we're not oppressed." In Minnesota, "our great cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul are under assault," Governor Walz said. "The situation in Minneapolis is now about attacking civil society, instilling fear and disrupting our great city." He said violence on Friday night had made "a mockery of pretending this is about George Floyd's death, or inequities or historical traumas to our communities of colour".  He and other officials have suggested that many violent protesters came from outside the state to cause trouble, but did not give details.  On Saturday, President Donald Trump said Mr Floyd's death had "filled Americans with horror, anger and grief".  "I stand before you as a friend and ally to every American seeking peace," he said in a televised address from Cape Canaveral in Florida, following the launch into orbit of two Nasa astronauts by billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX company.  The president denounced the actions of "looters and anarchists", saying that what was needed was "healing not hatred, justice not chaos".   "I will not allow angry mobs to dominate - won't happen," he added. Mr Trump earlier praised the US Secret Service for securing the White House but said if protesters breached the perimeter they "would have been greeted with the most vicious dogs, and most ominous weapons, I have ever seen". He blamed violence on "organised groups".  Minnesota remains the most volatile region, with curfews ordered for the Twin Cities of Minneapolis-Saint Paul from 20:00 to 06:00 on Friday and Saturday evening. Protesters defied the curfew on Friday. Fires, many from burning cars, were visible in a number of areas and television pictures showed widespread looting.  Hundreds of troops from the National Guard, a reserve military force that can be called on by the US president or state governors to intervene in domestic emergencies, moved in late at night. Minnesota officials said tens of thousands of people turned out on Friday and they are expecting more unrest on Saturday night.  As a result, Gov Walz said he was activating all National Guard troops available in the state  - reportedly up to 13,000 - for the first time in history to respond to rioters. The Pentagon said some US military units were on alert to support Minnesota if asked. There are long-standing tensions between the black community and police in Minneapolis. Another black man, Philando Castile, was shot and killed in 2016 during a traffic stop close to the epicentre of these protests in a case that gained international attention. African-Americans also suffer significant socio-economic inequalities, entrenched segregation and a higher level of unemployment than the white community.  In Atlanta, Georgia, where buildings were vandalised, a state of emergency was declared for some areas to protect people and property.  Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms issued an impassioned plea, saying: "This is not a protest. This is not in the spirit of Martin Luther King Jr. You are disgracing our city. You are disgracing the life of George Floyd." In New York's Brooklyn district, protesters clashed with police, throwing projectiles, starting fires and destroying police vehicles. A number of officers were injured and many arrests made. The mayor of Portland, Oregon, has declared a state of emergency amid looting, fires and an attack on a police precinct. An immediate curfew until 06:00 local time (13:00 GMT) was imposed and it will restart at 20:00. On Monday night, police received a phone call from a neighbourhood grocery store alleging that George Floyd had paid with a counterfeit $20 note. Officers responded and were attempting to put him in a police vehicle when he dropped to the ground, telling them he was claustrophobic. According to police, he physically resisted officers and was handcuffed. Video of the incident does not show how the confrontation started.  With Mr Chauvin's knee on his neck, Mr Floyd can be heard saying "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me". According to a preliminary autopsy by the county medical examiner, the police officer had his knee on Mr Floyd's neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds - almost three minutes of which was after Mr Floyd became non-responsive. Nearly two minutes before Mr Chauvin removed his knee the other officers checked Mr Floyd's right wrist for a pulse and were unable to find one. He was taken to hospital and pronounced dead around an hour later. The preliminary autopsy, included in the criminal complaint against Mr Chauvin, did not find evidence of "traumatic asphyxia or strangulation". The medical examiner noted Mr Floyd had underlying heart conditions and the combination of these, "potential intoxicants in his system" and being restrained by the officers "likely contributed to his death". Mr Chauvin was charged on Friday with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter over his role in Mr Floyd's death. Mr Floyd's family and their lawyer, Benjamin Crump, said that this was "welcome but overdue". The family said they wanted a more serious, first-degree murder charge as well as the arrest of the three other officers involved.  Hennepin County Prosecutor Mike Freeman said he "anticipates charges" for the other officers but would not offer more details.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violent protests over the death of an unarmed African-American man in the hands of police officers in Minnesota "are no longer in any way" about his killing, the state's governor has said. Tim Walz spoke after a night of unrest in several US cities over the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. He said that as a result he was taking the unprecedented step of mobilising the state's entire National Guard. There are also reports that military police units could deploy. An ex-Minneapolis policeman has been charged with murder over the death of Mr Floyd, 46, in police custody on Monday. Derek Chauvin, 44 and white, was shown in footage kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for several minutes, even after he said he couldn't breathe. He and three other officers have since been sacked. The video went viral online, reigniting US anger over police killings of black Americans, and reopening deep wounds over racial inequality across the nation. On Friday night protesters clashed with police in cities including New York, Atlanta and Portland. In Washington DC, the White House was briefly locked down. In Houston, where George Floyd grew up, a 19-year-old protester told the Associated Press: "My question is how many more, how many more? I just want to live in a future where we all live in harmony and we're not oppressed." In Minnesota, "our great cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul are under assault," Governor Walz said. "The situation in Minneapolis is now about attacking civil society, instilling fear and disrupting our great city." He said violence on Friday night had made "a mockery of pretending this is about George Floyd's death, or inequities or historical traumas to our communities of colour".  He and other officials have suggested that many violent protesters came from outside the state to cause trouble, but did not give details.  On Saturday, President Donald Trump said Mr Floyd's death had "filled Americans with horror, anger and grief".  "I stand before you as a friend and ally to every American seeking peace," he said in a televised address from Cape Canaveral in Florida, following the launch into orbit of two Nasa astronauts by billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX company.  The president denounced the actions of "looters and anarchists", saying that what was needed was "healing not hatred, justice not chaos".   "I will not allow angry mobs to dominate - won't happen," he added. Mr Trump earlier praised the US Secret Service for securing the White House but said if protesters breached the perimeter they "would have been greeted with the most vicious dogs, and most ominous weapons, I have ever seen". He blamed violence on "organised groups".  Minnesota remains the most volatile region, with curfews ordered for the Twin Cities of Minneapolis-Saint Paul from 20:00 to 06:00 on Friday and Saturday evening. Protesters defied the curfew on Friday. Fires, many from burning cars, were visible in a number of areas and television pictures showed widespread looting.  Hundreds of troops from the National Guard, a reserve military force that can be called on by the US president or state governors to intervene in domestic emergencies, moved in late at night. Minnesota officials said tens of thousands of people turned out on Friday and they are expecting more unrest on Saturday night.  As a result, Gov Walz said he was activating all National Guard troops available in the state  - reportedly up to 13,000 - for the first time in history to respond to rioters. The Pentagon said some US military units were on alert to support Minnesota if asked. There are long-standing tensions between the black community and police in Minneapolis. Another black man, Philando Castile, was shot and killed in 2016 during a traffic stop close to the epicentre of these protests in a case that gained international attention. African-Americans also suffer significant socio-economic inequalities, entrenched segregation and a higher level of unemployment than the white community.  In Atlanta, Georgia, where buildings were vandalised, a state of emergency was declared for some areas to protect people and property.  Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms issued an impassioned plea, saying: "This is not a protest. This is not in the spirit of Martin Luther King Jr. You are disgracing our city. You are disgracing the life of George Floyd." In New York's Brooklyn district, protesters clashed with police, throwing projectiles, starting fires and destroying police vehicles. A number of officers were injured and many arrests made. The mayor of Portland, Oregon, has declared a state of emergency amid looting, fires and an attack on a police precinct. An immediate curfew until 06:00 local time (13:00 GMT) was imposed and it will restart at 20:00. On Monday night, police received a phone call from a neighbourhood grocery store alleging that George Floyd had paid with a counterfeit $20 note. Officers responded and were attempting to put him in a police vehicle when he dropped to the ground, telling them he was claustrophobic. According to police, he physically resisted officers and was handcuffed. Video of the incident does not show how the confrontation started.  With Mr Chauvin's knee on his neck, Mr Floyd can be heard saying "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me". According to a preliminary autopsy by the county medical examiner, the police officer had his knee on Mr Floyd's neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds - almost three minutes of which was after Mr Floyd became non-responsive. Nearly two minutes before Mr Chauvin removed his knee the other officers checked Mr Floyd's right wrist for a pulse and were unable to find one. He was taken to hospital and pronounced dead around an hour later. The preliminary autopsy, included in the criminal complaint against Mr Chauvin, did not find evidence of "traumatic asphyxia or strangulation". The medical examiner noted Mr Floyd had underlying heart conditions and the combination of these, "potential intoxicants in his system" and being restrained by the officers "likely contributed to his death". Mr Chauvin was charged on Friday with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter over his role in Mr Floyd's death. Mr Floyd's family and their lawyer, Benjamin Crump, said that this was "welcome but overdue". The family said they wanted a more serious, first-degree murder charge as well as the arrest of the three other officers involved.  Hennepin County Prosecutor Mike Freeman said he "anticipates charges" for the other officers but would not offer more details.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The private rocket company SpaceX has sent two Nasa astronauts into orbit. It's the first time since the retirement of the shuttles nine years ago that an American crew has made the journey from US territory. Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken are not only trialling a new capsule system, they are also initiating a new business model for Nasa. The agency will no longer own the vehicles it uses but merely purchase the "taxi" service offered by SpaceX. It's hoped companies other than tech billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX outfit will come in to expand the market. The aerospace giant Boeing already has a contract with Nasa to do so.  Mr Musk himself said he was overcome with emotion watching his hardware take the astronauts to orbit.  "I think this is something that should get people right in the heart, of anyone that has the spirit of exploration. And the US is the distillation of the spirit of exploration," he told reporters. The new capability the CEO is offering will end the reliance of Nasa on Russian rockets and capsules to get its people to the International Space Station (ISS). It was a point picked up on by President Donald Trump, who came to Florida to watch the launch. "Past leaders put the US at the mercy of foreign nations to send our astronauts into orbit. Not anymore," he said. "Today we once again proudly launched American astronauts on American rockets - the best in the world - from right here on American soil." Hurley's and Behnken's Dragon ship left Earth atop its Falcon-9 rocket precisely on time - at 15:22 EDT (19:22 GMT / 20:22 BST). Meteorologists had forecast only a 50:50 chance of favourable conditions around Florida's Kennedy Space Center at lift-off, but, as luck would have it, the weather window stayed open and the SpaceX controllers grabbed their opportunity. The Falcon soared off the spaceport's famous 39A pad to head northeast out over the Atlantic. After two-and-a-half minutes, the lower-stage of the vehicle had separated to return to a drone ship at sea. And after a further six minutes, the crew were safely inserted into orbit.  Hurley and Behnken are set to arrive at the ISS on Sunday. They'll use some of the intervening hours to test equipment and procedures in their capsule, including doing some manual flying.  Although the Dragon capsule is a fully automated vehicle capable of finding its own way to the ISS, the crew needs to prepare for all eventualities and that means knowing exactly how the ship will behave in their hands. Uniquely, the Dragon has no control stick; all flight commands must be entered via a touchscreen panel. One of their first tasks in orbit was simply to name their ship - in the tradition of past US spacefarers, all the way back to the Mercury programme. Radioing down to Earth, they announced it would be called Endeavour.  Doug Hurley said: "We chose Endeavour for a few reasons: One, because of this incredible endeavour that Nasa, SpaceX and the US have been on since the end of the shuttle programme back in 2011. The other reason is a little more personal to Bob and I. We both had our first flights on shuttle Endeavour and it just meant so much to us to carry on that name." Endeavour was the ship commanded by British explorer James Cook on his voyage to Australia in the late 18th Century. Hurley's and Behnken's stay at the ISS is not known currently, but is likely to be somewhere between one and four months.  Assuming their return to a splashdown in the Atlantic is as smooth as the launch, Nasa and SpaceX will move directly into the full terms of their new relationship. The company has a $2.6bn (£2.1bn) contract with the agency to fly six operational crew missions to the ISS.  The first of these should occur at the end August, or very soon after; and will see four astronauts climb aboard a Dragon rather than just the two we saw on this occasion. Saturday's launch went ahead against the background of the coronavirus crisis.  Crowds were encouraged not to assemble near the Kennedy complex, and Nasa itself severely limited the number of guests invited on to the spaceport. As for the astronauts, they would ordinarily observe a quarantine before flight. But again Nasa reduced the number of people the men could come into contact with in the weeks running up to launch, and those that had to get close were instructed to wear masks. For SpaceX, Saturday marked another significant milestone for the company which was founded just 18 years ago. The firm has upended the launcher industry with its reusable vehicles and is now pioneering a new market-driven approach to human spaceflight. It hasn't all been plain sailing - as evidenced by a spectacular explosion at the  firm's prototyping facility in Boca Chica, Texas, on Friday. But the company has routinely proved naysayers wrong, and Nasa believes its relationship with Elon Musk will save billion of dollars that can be diverted to the more complex task of getting people back to the Moon and then to Mars.     "We want to establish a commercial environment in low-Earth orbit so that we can focus on the hard job of exploring beyond our home planet, to establish a sustained presence on the Moon and get to Mars to establish a presence there," said Bob Cabana, the director at Kennedy.  "We can't do that if we're locked here in low-Earth orbit, and commercial crew - that's the beginning of a whole new era of spaceflight." Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violence has broken out again in the US as protests continue across the country over the killing of an unarmed black man by police in the state on Minnesota on Monday.  George Floyd died in police custody while an officer kneeled on his neck to pin him down.  In Minnesota - where he was killed - the state's entire national guard was mobilised on Saturday to try to prevent further trouble. All pictures copyrightedShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has said he will postpone this year's G7 summit and invite leaders of other countries to participate in the talks. "I don't feel that... it properly represents what's going on in the world. It's a very outdated group of countries," Mr Trump said on Saturday. The G7 group, which the US hosts this year, includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the UK.  The president said Russia, South Korea, Australia and India should be invited. Speaking to reporters on board the presidential plane Air Force One, Mr Trump said that he was delaying the summit - which was scheduled to take place later in June  - until September.  Last week, Mr Trump said it might be possible to hold a gathering at the White House and potentially parts of Camp David, the US presidential country retreat, despite concerns over the coronavirus pandemic. German Chancellor Angela Merkel later rejected the president's invitation to attend a summit in person because of the outbreak.  Her spokesman thanked Mr Trump, but said the German leader "cannot agree to her personal participation, to a journey to Washington". On Friday, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson "agreed on the importance of convening the G7 in person in the near future" following a conversation with the US president, the White House said in a statement.  The G7 - or Group of Seven - leaders were scheduled to meet by videoconference in June in response to Covid-19. The group is made up of the seven of the world's largest economies. It regards itself as "a community of values", with freedom and human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and prosperity and sustainable development as its key principles.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Microsoft is to replace dozens of contract journalists on its MSN website and use automated systems to select news stories, US and UK media report. The curating of  stories from news organisations and selection of headlines and pictures for the MSN site is currently done by  journalists. Artificial intelligence will perform these news production tasks, sources told the Seattle Times.   Microsoft said it was part of an evaluation of its business.  The US tech giant said in a statement: "Like all companies, we evaluate our business on a regular basis. This can result in increased investment in some places and, from time to time, redeployment in others. These decisions are not the result of the current pandemic." Microsoft, like some other tech companies, pays news organisations to use their content on its website. But it employs journalists to decide which stories to display and how they are presented.  Around 50 contract news producers will lose their jobs at the end of June, the Seattle Times reports, but a team of full-time journalists will remain. "It's demoralising to think machines can replace us but there you go," one of those facing redundancy told the paper. Some  sacked journalists warned that artificial intelligence may not be fully familiar with strict editorial guidelines, and could end up letting through inappropriate stories.  Twenty-seven of those losing their jobs are employed by the UK's PA Media, the Guardian reports.  One journalist quoted in the paper said: "I spend all my time reading about how automation and AI is going to take all our jobs - now it's taken mine."  Microsoft is one of many tech companies experimenting with forms of so-called robot journalism to cut costs.   Google is also investing in projects to understand how it might work.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump has been criticised at home and abroad after announcing he is ending US ties with the World Health Organization (WHO).  The EU urged him to reconsider the decision, while Germany's health minister called it a "disappointing setback for international health". The head of the US Senate's health committee, a Republican like Mr Trump, said now was not the time to leave. Mr Trump said the WHO had failed to hold China to account over coronavirus. The WHO, a UN agency that helps countries promote healthcare and tackle outbreaks of disease, has faced regular criticism from the US president over its handling of the outbreak. He suspended US funding to the WHO last month and on Friday permanently halted the payment, which last year stood at more than $400m (£324m; €360m), the largest single contribution at around 15% of its total budget. European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and top EU diplomat, Josep Borrell, said in a statement: "In the face of this global threat, now is the time for enhanced co-operation and common solutions. Actions that weaken international results must be avoided. "We urge the US to reconsider its announced decision." German Health Minister Jens Spahn described the setback as "disappointing" although he accepted the WHO "needs reform". "The EU must take a leading role and engage more financially," he said. A spokesperson for the UK said: "Coronavirus is a global challenge and the World Health Organization has an important role to play in leading the international health response. We have no plans to withdraw our funding." The chair of the US Senate Health Committee, Lamar Alexander, said the move could hamper the discovery of a vaccine against Covid-19 and urged a reversal of the decision in the "strongest terms possible". "Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis has been dealt with, not in the middle of it," he said. Ex-presidential candidate and US Senator Elizabeth Warren tweeted: "President Trump's decision to leave the @WHO during a global pandemic alienates our allies, undermines our global leadership, and threatens the health of the American people." Anders Nordstrom, a former WHO acting director general, said he was "deeply concerned" the move would increase political tension at a time when "we need to have global solidarity". South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize called the decision "unfortunate".  WHO member states agreed on 19 May to set up an independent inquiry into the global response to the pandemic. Speaking  at the White House, Mr Trump said: "Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs."  It is not clear when any US withdrawal might take place. A 1948 agreement between the US and WHO allows for one year's notice before pulling out.  Mr Trump has accused China of trying to cover up the outbreak of coronavirus, which occurred in the city of Wuhan late last year. He also says that "China has total control over the World Health Organization". The president accused China of pressurising the WHO to "mislead the world" about the virus, without elaborating. "The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government," he said. The US will redirect its funds for the WHO  to other health groups. More than 102,000 people in the US have lost their lives to Covid-19 - by far the biggest death toll in the world.  Opponents say Mr Trump is trying to deflect criticism of his handling of the pandemic ahead of his re-election bid this year. Meanwhile, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has said that Mr Trump is trying to mislead the public, smear China and "shift the blame for [the US's] own incompetent response".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violent protests over the death of an unarmed African-American man in the hands of police officers in Minnesota "are no longer in any way" about his killing, the state's governor has said. Tim Walz spoke after a night of unrest in several US cities over the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. He said that as a result he was taking the unprecedented step of mobilising the state's entire National Guard. There are also reports that military police units could deploy. An ex-Minneapolis policeman has been charged with murder over the death of Mr Floyd, 46, in police custody on Monday. Derek Chauvin, 44 and white, was shown in footage kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for several minutes, even after he said he couldn't breathe. He and three other officers have since been sacked. The video went viral online, reigniting US anger over police killings of black Americans, and reopening deep wounds over racial inequality across the nation. On Friday night protesters clashed with police in cities including New York, Atlanta and Portland. In Washington DC, the White House was briefly locked down. In Houston, where George Floyd grew up, a 19-year-old protester told the Associated Press: "My question is how many more, how many more? I just want to live in a future where we all live in harmony and we're not oppressed." In Minnesota, "our great cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul are under assault," Governor Walz said. "The situation in Minneapolis is now about attacking civil society, instilling fear and disrupting our great city." He said violence on Friday night had made "a mockery of pretending this is about George Floyd's death, or inequities or historical traumas to our communities of colour".  He and other officials have suggested that many violent protesters came from outside the state to cause trouble, but did not give details.  On Saturday, President Donald Trump said Mr Floyd's death had "filled Americans with horror, anger and grief".  "I stand before you as a friend and ally to every American seeking peace," he said in a televised address from Cape Canaveral in Florida, following the launch into orbit of two Nasa astronauts by billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX company.  The president denounced the actions of "looters and anarchists", saying that what was needed was "healing not hatred, justice not chaos".   "I will not allow angry mobs to dominate - won't happen," he added. Mr Trump earlier praised the US Secret Service for securing the White House but said if protesters breached the perimeter they "would have been greeted with the most vicious dogs, and most ominous weapons, I have ever seen". He blamed violence on "organised groups".  Minnesota remains the most volatile region, with curfews ordered for the Twin Cities of Minneapolis-Saint Paul from 20:00 to 06:00 on Friday and Saturday evening. Protesters defied the curfew on Friday. Fires, many from burning cars, were visible in a number of areas and television pictures showed widespread looting.  Hundreds of troops from the National Guard, a reserve military force that can be called on by the US president or state governors to intervene in domestic emergencies, moved in late at night. Minnesota officials said tens of thousands of people turned out on Friday and they are expecting more unrest on Saturday night.  As a result, Gov Walz said he was activating all National Guard troops available in the state  - reportedly up to 13,000 - for the first time in history to respond to rioters. The Pentagon said some US military units were on alert to support Minnesota if asked. There are long-standing tensions between the black community and police in Minneapolis. Another black man, Philando Castile, was shot and killed in 2016 during a traffic stop close to the epicentre of these protests in a case that gained international attention. African-Americans also suffer significant socio-economic inequalities, entrenched segregation and a higher level of unemployment than the white community.  In Atlanta, Georgia, where buildings were vandalised, a state of emergency was declared for some areas to protect people and property.  Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms issued an impassioned plea, saying: "This is not a protest. This is not in the spirit of Martin Luther King Jr. You are disgracing our city. You are disgracing the life of George Floyd." In New York's Brooklyn district, protesters clashed with police, throwing projectiles, starting fires and destroying police vehicles. A number of officers were injured and many arrests made. The mayor of Portland, Oregon, has declared a state of emergency amid looting, fires and an attack on a police precinct. An immediate curfew until 06:00 local time (13:00 GMT) was imposed and it will restart at 20:00. On Monday night, police received a phone call from a neighbourhood grocery store alleging that George Floyd had paid with a counterfeit $20 note. Officers responded and were attempting to put him in a police vehicle when he dropped to the ground, telling them he was claustrophobic. According to police, he physically resisted officers and was handcuffed. Video of the incident does not show how the confrontation started.  With Mr Chauvin's knee on his neck, Mr Floyd can be heard saying "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me". According to a preliminary autopsy by the county medical examiner, the police officer had his knee on Mr Floyd's neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds - almost three minutes of which was after Mr Floyd became non-responsive. Nearly two minutes before Mr Chauvin removed his knee the other officers checked Mr Floyd's right wrist for a pulse and were unable to find one. He was taken to hospital and pronounced dead around an hour later. The preliminary autopsy, included in the criminal complaint against Mr Chauvin, did not find evidence of "traumatic asphyxia or strangulation". The medical examiner noted Mr Floyd had underlying heart conditions and the combination of these, "potential intoxicants in his system" and being restrained by the officers "likely contributed to his death". Mr Chauvin was charged on Friday with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter over his role in Mr Floyd's death. Mr Floyd's family and their lawyer, Benjamin Crump, said that this was "welcome but overdue". The family said they wanted a more serious, first-degree murder charge as well as the arrest of the three other officers involved.  Hennepin County Prosecutor Mike Freeman said he "anticipates charges" for the other officers but would not offer more details.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The private rocket company SpaceX has sent two Nasa astronauts into orbit. It's the first time since the retirement of the shuttles nine years ago that an American crew has made the journey from US territory. Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken are not only trialling a new capsule system, they are also initiating a new business model for Nasa. The agency will no longer own the vehicles it uses but merely purchase the "taxi" service offered by SpaceX. It's hoped companies other than tech billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX outfit will come in to expand the market. The aerospace giant Boeing already has a contract with Nasa to do so.  Mr Musk himself said he was overcome with emotion watching his hardware take the astronauts to orbit.  "I think this is something that should get people right in the heart, of anyone that has the spirit of exploration. And the US is the distillation of the spirit of exploration," he told reporters. The new capability the CEO is offering will end the reliance of Nasa on Russian rockets and capsules to get its people to the International Space Station (ISS). It was a point picked up on by President Donald Trump, who came to Florida to watch the launch. "Past leaders put the US at the mercy of foreign nations to send our astronauts into orbit. Not anymore," he said. "Today we once again proudly launched American astronauts on American rockets - the best in the world - from right here on American soil." Hurley's and Behnken's Dragon ship left Earth atop its Falcon-9 rocket precisely on time - at 15:22 EDT (19:22 GMT / 20:22 BST). Meteorologists had forecast only a 50:50 chance of favourable conditions around Florida's Kennedy Space Center at lift-off, but, as luck would have it, the weather window stayed open and the SpaceX controllers grabbed their opportunity. The Falcon soared off the spaceport's famous 39A pad to head northeast out over the Atlantic. After two-and-a-half minutes, the lower-stage of the vehicle had separated to return to a drone ship at sea. And after a further six minutes, the crew were safely inserted into orbit.  Hurley and Behnken are set to arrive at the ISS on Sunday. They'll use some of the intervening hours to test equipment and procedures in their capsule, including doing some manual flying.  Although the Dragon capsule is a fully automated vehicle capable of finding its own way to the ISS, the crew needs to prepare for all eventualities and that means knowing exactly how the ship will behave in their hands. Uniquely, the Dragon has no control stick; all flight commands must be entered via a touchscreen panel. One of their first tasks in orbit was simply to name their ship - in the tradition of past US spacefarers, all the way back to the Mercury programme. Radioing down to Earth, they announced it would be called Endeavour.  Doug Hurley said: "We chose Endeavour for a few reasons: One, because of this incredible endeavour that Nasa, SpaceX and the US have been on since the end of the shuttle programme back in 2011. The other reason is a little more personal to Bob and I. We both had our first flights on shuttle Endeavour and it just meant so much to us to carry on that name." Endeavour was the ship commanded by British explorer James Cook on his voyage to Australia in the late 18th Century. Hurley's and Behnken's stay at the ISS is not known currently, but is likely to be somewhere between one and four months.  Assuming their return to a splashdown in the Atlantic is as smooth as the launch, Nasa and SpaceX will move directly into the full terms of their new relationship. The company has a $2.6bn (£2.1bn) contract with the agency to fly six operational crew missions to the ISS.  The first of these should occur at the end August, or very soon after; and will see four astronauts climb aboard a Dragon rather than just the two we saw on this occasion. Saturday's launch went ahead against the background of the coronavirus crisis.  Crowds were encouraged not to assemble near the Kennedy complex, and Nasa itself severely limited the number of guests invited on to the spaceport. As for the astronauts, they would ordinarily observe a quarantine before flight. But again Nasa reduced the number of people the men could come into contact with in the weeks running up to launch, and those that had to get close were instructed to wear masks. For SpaceX, Saturday marked another significant milestone for the company which was founded just 18 years ago. The firm has upended the launcher industry with its reusable vehicles and is now pioneering a new market-driven approach to human spaceflight. It hasn't all been plain sailing - as evidenced by a spectacular explosion at the  firm's prototyping facility in Boca Chica, Texas, on Friday. But the company has routinely proved naysayers wrong, and Nasa believes its relationship with Elon Musk will save billion of dollars that can be diverted to the more complex task of getting people back to the Moon and then to Mars.     "We want to establish a commercial environment in low-Earth orbit so that we can focus on the hard job of exploring beyond our home planet, to establish a sustained presence on the Moon and get to Mars to establish a presence there," said Bob Cabana, the director at Kennedy.  "We can't do that if we're locked here in low-Earth orbit, and commercial crew - that's the beginning of a whole new era of spaceflight." Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violence has broken out again in the US as protests continue across the country over the killing of an unarmed black man by police in the state on Minnesota on Monday.  George Floyd died in police custody while an officer kneeled on his neck to pin him down.  In Minnesota - where he was killed - the state's entire national guard was mobilised on Saturday to try to prevent further trouble. All pictures copyrightedShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has said he will postpone this year's G7 summit and invite leaders of other countries to participate in the talks. "I don't feel that... it properly represents what's going on in the world. It's a very outdated group of countries," Mr Trump said on Saturday. The G7 group, which the US hosts this year, includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the UK.  The president said Russia, South Korea, Australia and India should be invited. Speaking to reporters on board the presidential plane Air Force One, Mr Trump said that he was delaying the summit - which was scheduled to take place later in June  - until September.  Last week, Mr Trump said it might be possible to hold a gathering at the White House and potentially parts of Camp David, the US presidential country retreat, despite concerns over the coronavirus pandemic. German Chancellor Angela Merkel later rejected the president's invitation to attend a summit in person because of the outbreak.  Her spokesman thanked Mr Trump, but said the German leader "cannot agree to her personal participation, to a journey to Washington". On Friday, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson "agreed on the importance of convening the G7 in person in the near future" following a conversation with the US president, the White House said in a statement.  The G7 - or Group of Seven - leaders were scheduled to meet by videoconference in June in response to Covid-19. The group is made up of the seven of the world's largest economies. It regards itself as "a community of values", with freedom and human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and prosperity and sustainable development as its key principles.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Microsoft is to replace dozens of contract journalists on its MSN website and use automated systems to select news stories, US and UK media report. The curating of  stories from news organisations and selection of headlines and pictures for the MSN site is currently done by  journalists. Artificial intelligence will perform these news production tasks, sources told the Seattle Times.   Microsoft said it was part of an evaluation of its business.  The US tech giant said in a statement: "Like all companies, we evaluate our business on a regular basis. This can result in increased investment in some places and, from time to time, redeployment in others. These decisions are not the result of the current pandemic." Microsoft, like some other tech companies, pays news organisations to use their content on its website. But it employs journalists to decide which stories to display and how they are presented.  Around 50 contract news producers will lose their jobs at the end of June, the Seattle Times reports, but a team of full-time journalists will remain. "It's demoralising to think machines can replace us but there you go," one of those facing redundancy told the paper. Some  sacked journalists warned that artificial intelligence may not be fully familiar with strict editorial guidelines, and could end up letting through inappropriate stories.  Twenty-seven of those losing their jobs are employed by the UK's PA Media, the Guardian reports.  One journalist quoted in the paper said: "I spend all my time reading about how automation and AI is going to take all our jobs - now it's taken mine."  Microsoft is one of many tech companies experimenting with forms of so-called robot journalism to cut costs.   Google is also investing in projects to understand how it might work.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump has been criticised at home and abroad after announcing he is ending US ties with the World Health Organization (WHO).  The EU urged him to reconsider the decision, while Germany's health minister called it a "disappointing setback for international health". The head of the US Senate's health committee, a Republican like Mr Trump, said now was not the time to leave. Mr Trump said the WHO had failed to hold China to account over coronavirus. The WHO, a UN agency that helps countries promote healthcare and tackle outbreaks of disease, has faced regular criticism from the US president over its handling of the outbreak. He suspended US funding to the WHO last month and on Friday permanently halted the payment, which last year stood at more than $400m (£324m; €360m), the largest single contribution at around 15% of its total budget. European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and top EU diplomat, Josep Borrell, said in a statement: "In the face of this global threat, now is the time for enhanced co-operation and common solutions. Actions that weaken international results must be avoided. "We urge the US to reconsider its announced decision." German Health Minister Jens Spahn described the setback as "disappointing" although he accepted the WHO "needs reform". "The EU must take a leading role and engage more financially," he said. A spokesperson for the UK said: "Coronavirus is a global challenge and the World Health Organization has an important role to play in leading the international health response. We have no plans to withdraw our funding." The chair of the US Senate Health Committee, Lamar Alexander, said the move could hamper the discovery of a vaccine against Covid-19 and urged a reversal of the decision in the "strongest terms possible". "Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis has been dealt with, not in the middle of it," he said. Ex-presidential candidate and US Senator Elizabeth Warren tweeted: "President Trump's decision to leave the @WHO during a global pandemic alienates our allies, undermines our global leadership, and threatens the health of the American people." Anders Nordstrom, a former WHO acting director general, said he was "deeply concerned" the move would increase political tension at a time when "we need to have global solidarity". South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize called the decision "unfortunate".  WHO member states agreed on 19 May to set up an independent inquiry into the global response to the pandemic. Speaking  at the White House, Mr Trump said: "Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs."  It is not clear when any US withdrawal might take place. A 1948 agreement between the US and WHO allows for one year's notice before pulling out.  Mr Trump has accused China of trying to cover up the outbreak of coronavirus, which occurred in the city of Wuhan late last year. He also says that "China has total control over the World Health Organization". The president accused China of pressurising the WHO to "mislead the world" about the virus, without elaborating. "The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government," he said. The US will redirect its funds for the WHO  to other health groups. More than 102,000 people in the US have lost their lives to Covid-19 - by far the biggest death toll in the world.  Opponents say Mr Trump is trying to deflect criticism of his handling of the pandemic ahead of his re-election bid this year. Meanwhile, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has said that Mr Trump is trying to mislead the public, smear China and "shift the blame for [the US's] own incompetent response".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The private rocket company SpaceX has sent two Nasa astronauts into orbit. It's the first time since the retirement of the shuttles nine years ago that an American crew has made the journey from US territory. Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken are not only trialling a new capsule system, they are also initiating a new business model for Nasa. The agency will no longer own the vehicles it uses but merely purchase the "taxi" service offered by SpaceX. It's hoped companies other than tech billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX outfit will come in to expand the market. The aerospace giant Boeing already has a contract with Nasa to do so.  Mr Musk himself said he was overcome with emotion watching his hardware take the astronauts to orbit.  "I think this is something that should get people right in the heart, of anyone that has the spirit of exploration. And the US is the distillation of the spirit of exploration," he told reporters. The new capability the CEO is offering will end the reliance of Nasa on Russian rockets and capsules to get its people to the International Space Station (ISS). It was a point picked up on by President Donald Trump, who came to Florida to watch the launch. "Past leaders put the US at the mercy of foreign nations to send our astronauts into orbit. Not anymore," he said. "Today we once again proudly launched American astronauts on American rockets - the best in the world - from right here on American soil." Hurley's and Behnken's Dragon ship left Earth atop its Falcon-9 rocket precisely on time - at 15:22 EDT (19:22 GMT / 20:22 BST). Meteorologists had forecast only a 50:50 chance of favourable conditions around Florida's Kennedy Space Center at lift-off, but, as luck would have it, the weather window stayed open and the SpaceX controllers grabbed their opportunity. The Falcon soared off the spaceport's famous 39A pad to head northeast out over the Atlantic. After two-and-a-half minutes, the lower-stage of the vehicle had separated to return to a drone ship at sea. And after a further six minutes, the crew were safely inserted into orbit.  Hurley and Behnken are set to arrive at the ISS on Sunday. They'll use some of the intervening hours to test equipment and procedures in their capsule, including doing some manual flying.  Although the Dragon capsule is a fully automated vehicle capable of finding its own way to the ISS, the crew needs to prepare for all eventualities and that means knowing exactly how the ship will behave in their hands. Uniquely, the Dragon has no control stick; all flight commands must be entered via a touchscreen panel. One of their first tasks in orbit was simply to name their ship - in the tradition of past US spacefarers, all the way back to the Mercury programme. Radioing down to Earth, they announced it would be called Endeavour.  Doug Hurley said: "We chose Endeavour for a few reasons: One, because of this incredible endeavour that Nasa, SpaceX and the US have been on since the end of the shuttle programme back in 2011. The other reason is a little more personal to Bob and I. We both had our first flights on shuttle Endeavour and it just meant so much to us to carry on that name." Endeavour was the ship commanded by British explorer James Cook on his voyage to Australia in the late 18th Century. Hurley's and Behnken's stay at the ISS is not known currently, but is likely to be somewhere between one and four months.  Assuming their return to a splashdown in the Atlantic is as smooth as the launch, Nasa and SpaceX will move directly into the full terms of their new relationship. The company has a $2.6bn (£2.1bn) contract with the agency to fly six operational crew missions to the ISS.  The first of these should occur at the end August, or very soon after; and will see four astronauts climb aboard a Dragon rather than just the two we saw on this occasion. Saturday's launch went ahead against the background of the coronavirus crisis.  Crowds were encouraged not to assemble near the Kennedy complex, and Nasa itself severely limited the number of guests invited on to the spaceport. As for the astronauts, they would ordinarily observe a quarantine before flight. But again Nasa reduced the number of people the men could come into contact with in the weeks running up to launch, and those that had to get close were instructed to wear masks. For SpaceX, Saturday marked another significant milestone for the company which was founded just 18 years ago. The firm has upended the launcher industry with its reusable vehicles and is now pioneering a new market-driven approach to human spaceflight. It hasn't all been plain sailing - as evidenced by a spectacular explosion at the  firm's prototyping facility in Boca Chica, Texas, on Friday. But the company has routinely proved naysayers wrong, and Nasa believes its relationship with Elon Musk will save billion of dollars that can be diverted to the more complex task of getting people back to the Moon and then to Mars.     "We want to establish a commercial environment in low-Earth orbit so that we can focus on the hard job of exploring beyond our home planet, to establish a sustained presence on the Moon and get to Mars to establish a presence there," said Bob Cabana, the director at Kennedy.  "We can't do that if we're locked here in low-Earth orbit, and commercial crew - that's the beginning of a whole new era of spaceflight." Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violence has broken out again in the US as protests continue across the country over the killing of an unarmed black man by police in the state on Minnesota on Monday.  George Floyd died in police custody while an officer kneeled on his neck to pin him down.  In Minnesota - where he was killed - the state's entire national guard was mobilised on Saturday to try to prevent further trouble. All pictures copyrightedShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has said he will postpone this year's G7 summit and invite leaders of other countries to participate in the talks. "I don't feel that... it properly represents what's going on in the world. It's a very outdated group of countries," Mr Trump said on Saturday. The G7 group, which the US hosts this year, includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the UK.  The president said Russia, South Korea, Australia and India should be invited. Speaking to reporters on board the presidential plane Air Force One, Mr Trump said that he was delaying the summit - which was scheduled to take place later in June  - until September.  Last week, Mr Trump said it might be possible to hold a gathering at the White House and potentially parts of Camp David, the US presidential country retreat, despite concerns over the coronavirus pandemic. German Chancellor Angela Merkel later rejected the president's invitation to attend a summit in person because of the outbreak.  Her spokesman thanked Mr Trump, but said the German leader "cannot agree to her personal participation, to a journey to Washington". On Friday, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson "agreed on the importance of convening the G7 in person in the near future" following a conversation with the US president, the White House said in a statement.  The G7 - or Group of Seven - leaders were scheduled to meet by videoconference in June in response to Covid-19. The group is made up of the seven of the world's largest economies. It regards itself as "a community of values", with freedom and human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and prosperity and sustainable development as its key principles.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Microsoft is to replace dozens of contract journalists on its MSN website and use automated systems to select news stories, US and UK media report. The curating of  stories from news organisations and selection of headlines and pictures for the MSN site is currently done by  journalists. Artificial intelligence will perform these news production tasks, sources told the Seattle Times.   Microsoft said it was part of an evaluation of its business.  The US tech giant said in a statement: "Like all companies, we evaluate our business on a regular basis. This can result in increased investment in some places and, from time to time, redeployment in others. These decisions are not the result of the current pandemic." Microsoft, like some other tech companies, pays news organisations to use their content on its website. But it employs journalists to decide which stories to display and how they are presented.  Around 50 contract news producers will lose their jobs at the end of June, the Seattle Times reports, but a team of full-time journalists will remain. "It's demoralising to think machines can replace us but there you go," one of those facing redundancy told the paper. Some  sacked journalists warned that artificial intelligence may not be fully familiar with strict editorial guidelines, and could end up letting through inappropriate stories.  Twenty-seven of those losing their jobs are employed by the UK's PA Media, the Guardian reports.  One journalist quoted in the paper said: "I spend all my time reading about how automation and AI is going to take all our jobs - now it's taken mine."  Microsoft is one of many tech companies experimenting with forms of so-called robot journalism to cut costs.   Google is also investing in projects to understand how it might work.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump has been criticised at home and abroad after announcing he is ending US ties with the World Health Organization (WHO).  The EU urged him to reconsider the decision, while Germany's health minister called it a "disappointing setback for international health". The head of the US Senate's health committee, a Republican like Mr Trump, said now was not the time to leave. Mr Trump said the WHO had failed to hold China to account over coronavirus. The WHO, a UN agency that helps countries promote healthcare and tackle outbreaks of disease, has faced regular criticism from the US president over its handling of the outbreak. He suspended US funding to the WHO last month and on Friday permanently halted the payment, which last year stood at more than $400m (£324m; €360m), the largest single contribution at around 15% of its total budget. European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and top EU diplomat, Josep Borrell, said in a statement: "In the face of this global threat, now is the time for enhanced co-operation and common solutions. Actions that weaken international results must be avoided. "We urge the US to reconsider its announced decision." German Health Minister Jens Spahn described the setback as "disappointing" although he accepted the WHO "needs reform". "The EU must take a leading role and engage more financially," he said. A spokesperson for the UK said: "Coronavirus is a global challenge and the World Health Organization has an important role to play in leading the international health response. We have no plans to withdraw our funding." The chair of the US Senate Health Committee, Lamar Alexander, said the move could hamper the discovery of a vaccine against Covid-19 and urged a reversal of the decision in the "strongest terms possible". "Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis has been dealt with, not in the middle of it," he said. Ex-presidential candidate and US Senator Elizabeth Warren tweeted: "President Trump's decision to leave the @WHO during a global pandemic alienates our allies, undermines our global leadership, and threatens the health of the American people." Anders Nordstrom, a former WHO acting director general, said he was "deeply concerned" the move would increase political tension at a time when "we need to have global solidarity". South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize called the decision "unfortunate".  WHO member states agreed on 19 May to set up an independent inquiry into the global response to the pandemic. Speaking  at the White House, Mr Trump said: "Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs."  It is not clear when any US withdrawal might take place. A 1948 agreement between the US and WHO allows for one year's notice before pulling out.  Mr Trump has accused China of trying to cover up the outbreak of coronavirus, which occurred in the city of Wuhan late last year. He also says that "China has total control over the World Health Organization". The president accused China of pressurising the WHO to "mislead the world" about the virus, without elaborating. "The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government," he said. The US will redirect its funds for the WHO  to other health groups. More than 102,000 people in the US have lost their lives to Covid-19 - by far the biggest death toll in the world.  Opponents say Mr Trump is trying to deflect criticism of his handling of the pandemic ahead of his re-election bid this year. Meanwhile, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has said that Mr Trump is trying to mislead the public, smear China and "shift the blame for [the US's] own incompetent response".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window My Money is a series looking at how people spend their money - and the sometimes tough decisions they have to make. Here Alyssa Hulme from Heber City in Utah, US, takes us through a week in her life during the coronavirus pandemic. Alyssa, 31, is a freelance writer and educational consultant. She and her husband Randy have four children: Ellie, eight, Max, seven, Amethyst, four and Josie, one. She has been homeschooling her children for a year, months before the pandemic started.  She says her week started out mundane but ended up awesome! She had no idea on Monday where she would be by Sunday.  Over to Alyssa.... I started the day nursing my one-year-old, passed her off to her dad for breakfast and settled down for a solid 45 minutes of private time before spending the rest of the day homeschooling three kids and caring for a baby. After prayer, meditation, and setting my To-Dos for the day, I purchased a course, the 30-day Money Cure with Carol Tuttle for $297 (£242). The course is on gaining financial affluence by clearing out limiting belief systems that don't serve me and replacing them with healthy practices. I have been looking forward to this course for months and have set aside money for this specific purpose.  After that I moved on to begin my day with my family and set everyone to their beginning tasks of piano, chores, and math. We've been homeschooling for a year now, so it's been a pretty typical day. But at lunchtime instead of transitioning to a play date, my husband took our eldest out for one-on-one time to help supplement the loss of activities and outings that has come with Covid-19 lockdowns.  We've been isolating since the end of February and the loss of friends is wearing on us all. During our midday quiet time I taught two online vocal training lessons virtually to students who live in town. Typically they'd come to my home, but we are all still isolating. After that we settled into our evening routine: I made dinner, we ate together and then held our weekly "family night" - an evening of talent shows, games, treats and fun. Total spend: $297 (£242) I continued with the money course. I am starting up a homeschool consulting business and really want to get on the correct and mentally healthy track for the sake of my business. The course has helped me identify several limiting beliefs I can clear up to allow space for more growth. Then, as every weekday for months, we did homeschool, lunch and quiet time in the afternoon.  During quiet time I had a virtual occupational therapy appointment for my one-year-old in order to evaluate her for possible gross motor delays. This is free through our state. Next I had a virtual appointment with my therapist. This costs $110 after insurance and is withdrawn from my Health Saving Account, an account we pay into monthly through my husband's pay check and is tax free. Therapy always really takes it out of me and today it was compounded by some new business issues I'm working through, so my husband picked up dinner from a fastfood Chinese restaurant for $40. It ended up being a lot of food and will last a good two and a half meals for the six of us.  I took the evening to work more on my business and work on my personal goals. Normally I'd go out with friends or go to the gym, but everything is closed, so I get to save more money and get to know my bed a little better. Total spend: $150 (£122) Our big outing today was a trip up the canyon near our home. We spent two hours hiking in the woods, building fairy houses and crossing streams.  Later in the evening I started making plans for next year's homeschool and bought some notebooks and stationery through Target.com. I really dislike online shopping, especially for something as personal as a notebook. As a writer, the size, weight and binding of a notebook really matters to me, so buying from an online shop is very disorienting.  I also bought a summer dress through Target.com, something I can easily nurse in and hope to be able to wear out and about someday here soon when the quarantine is lifted. Our county just moved to a low-risk status, so hopefully my husband and I can start up our weekly date nights soon.  Total spend: $110.52 (£90) Late last night my husband discovered that he will not be returning to work in his office until the end of 2020. We discussed buying a motorhome, living in it for the next six months, renting out our home, and working and doing homeschool on the go. This has been a dream of ours for 10 years, but it never worked out with our careers. Now is the time.  Today we decided to rent an RV (recreational vehicle) - $1,160 for four nights - and start testing out different configurations and living quarters. We decided to head for Yellowstone National Park. Two of the four entrances are now open! I found an RV site and started packing up.  I normally would have gone grocery shopping last night but our travel plans halted that. As a result we were out of food today, so I grabbed lunch from a local shop for $33.50 and dinner from a restaurant for $45. This is not a normal thing for us to just pick up and drop a ton of money on travel, but we have now been in isolation since the end of February and we are all so ready to have a new experience.  This money is coming from the allotment my husband and I had set aside to celebrate our 10 year anniversary tomorrow, but all our kid-free-for-the-first-time-in-five-years international travel plans were squashed by the virus. This will be an interesting substitute.  We parked the RV along our path to Yellowstone at a Walmart. Anyone can park there overnight for free, so it's a great backup to have in mind when travelling.  Total spend: $1,238.50 (£1,005) Happy 10 year anniversary to my husband and me! We celebrate the day by first getting groceries from Walmart and starting the trek to Yellowstone. I bought groceries for the week for $233. Not too bad for a family of six with limited fridge and cupboard space. We stopped to fill up the RV with gas for $213. After several hours of driving, we arrived at the spot I had reserved online yesterday for two nights, a total of $180, including water and electricity plug-ins. It's a little high for an RV site, but it's the closest I could find to the park entrance online and we decided to value time in the park over the cost of the campsite. (All the sites inside the park are closed due to Covid-19.) Total spend: $626 (£510) More blogs from the BBC's My Money Series: We woke early and headed to the park today, but it was closed due to a snowstorm. The road ended up getting 12 inches of snow in some places! Instead of exploring the park we explored the National Forest just outside. Total spend: $0 We got up early again and were able to enter the park! We used our National Parks Pass to get in, so no cost today. We did everything that was open in the park, the big attractions for us being the Upper and Lower falls outlooks, the Grand Prismatic Spring, and Old Faithful.  We saw so much wildlife on this trip, far more than my husband or I even saw here as children. We drove by and hiked next to elk, bison, deer, egrets, and even several bears including a baby and mama bear. We attribute this expanse of wildlife to conservation efforts in the park as well as the closure of the park over the last several months.  The snow also allowed us to see all the animal tracks throughout the park which our kids loved! Old Faithful had the largest crowd, but still very small even for this time of year. We watched with a small, social distancing crowd for the big event, and then headed out. We were tempted to get take-out from the lodge near Old Faithful, but decided to continue eating the food we'd already purchased knowing the lodge food prices are really marked up.  We packed up and exited the park through the South Entrance and drove through Grand Tetons National Park and got gas in Jackson Hole for $176. Wyoming has lots of open land for free parking, but with a new vehicle and dark terrain, we decided to stay overnight in a National Forest campsite a half hour away for $15 for the night. We pulled in about 23:00, paid via cash in a drop box, and enjoyed sleeping next to a river and under a blanket of stars. Total spend: $191 (£156) Thanks for coming with me on my 10 year wedding anniversary trip! This is not the trip we'd planned, but it's been wonderful for our family. We've seen two more National Parks, taken a break from quarantine in a way that feels safe for us, and enjoyed our beautiful nation.  This is an unusually high week for us because we went on our trip. But considering $2,000 of that was spent on our trip and only $613.02 spent on our normal life, I feel good about that. We had $2,000+ saved for months now to go to Barbados later this summer, but we have given up all international travel until the virus settles down. All in, I feel like this was a successful trip. We would not be moving forward with purchasing an RV had we not had the real life experience of travelling in one for an extended period of time.  The remaining $613.02 also reflects an unusual cost in the money course I am taking. I haven't purchased class tuition in probably five years, but being home all the time has me under-stimulated and needing a project.  I think like many families these days, our spending in many areas has decreased (no extracurriculars, less shopping and self-care purchases, almost no gas purchases), but in other ways expanded. I don't bring my kids into any grocery stores anymore, so when my husband is too busy at work to be with them and we run out of food, I get take-out meals. When our mental health is being run down by monotony, we rent RVs, buy our kids bikes, and online shop for anything to help the kids make it through the day. This is survival for us.  I feel very privileged to be financially secure and have a very stable income. While the world is in chaos we will continue to use money as a tool to support our mental wellbeing and try to take advantage of the new opportunities opening up to us.  We're looking for more people to share what they spend their money on. If you're interested, please email my.money@bbc.co.uk or get in touch via our My Money (World) Facebook group, or if you live in the UK, please join our My Money (UK) Facebook group and we'll aim to contact you.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window As the US grapples with the coronavirus outbreak, President Donald Trump and and his likely election rival, Joe Biden, have been locking horns over the handling of the crisis. They've traded accusations about access to China for US health experts, and restrictions on flights from China following the outbreak. We've been looking at some of these claims and counter-claims. President Trump failed to get US health officials into China to inspect the outbreak Mr Biden has said there was "no effort" by the president to get US officials into China to inspect the initial outbreak, and also claimed that "Trump never got a CDC team on the ground in China."  But the Trump administration says it did try. Health Secretary Alex Azar told journalists in late January that the US had offered on 6 January to send a team from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) - an offer that was repeated later that month and in February. The CDC is the top government body responsible for protecting public health. Two US experts did get into China as part of a multinational delegation from the World Health Organization, which went in mid-February. These were Weigong Zhou from the US CDC, and Clifford Lane from the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.  It's also worth adding that the CDC itself has had an office in China for decades (more on this further down). Trump allowed 40,000 people to travel to US from China after the travel ban President Trump and Mr Biden have also clashed over how airtight the restrictions introduced on travel from China are. Mr Trump issued an order on 31 January which stopped foreign nationals who had been in China in the previous two weeks from entering the US. This came into effect on 2 February.  An advert by the Biden campaign claims the president let 40,000 travellers into the US from China after he signed the order. President Trump has hit back, saying these were US citizens coming home.  The order does have exemptions for US citizens, legal residents, and non-citizen relatives with close ties. Flight data analysed by the New York Times shows 40,000 people arrived in the US directly from China in the two months after President Trump's restrictions. We don't know how many of these were US citizens, but it is unlikely they all were  - as President Trump claims - with other exemptions also applying. President Trump cut the numbers of US disease experts in China before the outbreak This claim by Mr Biden refers to the presence of a CDC office inside China, which it's maintained for decades. Joe Biden said: "We had over 44, if I'm not mistaken, people from the CDC in China, to observe what was going on. The president brought home the vast majority of them and I think left only four in place." Mr Biden is right that overall numbers of CDC staff in China have come down significantly, but he's not correct about the numbers.  The CDC website says that as of March this year there were 14 staff in total working in China - three from the US and 11 employed locally. That's down from 47 CDC staff a year earlier, eight of whom were US employees and 39 of whom were locally recruited. Mr Biden further alleges that a key US expert role inside China has not been filled. He said: "We had an American official stationed inside the Chinese disease control agency serving as our eyes and ears. President Trump left the position vacant as the outbreak hit." It's true that the last American - a CDC employee -  left her role in China's disease control agency in 2019 before the coronavirus emerged, and was not replaced. When President Trump was asked about this on 22 March, he said that media reports about the CDC were "100 percent wrong" and then referred the question to Robert Redfield, the CDC director, who was with him.  Mr Redfield said the CDC "China office is actually being augmented, as we speak," but didn't explain why this particular role had ceased. Biden called Trump xenophobic for China travel ban President Trump claims Mr Biden "went crazy" and called him "xenophobic" for banning people entering the US from China. When the order was announced, Mr Biden did say it wasn't the time for "Donald Trump's record of hysterical xenophobia", and the next day tweeted a similar message. The Biden campaign says this wasn't a reference to the travel restrictions, but to the president's overall record in office. Mr Biden has never specifically said he opposed travel restrictions per se, but he did say in March that "travel restrictions based on favouritism and politics, rather than risk, will be counter-productive". He publicly supported the travel ban in early April, with his campaign saying: "Science supported this ban, therefore he did too." President Trump has also said Mr Biden wrote him a letter of apology regarding his comments about the China travel restrictions, but this isn't true, according to the Biden campaign. Read more from Reality Check Send us your questions Follow us on TwitterShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Tensions between Minneapolis' black community and the police did not start with the death of George Floyd. They have been years in the making. On a hot Thursday morning in the Longfellow neighbourhood of Minneapolis, a 28-year-old father named Nuwman stood outside the Minneapolis Police Department's Third Precinct drinking a large coffee as smoke wafted past from the smouldering ruins of nearby buildings.  It was day three of protests over the death of 46-year-old George Floyd, after a white police officer named Derek Chauvin kneeled on his neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds. Floyd begged for his life before falling unconscious and dying in the street, in full view of witnesses and a rolling mobile phone camera. Four officers, including Chauvin, were fired from the department for their involvement. The previous night, tensions ignited, and for the first time the city saw looting, arson and violence. At least one man died in a shooting at a pawn shop. "This is everyday. Everyday that these police officers have enforced their protocol has led up to this," said Nuwman, his voice rising with emotion over the din of protesters and sirens. "This is not just a singular moment. This is a cataclysm. A combination of all the things that happened before." That night, protesters stormed the precinct as police cruisers flew out of the rear parking lot, abandoning it to demonstrators who quickly moved from room to room lighting blazes.  The following afternoon, a Friday, saw the arrest of Chauvin by Minnesota's Bureau of Criminal Apprehension. Chauvin has been charged with murder. This is not the first instance of a controversial, police-involved killing in the region. In 2016, Philando Castile was shot and killed by a police officer in a neighbourhood just 15 minutes away from the current epicentre of protest.  In 2017, a Minneapolis officer was charged with the shooting death of Justine Damond after she called to report a possible sexual assault. In 2015, protests erupted over the shooting death of Jamar Clark, a 24-year-old man who was being pursued by Minneapolis officers. All three deaths sparked protest movements and yielded mixed results in terms of prosecution. Yanez was tried and acquitted. Mohamed Noor, Damond's shooter, was sentenced to 12.5 years. No charges were brought in Clark's case.  For some, Floyd's death was the continuation of those stories. "WE SHOULD HAVE BURNT THE CITY DOWN FOR PHILANDO CASTILE," one person posted on social media.  But in some ways, the pictures beamed around the world this week tell a story that's unique.  Demonstrations are occurring in the midst of a historic, global pandemic. The sheer amount of property damage and arson has been staggering. The swiftness with which officers were fired, and the speed in which Chauvin was arrested and charged surprised many. But Minneapolis - while a prosperous city that celebrates liberal policies and politicians - has struggled for years with socioeconomic inequality and segregation. It's a phenomena that's been dubbed the "Minnesota paradox".  The Twin Cities, as Minneapolis and St Paul are known, are still overwhelmingly white - about one-quarter of the population is non-white - and its neighbourhoods are still highly segregated. Most people of colour live on the cities' north sides.  They were shaped by racist red-lining policies dating to the early 20th Century, when black families were not allowed to buy homes in certain neighbourhoods. In the 1960s, the state built a major highway that cut through and destroyed a thriving black community known as Rondo in St Paul.  According to a 2018 study, the rate of black homeownership in the Twin Cities is among the lowest in the nation. Even before the pandemic caused massive layoffs, 10% of black residents were unemployed compared to 4% of whites. That disparity ranks as one of the nation's worst.  In 2016, the average white household in the Twin Cities made about $76,000 a year, while the average black household earned just $32,000. Thirty-two percent of black Twin Citians fell below the poverty line, while only 6.5% of whites did.  Racial disparities persist in the way the community is policed.  After Philando Castile was killed, data released about police traffic stops in the area showed that 44% of stops were black drivers, though the population was only 7% black.  According to the Minneapolis police department's own data, in 2018 55% of drivers stopped for "equipment violations" were black.  As Covid-19 ravages the area, these disparities are sure to worsen, as thousands lose their jobs, and their homes to evictions and foreclosures.  On Friday afternoon, residents of both St Paul and Minneapolis headed into the streets carrying brooms and pails, and slowly began to literally pick up the pieces of the town.  Following the announcement that former officer Chauvin had been jailed and charged with third-degree murder and manslaughter, protesters at Minneapolis City Hall let up a cheer.  But it was quickly replaced by a new demand: "One down, three to go." Follow Jessica on TwitterShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window For years, Twitter resisted calls to treat President Trump just like any other user. Then this week, everything changed. On Tech Tent, we examine the conflict between the president and his favourite social media platform. It began on Wednesday. Twitter had been under fire for allowing tweets in which the president shared a far-fetched conspiracy theory about an alleged crime involving a TV presenter and former Republican congressman.  But instead of taking action on those tweets, it fact-checked two others - about postal voting under a new policy which seeks to deter content which might suppress voting. Social media expert Chris Stokel-Walker tells Tech Tent that if Twitter thought limiting action to the area of elections was a cautious first step, it was wrong. "As soon as you start engaging in any sort of moderation or comment on politics, you run the risk of potentially alienating 50% of your audience - and given our very politically fractious times, that is more of a risk than ever," he said. Having taken that first step, and seeing President Trump immediately go nuclear and threatening to go so far as to shut the social media platform down, Twitter might have been tempted to go quiet for a bit. Instead, it chose escalation.  In the early hours of Friday morning, in a tweet about the protests in Minneapolis over the death of a black man, Mr Trump warned: "when the looting starts, the shooting starts".  Twitter's moderation team swung into action - after consulting CEO Jack Dorsey - and obscured the tweet with a message saying that rules on glorifying violence had been broken. Users could still see the tweet by clicking through that message, but sharing it was made harder.  A few hours later, as the president woke up, the official White House account simply repeated the offending tweet. We watched with bated breath to see what would happen and, sure enough, Twitter's moderators slapped the same warning on the tweet. It is difficult to see either side backing down now.  The White House is busy scouring Twitter to find examples of other world leaders who have glorified violence without any comeback. Others are finding all sorts of old Trump tweets that appear to have broken the rules by, for instance, spreading misinformation about treatments for coronavirus. Jack Dorsey, who had appeared very reluctant to apply anything but the most light-touch regulation, now finds himself faced with the unappealing prospect of cracking down on world leaders far and wide. Meanwhile, there is not exactly much solidarity being shown by Facebook. In general, it has been a more tightly-moderated platform than Twitter, but Mark Zuckerberg has made it clear he has no intention of following Jack Dorsey's lead when it comes to fact checking politicians. Donald Trump's Facebook page has simply replicated the posts which fell foul of Twitter - with no sign of fact-checking or finger-wagging. "This is the kind of thing that Donald Trump revels in," says Chris Stokel-Walker, "an ex-reality TV star who likes to stir the pot. He's now managed to set Mark Zuckerberg and Jack Dorsey against each other." For all the rage about freedom of speech from the president - and remember Twitter as a private company can do what it likes in that area - he seems unlikely to kill what has become his main platform for getting his message out.  Like the fighting couple in some dodgy romcom, Trump and Twitter need each other - though one suspects Jack Dorsey might be tempted to throw the President out and change the locks.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window It's an uncanny and almost tragically perfect piece of symmetry. The number of US servicemen and women killed in Korea, Vietnam, Iraq and Afghanistan - over an aggregate 44 years of fighting - is almost exactly the same as the number of Americans who've now lost their lives to coronavirus in just three months of America's war against the hidden enemy, as Donald Trump likes to refer to Covid-19.  He also calls it the Chinese virus, but we'll come to that. Now I know you could replace the Covid-19 deaths with US cancer deaths or road crash victims and come up with similarly stark or perhaps even more dramatic statistics. But sadly, fatal car accidents and terminal tumours have always been with us. A global pandemic has not. And out of nowhere 100,000 American families are this spring mourning loved ones, whose lives have been cut short by this virus. 1.5m Americans have been infected. Many millions more have lost their jobs. One of Donald Trump's first acts when he moved into the Oval Office in 2017, was to restore to a central position the bust of Winston Churchill that Barack Obama had moved out in favour of a bronze of Martin Luther King Jr.  And in this fight against coronavirus, Donald Trump does see himself as a war leader; the property tycoon who could work a shovel on a Manhattan building site was also going to be shown to be a man of destiny -  the untried field-marshal, with a baton in his knapsack ready to command the troops to get the job done. But also keeping the home fires burning, and lifting the morale of a frightened nation. It has all been far more jagged than that.  Donald Trump is not imbued with the gift of soaring Churchillian rhetoric; there have been no "we shall fight them on the beaches" moments. Nor has he conjured the Rooseveltian calm when delivering one of his fireside chats. There have been days of infamy, but they have been invariably generated by things that the president has said, rather than what has been done to the United States.  And anyway, for a self-styled war leader he must at least face the charge of ignoring the warnings about the enemy he was confronting in the early stages, appearing more Neville Chamberlain than Winston Churchill. Korean War (1950-1953): 36,500 Vietnam War (1961-1975): 58,000 Iraq War (2003-2011): 4,500 Afghanistan (2001-today): 2,000 Covid-19 (Feb 2020- today): 100,000 The initial period of the US effort against the virus was marked by one significant action in late January, when the president stopped non-American visitors from China entering the United States. That was smart and decisive (although some have argued, to my mind unfairly, that Trump should have stopped anyone and everyone coming from China). But any tactical advantage that had given the administration was squandered in February where there was a month of inaction and incompetence.  Attempts to roll out testing were woeful (the president was badly let down by the Centers for Disease Control). Procurement of PPE was weak. The federal emergency stockpile of vital equipment was like Old Mother Hubbard's cupboard: bare. The president had also disbanded the entire global-health-security unit of the National Security Council. He also eliminated the US government's $30m (£23m) Complex Crises Fund. These were decisions that badly undermined the American ability to counter the disease.  All while he was on a determined mission to tell America that this thing from China was no biggie, and certainly was not going to upend the economy - the centrepiece of his strategy for re-election in November.  It is worth just going through the president's quotes from these critical few weeks.  Jan 22: "It's one person coming in from China and we have it under control. It's going to be just fine." Feb 2: "We pretty much shut it down coming in from China." Feb 10: "Looks like by April, you know, in theory, when it gets a little warmer, it miraculously goes away. I hope that's true. But we're doing great in our country. China, I spoke with President Xi, and they're working very, very hard. And I think it's going to all work out fine." Feb 11: "In our country, we only have, basically, 12 cases and most of those people are recovering and some cases fully recovered. So it's actually less." Feb 24: "The coronavirus is very much under control in the USA. We are in contact with everyone and all relevant countries. CDC and World Health have been working hard and very smart. Stock market starting to look very good to me!" Feb 26: "When you have 15 people, and the 15 within a couple of days is going to be down to close to zero, that's a pretty good job we've done." Crisis? What crisis?  But in March the contours became clearer, and it was not pretty. The news was all grim. Because of a lack of testing, there had been extensive community transmission - people were coming down with coronavirus, but it wasn't clear where they'd contracted it, who they'd caught it from, how they'd got it. The "track and trace" (the language of coronavirus that we've all now become so familiar with) was now impossible.  Although the first reported outbreak was out on the West Coast in Washington state, Covid-19 was playing a mean sleight of hand on us all. This pesky virus got us to look in one direction, when we really should have been focused on the other. Where Covid-19 was really letting rip was on the East Coast, especially in the biggest, richest and most densely populated city in the US, New York, with devastating consequences.  If the city was quickly to become the most worrying centre of the outbreak, the borough of Queens became the epicentre of the epicentre - the district where Donald Trump had grown up. And the visuals from there drove home to Americans - and to the president - the scale of the unfolding disaster. At Elmhurst Hospital, refrigerated container lorries were parked to store bodies that the morgue had no way of dealing with. I interviewed a young doctor from there at the height of the pandemic who painted a harrowing picture of daily life and death.  In the richest city of the wealthiest country on the planet, we saw nurses heading into intensive care units to treat Covid patients wearing bin liners as PPE, because that is all they had. We saw the ER consultant putting on his ski goggles to examine a patient, because the hospital didn't have the right face masks. We saw mass graves being dug on a small island in the Bronx to accommodate all those who'd died with no next of kin, or with no money for a funeral. Like the inscription on the tomb of the unknown soldiers in the Commonwealth war graves: "known unto God".  America, this all-mighty superpower, with enough weaponry to blow the planet to smithereens many times over, was looking ragged and not in control of events in its own backyard. It's hard to see this chapter of America's story going down as another moment of this nation's greatness. If Queens is where Donald Trump grew up, Manhattan is where he made his money - and nothing says money like Wall Street, the pulse and oxygen monitor of the US economy. And the president likes to stand over its bed to take its vitals hourly. But as it became clear that the US economy was going to have to shut down, so the Dow Jones index went diving downwards - vertiginous drops, causing circuit-breakers to kick in, and causing the president and his advisers to fret that his whole re-election strategy had gone up in flames.  But then the precipitous falls would be followed by dizzying rises as word came from Capitol Hill that lawmakers might be close to some agreement to inject gazillions into the cryogenically frozen economy.  More than 25,000 of the deaths have come from New York state, and Governor Andrew Cuomo became coronavirus's first political superstar. His daily factual and highly detailed presentation of what was happening, where it was happening, what was being done to mitigate, and what still needed to be done, became appointment-to-view television across the US. Cometh the hour and all that. This lifelong Democrat - who also grew up in Queens - was drawing admiring glances from a lot of Republicans, and with many Democrats quietly thinking: "I wish he was our candidate for president in November, and not Joe Biden." Like an old-fashioned newspaper, he delineated clearly what was fact and what was opinion. In the space of 45 highly polished minutes he would deliver the news stories of New York's descent into the abyss, and then give you his op-ed column. He admitted his response wasn't perfect, acknowledging he could have acted earlier. And he also gave praise to Donald Trump where he thought it was due; he tweaked the tail of the administration when he thought it needed a bit of a kicking. At around the same time as Cuomo was capturing the nation's attention, Donald Trump decided he would go daily with a White House briefing too. It is hard to overstate how much Donald Trump loves - and needs - the roar of the crowd. Governing is dull. Campaigning - and the adoration from his rallies - is what gives him energy. It's what gets his heart pumping and the blood circulating. And because of the lockdown, here was a president who was deprived of the two things he yearns for most - a day out playing golf, and an evening rally addressing raucous, loving crowds. There were also no heads of states visiting him, where the cameras would record his thoughts on whatever was the subject du jour. He was being starved of the oxygen of publicity, and so daily to the briefing room he would come, with us reporters playing the most unlikely role as his ventilator. Being intubated to a bunch of journalists he's never trusted was never going to end well.   Vice President Mike Pence had been given the task of heading the coronavirus taskforce. A poisoned chalice it may have been, but it's a task he's performed with aplomb. He is across the detail of everything, and was the perfect link person between the different branches of government and the White House; between the different branches of government and the governors of the 50 states. And two other things he did with considerable deftness. He never forgot to praise the president to the hilt, saluting him for his leadership. Woe betide you if you don't. And he never forgets to display empathy - talking about the suffering of the American people, expressing condolences to those who'd lost loved ones. That is something that came easily to Mr Pence and is something Donald Trump hardly ever does.  Though there would be a revolving cast of characters in the briefing room - the two other stalwarts were Dr Anthony Fauci, the independent-minded head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and Dr Deborah Birx, who used to head the fight against Aids for the Obama administration, and was made the coronavirus response co-ordinator. These were the scientists who wanted to ensure that the judgements the president made were evidence based. They had limited success.   No sooner had the US economy gone into shutdown than other, more business-minded voices were in Donald Trump's other ear telling him that the remedy his doctors were prescribing was worse than the disease. Let people go back to work. Reopen the economy. The loss of jobs, the recession, depression, the devastation of the US economy will be worse than the death toll. And you could see where the president's sympathies lay. First he advocated that the US should reopen by Easter, with churches packed. Only to have that kyboshed by doctors Birx and Fauci. When asked about this Dr Fauci gave an object lesson in disagreeing with the president without disagreeing: "You don't set the timeline, the virus does," he told reporters. Masterful. But the impetus to reopen became overwhelming. The jobless totals were soaring, and Donald Trump saw his "strong economy" election strategy disappearing down the plug-hole.  And all the while the death toll was mounting, ever, ever higher. What started as a trickle at the end of February became a gradual flow. The gradual flow then became a steady stream. And by late April the stream became a torrent.  Coronavirus was indiscriminating about who it infected, but selective with who it killed. The statistics were striking - if you were black or Latino you were much more likely to die. Longstanding health inequalities came to the fore. If you'd grown up in an impoverished background, you were more likely to have the pre-existing conditions - the co-morbidities, as they say in the US - that would prove so deadly with coronavirus: hypertension, diabetes, obesity, heart disease. And if you live in densely packed, multi-generational households, and work in factories or meat-packing plants where social distancing is impossible, then - surprise, surprise - you're more likely to contract the disease.  The US Surgeon General, Admiral Jerome Adams - himself African American - addressed this directly, and spoke powerfully about it. But he seemed to pay a price for doing so - he was not seen again at another White House news conference. Someone must have taken exception to what he said. The president's own erratic performances at these briefings were coming to be seen as counterproductive by Republican strategists. The president's poll numbers were going down. I was at a couple of the most extraordinary briefings. There was the one where the president made it all about himself. His staff had produced a lengthy campaign style video detailing how brilliantly he'd handled the outbreak - for the first 45 minutes of this over two-hour-long news conference, Donald Trump spoke about himself. He spoke about how unfair the media was to him. It was "poor me". Not once in those first 45 minutes did he talk about those who'd died, nor about those who'd been infected. Nor about the millions who were fretting about how they were going to pay the bills having lost their jobs. I was also at the briefing where the president spoke about injecting disinfectant to treat coronavirus. Dr Birx, who was sitting at the side of the briefing room, looked like she was in some kind of gastric agony as she listened to the president, but never felt she had the space to stand up and say: "This is dangerous nonsense." His performance was lampooned and ridiculed.  But as the criticism piled up against the president, so Donald Trump bristled.  And there were two culprits who'd be forced onto the perp walk of shame. The first was China. Despite his early praise for President Xi, China was now in Donald Trump's cross-hairs. China had lied and covered up. This was the Wuhan flu, the city where the outbreak originated. The Chinese had taken actions to protect themselves, but not anyone else. Worse still in Donald Trump's eyes, China had intimidated the World Health Organization, and its weak, pusillanimous leadership had allowed itself to be cowed by Beijing, and therefore had failed to warn the world sufficiently of the dangers that this new strain of virus presented. In this, sure, there was blame shifting - but President Trump had a point, both about shortcomings of the WHO, and the candour of the Chinese leadership.  All of this fired up the Trump base, but it was as nothing compared with the president shifting firmly in favour of reopening the US economy. Wild demonstrations sprang up - particularly in Democrat-run states, which the president did nothing to tamp down. In California, surfer dudes, backed by libertarian Republicans and small business owners, protested at beachside locations in a bizarre Baywatch meets the Tea Party moment. In Michigan, heavily armed men carrying assault rifles and dressed as though they were auditioning as extras for a movie about mercenaries laid siege to the State House.  A public health emergency, with a virus that is no respecter of whether you are a Democrat or Republican, Trump lover or Trump hater, had divided and bitterly polarised the country. Like everything else.  If you want the country to reopen you're with Trump (broadly); if you're wary about reopening too soon you're a Dem (broadly). If you love the fact that the president has ignored the advice of the Food and Drug Administration over the dangers of hydroxychloroquine, and decided to take it anyway, then you are firmly in his camp.  And although the president has publicly stated that everyone ought to wear a mask, the fact that he chooses not to is taken as a clear dog-whistle to his supporters that you really don't have to. In the face - so to speak - of all medical advice, the mask is being seen by some as an act of provocation, a symbol of the nanny state.  Shopkeepers who insist that customers wear a mask are being intimidated by thuggish gangs patrolling outside their premises. It is grotesque. They are being ripped up and destroyed as though a symbol of oppression by the "Deep State", rather than a small effort to halt the spread of the disease. Our film crews have been jostled and abused for wearing face masks while filming these protesters. Needless to say, these people are no respecters of social distancing.  And now that America has reached this grim milestone of 100,000 dead, what of the future?  In public opinion there does seem to be a battle going on between head versus heart. Science pitted against gut instinct. The role of the state against the rights of the individual.  If a phone app that can track and trace your movements is the vital tool to prevent a second wave of the virus, it relies on a sizeable majority of the population handing over their personal data for it to be effective. Will that happen? In a country whose founding fathers fretted about the dangers of the state becoming too mighty, I just cannot see it (and this goes far wider than pro- and anti-Trump). And what if, please God, an effective vaccine is found? You can be sure that the anti-vaxx brigade (and remember Donald Trump was once one of its advocates) will be out in force, stirring up doubts about the science, the medicine, the state, Big Brother, you name it.  Donald Trump has boasted repeatedly in the past couple of months that no country has done more coronavirus testing that then USA. "It's not even close," he says. No country has built more ventilators or supplied so much PPE to its front-line workers, he says. The president has claimed that other world leaders are jealous of what the US has managed to achieve. Really? Germany, South Korea, Taiwan, Australia, New Zealand, Greece: envious?  Hard to believe somehow.  No country has had more deaths, more infections. Anywhere else, so far, is not even close.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violent protests over the death of an unarmed African-American man in the hands of police officers in Minnesota "are no longer in any way" about his killing, the state's governor has said. Tim Walz spoke after a night of unrest in several US cities over the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. He said that as a result he was taking the unprecedented step of mobilising the state's entire National Guard. There are also reports that military police units could deploy. An ex-Minneapolis policeman has been charged with murder over the death of Mr Floyd, 46, in police custody on Monday. Derek Chauvin, 44 and white, was shown in footage kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for several minutes, even after he said he couldn't breathe. He and three other officers have since been sacked. The video went viral online, reigniting US anger over police killings of black Americans, and reopening deep wounds over racial inequality across the nation. On Friday night protesters clashed with police in cities including New York, Atlanta and Portland. In Washington DC, the White House was briefly locked down. In Houston, where George Floyd grew up, a 19-year-old protester told the Associated Press: "My question is how many more, how many more? I just want to live in a future where we all live in harmony and we're not oppressed." In Minnesota, "our great cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul are under assault," Governor Walz said. "The situation in Minneapolis is now about attacking civil society, instilling fear and disrupting our great city." He said violence on Friday night had made "a mockery of pretending this is about George Floyd's death, or inequities or historical traumas to our communities of colour".  He and other officials have suggested that many violent protesters came from outside the state to cause trouble, but did not give details.  On Saturday, President Donald Trump said Mr Floyd's death had "filled Americans with horror, anger and grief".  "I stand before you as a friend and ally to every American seeking peace," he said in a televised address from Cape Canaveral in Florida, following the launch into orbit of two Nasa astronauts by billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX company.  The president denounced the actions of "looters and anarchists", saying that what was needed was "healing not hatred, justice not chaos".   "I will not allow angry mobs to dominate - won't happen," he added. Mr Trump earlier praised the US Secret Service for securing the White House but said if protesters breached the perimeter they "would have been greeted with the most vicious dogs, and most ominous weapons, I have ever seen". He blamed violence on "organised groups".  Minnesota remains the most volatile region, with curfews ordered for the Twin Cities of Minneapolis-Saint Paul from 20:00 to 06:00 on Friday and Saturday evening. Protesters defied the curfew on Friday. Fires, many from burning cars, were visible in a number of areas and television pictures showed widespread looting.  Hundreds of troops from the National Guard, a reserve military force that can be called on by the US president or state governors to intervene in domestic emergencies, moved in late at night. Minnesota officials said tens of thousands of people turned out on Friday and they are expecting more unrest on Saturday night.  As a result, Gov Walz said he was activating all National Guard troops available in the state  - reportedly up to 13,000 - for the first time in history to respond to rioters. The Pentagon said some US military units were on alert to support Minnesota if asked. There are long-standing tensions between the black community and police in Minneapolis. Another black man, Philando Castile, was shot and killed in 2016 during a traffic stop close to the epicentre of these protests in a case that gained international attention. African-Americans also suffer significant socio-economic inequalities, entrenched segregation and a higher level of unemployment than the white community.  In Atlanta, Georgia, where buildings were vandalised, a state of emergency was declared for some areas to protect people and property.  Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms issued an impassioned plea, saying: "This is not a protest. This is not in the spirit of Martin Luther King Jr. You are disgracing our city. You are disgracing the life of George Floyd." In New York's Brooklyn district, protesters clashed with police, throwing projectiles, starting fires and destroying police vehicles. A number of officers were injured and many arrests made. The mayor of Portland, Oregon, has declared a state of emergency amid looting, fires and an attack on a police precinct. An immediate curfew until 06:00 local time (13:00 GMT) was imposed and it will restart at 20:00. On Monday night, police received a phone call from a neighbourhood grocery store alleging that George Floyd had paid with a counterfeit $20 note. Officers responded and were attempting to put him in a police vehicle when he dropped to the ground, telling them he was claustrophobic. According to police, he physically resisted officers and was handcuffed. Video of the incident does not show how the confrontation started.  With Mr Chauvin's knee on his neck, Mr Floyd can be heard saying "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me". According to a preliminary autopsy by the county medical examiner, the police officer had his knee on Mr Floyd's neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds - almost three minutes of which was after Mr Floyd became non-responsive. Nearly two minutes before Mr Chauvin removed his knee the other officers checked Mr Floyd's right wrist for a pulse and were unable to find one. He was taken to hospital and pronounced dead around an hour later. The preliminary autopsy, included in the criminal complaint against Mr Chauvin, did not find evidence of "traumatic asphyxia or strangulation". The medical examiner noted Mr Floyd had underlying heart conditions and the combination of these, "potential intoxicants in his system" and being restrained by the officers "likely contributed to his death". Mr Chauvin was charged on Friday with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter over his role in Mr Floyd's death. Mr Floyd's family and their lawyer, Benjamin Crump, said that this was "welcome but overdue". The family said they wanted a more serious, first-degree murder charge as well as the arrest of the three other officers involved.  Hennepin County Prosecutor Mike Freeman said he "anticipates charges" for the other officers but would not offer more details.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violent protests over the death of an unarmed African-American man in the hands of police officers in Minnesota "are no longer in any way" about his killing, the state's governor has said. Tim Walz spoke after a night of unrest in several US cities over the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. He said that as a result he was taking the unprecedented step of mobilising the state's entire National Guard. There are also reports that military police units could deploy. An ex-Minneapolis policeman has been charged with murder over the death of Mr Floyd, 46, in police custody on Monday. Derek Chauvin, 44 and white, was shown in footage kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for several minutes, even after he said he couldn't breathe. He and three other officers have since been sacked. The video went viral online, reigniting US anger over police killings of black Americans, and reopening deep wounds over racial inequality across the nation. On Friday night protesters clashed with police in cities including New York, Atlanta and Portland. In Washington DC, the White House was briefly locked down. In Houston, where George Floyd grew up, a 19-year-old protester told the Associated Press: "My question is how many more, how many more? I just want to live in a future where we all live in harmony and we're not oppressed." In Minnesota, "our great cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul are under assault," Governor Walz said. "The situation in Minneapolis is now about attacking civil society, instilling fear and disrupting our great city." He said violence on Friday night had made "a mockery of pretending this is about George Floyd's death, or inequities or historical traumas to our communities of colour".  He and other officials have suggested that many violent protesters came from outside the state to cause trouble, but did not give details.  On Saturday, President Donald Trump said Mr Floyd's death had "filled Americans with horror, anger and grief".  "I stand before you as a friend and ally to every American seeking peace," he said in a televised address from Cape Canaveral in Florida, following the launch into orbit of two Nasa astronauts by billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX company.  The president denounced the actions of "looters and anarchists", saying that what was needed was "healing not hatred, justice not chaos".   "I will not allow angry mobs to dominate - won't happen," he added. Mr Trump earlier praised the US Secret Service for securing the White House but said if protesters breached the perimeter they "would have been greeted with the most vicious dogs, and most ominous weapons, I have ever seen". He blamed violence on "organised groups".  Minnesota remains the most volatile region, with curfews ordered for the Twin Cities of Minneapolis-Saint Paul from 20:00 to 06:00 on Friday and Saturday evening. Protesters defied the curfew on Friday. Fires, many from burning cars, were visible in a number of areas and television pictures showed widespread looting.  Hundreds of troops from the National Guard, a reserve military force that can be called on by the US president or state governors to intervene in domestic emergencies, moved in late at night. Minnesota officials said tens of thousands of people turned out on Friday and they are expecting more unrest on Saturday night.  As a result, Gov Walz said he was activating all National Guard troops available in the state  - reportedly up to 13,000 - for the first time in history to respond to rioters. The Pentagon said some US military units were on alert to support Minnesota if asked. There are long-standing tensions between the black community and police in Minneapolis. Another black man, Philando Castile, was shot and killed in 2016 during a traffic stop close to the epicentre of these protests in a case that gained international attention. African-Americans also suffer significant socio-economic inequalities, entrenched segregation and a higher level of unemployment than the white community.  In Atlanta, Georgia, where buildings were vandalised, a state of emergency was declared for some areas to protect people and property.  Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms issued an impassioned plea, saying: "This is not a protest. This is not in the spirit of Martin Luther King Jr. You are disgracing our city. You are disgracing the life of George Floyd." In New York's Brooklyn district, protesters clashed with police, throwing projectiles, starting fires and destroying police vehicles. A number of officers were injured and many arrests made. The mayor of Portland, Oregon, has declared a state of emergency amid looting, fires and an attack on a police precinct. An immediate curfew until 06:00 local time (13:00 GMT) was imposed and it will restart at 20:00. On Monday night, police received a phone call from a neighbourhood grocery store alleging that George Floyd had paid with a counterfeit $20 note. Officers responded and were attempting to put him in a police vehicle when he dropped to the ground, telling them he was claustrophobic. According to police, he physically resisted officers and was handcuffed. Video of the incident does not show how the confrontation started.  With Mr Chauvin's knee on his neck, Mr Floyd can be heard saying "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me". According to a preliminary autopsy by the county medical examiner, the police officer had his knee on Mr Floyd's neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds - almost three minutes of which was after Mr Floyd became non-responsive. Nearly two minutes before Mr Chauvin removed his knee the other officers checked Mr Floyd's right wrist for a pulse and were unable to find one. He was taken to hospital and pronounced dead around an hour later. The preliminary autopsy, included in the criminal complaint against Mr Chauvin, did not find evidence of "traumatic asphyxia or strangulation". The medical examiner noted Mr Floyd had underlying heart conditions and the combination of these, "potential intoxicants in his system" and being restrained by the officers "likely contributed to his death". Mr Chauvin was charged on Friday with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter over his role in Mr Floyd's death. Mr Floyd's family and their lawyer, Benjamin Crump, said that this was "welcome but overdue". The family said they wanted a more serious, first-degree murder charge as well as the arrest of the three other officers involved.  Hennepin County Prosecutor Mike Freeman said he "anticipates charges" for the other officers but would not offer more details.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The private rocket company SpaceX has sent two Nasa astronauts into orbit. It's the first time since the retirement of the shuttles nine years ago that an American crew has made the journey from US territory. Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken are not only trialling a new capsule system, they are also initiating a new business model for Nasa. The agency will no longer own the vehicles it uses but merely purchase the "taxi" service offered by SpaceX. It's hoped companies other than tech billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX outfit will come in to expand the market. The aerospace giant Boeing already has a contract with Nasa to do so.  Mr Musk himself said he was overcome with emotion watching his hardware take the astronauts to orbit.  "I think this is something that should get people right in the heart, of anyone that has the spirit of exploration. And the US is the distillation of the spirit of exploration," he told reporters. The new capability the CEO is offering will end the reliance of Nasa on Russian rockets and capsules to get its people to the International Space Station (ISS). It was a point picked up on by President Donald Trump, who came to Florida to watch the launch. "Past leaders put the US at the mercy of foreign nations to send our astronauts into orbit. Not anymore," he said. "Today we once again proudly launched American astronauts on American rockets - the best in the world - from right here on American soil." Hurley's and Behnken's Dragon ship left Earth atop its Falcon-9 rocket precisely on time - at 15:22 EDT (19:22 GMT / 20:22 BST). Meteorologists had forecast only a 50:50 chance of favourable conditions around Florida's Kennedy Space Center at lift-off, but, as luck would have it, the weather window stayed open and the SpaceX controllers grabbed their opportunity. The Falcon soared off the spaceport's famous 39A pad to head northeast out over the Atlantic. After two-and-a-half minutes, the lower-stage of the vehicle had separated to return to a drone ship at sea. And after a further six minutes, the crew were safely inserted into orbit.  Hurley and Behnken are set to arrive at the ISS on Sunday. They'll use some of the intervening hours to test equipment and procedures in their capsule, including doing some manual flying.  Although the Dragon capsule is a fully automated vehicle capable of finding its own way to the ISS, the crew needs to prepare for all eventualities and that means knowing exactly how the ship will behave in their hands. Uniquely, the Dragon has no control stick; all flight commands must be entered via a touchscreen panel. One of their first tasks in orbit was simply to name their ship - in the tradition of past US spacefarers, all the way back to the Mercury programme. Radioing down to Earth, they announced it would be called Endeavour.  Doug Hurley said: "We chose Endeavour for a few reasons: One, because of this incredible endeavour that Nasa, SpaceX and the US have been on since the end of the shuttle programme back in 2011. The other reason is a little more personal to Bob and I. We both had our first flights on shuttle Endeavour and it just meant so much to us to carry on that name." Endeavour was the ship commanded by British explorer James Cook on his voyage to Australia in the late 18th Century. Hurley's and Behnken's stay at the ISS is not known currently, but is likely to be somewhere between one and four months.  Assuming their return to a splashdown in the Atlantic is as smooth as the launch, Nasa and SpaceX will move directly into the full terms of their new relationship. The company has a $2.6bn (£2.1bn) contract with the agency to fly six operational crew missions to the ISS.  The first of these should occur at the end August, or very soon after; and will see four astronauts climb aboard a Dragon rather than just the two we saw on this occasion. Saturday's launch went ahead against the background of the coronavirus crisis.  Crowds were encouraged not to assemble near the Kennedy complex, and Nasa itself severely limited the number of guests invited on to the spaceport. As for the astronauts, they would ordinarily observe a quarantine before flight. But again Nasa reduced the number of people the men could come into contact with in the weeks running up to launch, and those that had to get close were instructed to wear masks. For SpaceX, Saturday marked another significant milestone for the company which was founded just 18 years ago. The firm has upended the launcher industry with its reusable vehicles and is now pioneering a new market-driven approach to human spaceflight. It hasn't all been plain sailing - as evidenced by a spectacular explosion at the  firm's prototyping facility in Boca Chica, Texas, on Friday. But the company has routinely proved naysayers wrong, and Nasa believes its relationship with Elon Musk will save billion of dollars that can be diverted to the more complex task of getting people back to the Moon and then to Mars.     "We want to establish a commercial environment in low-Earth orbit so that we can focus on the hard job of exploring beyond our home planet, to establish a sustained presence on the Moon and get to Mars to establish a presence there," said Bob Cabana, the director at Kennedy.  "We can't do that if we're locked here in low-Earth orbit, and commercial crew - that's the beginning of a whole new era of spaceflight." Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violence has broken out again in the US as protests continue across the country over the killing of an unarmed black man by police in the state on Minnesota on Monday.  George Floyd died in police custody while an officer kneeled on his neck to pin him down.  In Minnesota - where he was killed - the state's entire national guard was mobilised on Saturday to try to prevent further trouble. All pictures copyrightedShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has said he will postpone this year's G7 summit and invite leaders of other countries to participate in the talks. "I don't feel that... it properly represents what's going on in the world. It's a very outdated group of countries," Mr Trump said on Saturday. The G7 group, which the US hosts this year, includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the UK.  The president said Russia, South Korea, Australia and India should be invited. Speaking to reporters on board the presidential plane Air Force One, Mr Trump said that he was delaying the summit - which was scheduled to take place later in June  - until September.  Last week, Mr Trump said it might be possible to hold a gathering at the White House and potentially parts of Camp David, the US presidential country retreat, despite concerns over the coronavirus pandemic. German Chancellor Angela Merkel later rejected the president's invitation to attend a summit in person because of the outbreak.  Her spokesman thanked Mr Trump, but said the German leader "cannot agree to her personal participation, to a journey to Washington". On Friday, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson "agreed on the importance of convening the G7 in person in the near future" following a conversation with the US president, the White House said in a statement.  The G7 - or Group of Seven - leaders were scheduled to meet by videoconference in June in response to Covid-19. The group is made up of the seven of the world's largest economies. It regards itself as "a community of values", with freedom and human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and prosperity and sustainable development as its key principles.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Microsoft is to replace dozens of contract journalists on its MSN website and use automated systems to select news stories, US and UK media report. The curating of  stories from news organisations and selection of headlines and pictures for the MSN site is currently done by  journalists. Artificial intelligence will perform these news production tasks, sources told the Seattle Times.   Microsoft said it was part of an evaluation of its business.  The US tech giant said in a statement: "Like all companies, we evaluate our business on a regular basis. This can result in increased investment in some places and, from time to time, redeployment in others. These decisions are not the result of the current pandemic." Microsoft, like some other tech companies, pays news organisations to use their content on its website. But it employs journalists to decide which stories to display and how they are presented.  Around 50 contract news producers will lose their jobs at the end of June, the Seattle Times reports, but a team of full-time journalists will remain. "It's demoralising to think machines can replace us but there you go," one of those facing redundancy told the paper. Some  sacked journalists warned that artificial intelligence may not be fully familiar with strict editorial guidelines, and could end up letting through inappropriate stories.  Twenty-seven of those losing their jobs are employed by the UK's PA Media, the Guardian reports.  One journalist quoted in the paper said: "I spend all my time reading about how automation and AI is going to take all our jobs - now it's taken mine."  Microsoft is one of many tech companies experimenting with forms of so-called robot journalism to cut costs.   Google is also investing in projects to understand how it might work.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump has been criticised at home and abroad after announcing he is ending US ties with the World Health Organization (WHO).  The EU urged him to reconsider the decision, while Germany's health minister called it a "disappointing setback for international health". The head of the US Senate's health committee, a Republican like Mr Trump, said now was not the time to leave. Mr Trump said the WHO had failed to hold China to account over coronavirus. The WHO, a UN agency that helps countries promote healthcare and tackle outbreaks of disease, has faced regular criticism from the US president over its handling of the outbreak. He suspended US funding to the WHO last month and on Friday permanently halted the payment, which last year stood at more than $400m (£324m; €360m), the largest single contribution at around 15% of its total budget. European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and top EU diplomat, Josep Borrell, said in a statement: "In the face of this global threat, now is the time for enhanced co-operation and common solutions. Actions that weaken international results must be avoided. "We urge the US to reconsider its announced decision." German Health Minister Jens Spahn described the setback as "disappointing" although he accepted the WHO "needs reform". "The EU must take a leading role and engage more financially," he said. A spokesperson for the UK said: "Coronavirus is a global challenge and the World Health Organization has an important role to play in leading the international health response. We have no plans to withdraw our funding." The chair of the US Senate Health Committee, Lamar Alexander, said the move could hamper the discovery of a vaccine against Covid-19 and urged a reversal of the decision in the "strongest terms possible". "Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis has been dealt with, not in the middle of it," he said. Ex-presidential candidate and US Senator Elizabeth Warren tweeted: "President Trump's decision to leave the @WHO during a global pandemic alienates our allies, undermines our global leadership, and threatens the health of the American people." Anders Nordstrom, a former WHO acting director general, said he was "deeply concerned" the move would increase political tension at a time when "we need to have global solidarity". South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize called the decision "unfortunate".  WHO member states agreed on 19 May to set up an independent inquiry into the global response to the pandemic. Speaking  at the White House, Mr Trump said: "Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs."  It is not clear when any US withdrawal might take place. A 1948 agreement between the US and WHO allows for one year's notice before pulling out.  Mr Trump has accused China of trying to cover up the outbreak of coronavirus, which occurred in the city of Wuhan late last year. He also says that "China has total control over the World Health Organization". The president accused China of pressurising the WHO to "mislead the world" about the virus, without elaborating. "The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government," he said. The US will redirect its funds for the WHO  to other health groups. More than 102,000 people in the US have lost their lives to Covid-19 - by far the biggest death toll in the world.  Opponents say Mr Trump is trying to deflect criticism of his handling of the pandemic ahead of his re-election bid this year. Meanwhile, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has said that Mr Trump is trying to mislead the public, smear China and "shift the blame for [the US's] own incompetent response".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violent protests over the death of an unarmed African-American man in the hands of police officers in Minnesota "are no longer in any way" about his killing, the state's governor has said. Tim Walz spoke after a night of unrest in several US cities over the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. He said that as a result he was taking the unprecedented step of mobilising the state's entire National Guard. There are also reports that military police units could deploy. An ex-Minneapolis policeman has been charged with murder over the death of Mr Floyd, 46, in police custody on Monday. Derek Chauvin, 44 and white, was shown in footage kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for several minutes, even after he said he couldn't breathe. He and three other officers have since been sacked. The video went viral online, reigniting US anger over police killings of black Americans, and reopening deep wounds over racial inequality across the nation. On Friday night protesters clashed with police in cities including New York, Atlanta and Portland. In Washington DC, the White House was briefly locked down. In Houston, where George Floyd grew up, a 19-year-old protester told the Associated Press: "My question is how many more, how many more? I just want to live in a future where we all live in harmony and we're not oppressed." In Minnesota, "our great cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul are under assault," Governor Walz said. "The situation in Minneapolis is now about attacking civil society, instilling fear and disrupting our great city." He said violence on Friday night had made "a mockery of pretending this is about George Floyd's death, or inequities or historical traumas to our communities of colour".  He and other officials have suggested that many violent protesters came from outside the state to cause trouble, but did not give details.  On Saturday, President Donald Trump said Mr Floyd's death had "filled Americans with horror, anger and grief".  "I stand before you as a friend and ally to every American seeking peace," he said in a televised address from Cape Canaveral in Florida, following the launch into orbit of two Nasa astronauts by billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX company.  The president denounced the actions of "looters and anarchists", saying that what was needed was "healing not hatred, justice not chaos".   "I will not allow angry mobs to dominate - won't happen," he added. Mr Trump earlier praised the US Secret Service for securing the White House but said if protesters breached the perimeter they "would have been greeted with the most vicious dogs, and most ominous weapons, I have ever seen". He blamed violence on "organised groups".  Minnesota remains the most volatile region, with curfews ordered for the Twin Cities of Minneapolis-Saint Paul from 20:00 to 06:00 on Friday and Saturday evening. Protesters defied the curfew on Friday. Fires, many from burning cars, were visible in a number of areas and television pictures showed widespread looting.  Hundreds of troops from the National Guard, a reserve military force that can be called on by the US president or state governors to intervene in domestic emergencies, moved in late at night. Minnesota officials said tens of thousands of people turned out on Friday and they are expecting more unrest on Saturday night.  As a result, Gov Walz said he was activating all National Guard troops available in the state  - reportedly up to 13,000 - for the first time in history to respond to rioters. The Pentagon said some US military units were on alert to support Minnesota if asked. There are long-standing tensions between the black community and police in Minneapolis. Another black man, Philando Castile, was shot and killed in 2016 during a traffic stop close to the epicentre of these protests in a case that gained international attention. African-Americans also suffer significant socio-economic inequalities, entrenched segregation and a higher level of unemployment than the white community.  In Atlanta, Georgia, where buildings were vandalised, a state of emergency was declared for some areas to protect people and property.  Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms issued an impassioned plea, saying: "This is not a protest. This is not in the spirit of Martin Luther King Jr. You are disgracing our city. You are disgracing the life of George Floyd." In New York's Brooklyn district, protesters clashed with police, throwing projectiles, starting fires and destroying police vehicles. A number of officers were injured and many arrests made. The mayor of Portland, Oregon, has declared a state of emergency amid looting, fires and an attack on a police precinct. An immediate curfew until 06:00 local time (13:00 GMT) was imposed and it will restart at 20:00. On Monday night, police received a phone call from a neighbourhood grocery store alleging that George Floyd had paid with a counterfeit $20 note. Officers responded and were attempting to put him in a police vehicle when he dropped to the ground, telling them he was claustrophobic. According to police, he physically resisted officers and was handcuffed. Video of the incident does not show how the confrontation started.  With Mr Chauvin's knee on his neck, Mr Floyd can be heard saying "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me". According to a preliminary autopsy by the county medical examiner, the police officer had his knee on Mr Floyd's neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds - almost three minutes of which was after Mr Floyd became non-responsive. Nearly two minutes before Mr Chauvin removed his knee the other officers checked Mr Floyd's right wrist for a pulse and were unable to find one. He was taken to hospital and pronounced dead around an hour later. The preliminary autopsy, included in the criminal complaint against Mr Chauvin, did not find evidence of "traumatic asphyxia or strangulation". The medical examiner noted Mr Floyd had underlying heart conditions and the combination of these, "potential intoxicants in his system" and being restrained by the officers "likely contributed to his death". Mr Chauvin was charged on Friday with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter over his role in Mr Floyd's death. Mr Floyd's family and their lawyer, Benjamin Crump, said that this was "welcome but overdue". The family said they wanted a more serious, first-degree murder charge as well as the arrest of the three other officers involved.  Hennepin County Prosecutor Mike Freeman said he "anticipates charges" for the other officers but would not offer more details.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The private rocket company SpaceX has sent two Nasa astronauts into orbit. It's the first time since the retirement of the shuttles nine years ago that an American crew has made the journey from US territory. Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken are not only trialling a new capsule system, they are also initiating a new business model for Nasa. The agency will no longer own the vehicles it uses but merely purchase the "taxi" service offered by SpaceX. It's hoped companies other than tech billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX outfit will come in to expand the market. The aerospace giant Boeing already has a contract with Nasa to do so.  Mr Musk himself said he was overcome with emotion watching his hardware take the astronauts to orbit.  "I think this is something that should get people right in the heart, of anyone that has the spirit of exploration. And the US is the distillation of the spirit of exploration," he told reporters. The new capability the CEO is offering will end the reliance of Nasa on Russian rockets and capsules to get its people to the International Space Station (ISS). It was a point picked up on by President Donald Trump, who came to Florida to watch the launch. "Past leaders put the US at the mercy of foreign nations to send our astronauts into orbit. Not anymore," he said. "Today we once again proudly launched American astronauts on American rockets - the best in the world - from right here on American soil." Hurley's and Behnken's Dragon ship left Earth atop its Falcon-9 rocket precisely on time - at 15:22 EDT (19:22 GMT / 20:22 BST). Meteorologists had forecast only a 50:50 chance of favourable conditions around Florida's Kennedy Space Center at lift-off, but, as luck would have it, the weather window stayed open and the SpaceX controllers grabbed their opportunity. The Falcon soared off the spaceport's famous 39A pad to head northeast out over the Atlantic. After two-and-a-half minutes, the lower-stage of the vehicle had separated to return to a drone ship at sea. And after a further six minutes, the crew were safely inserted into orbit.  Hurley and Behnken are set to arrive at the ISS on Sunday. They'll use some of the intervening hours to test equipment and procedures in their capsule, including doing some manual flying.  Although the Dragon capsule is a fully automated vehicle capable of finding its own way to the ISS, the crew needs to prepare for all eventualities and that means knowing exactly how the ship will behave in their hands. Uniquely, the Dragon has no control stick; all flight commands must be entered via a touchscreen panel. One of their first tasks in orbit was simply to name their ship - in the tradition of past US spacefarers, all the way back to the Mercury programme. Radioing down to Earth, they announced it would be called Endeavour.  Doug Hurley said: "We chose Endeavour for a few reasons: One, because of this incredible endeavour that Nasa, SpaceX and the US have been on since the end of the shuttle programme back in 2011. The other reason is a little more personal to Bob and I. We both had our first flights on shuttle Endeavour and it just meant so much to us to carry on that name." Endeavour was the ship commanded by British explorer James Cook on his voyage to Australia in the late 18th Century. Hurley's and Behnken's stay at the ISS is not known currently, but is likely to be somewhere between one and four months.  Assuming their return to a splashdown in the Atlantic is as smooth as the launch, Nasa and SpaceX will move directly into the full terms of their new relationship. The company has a $2.6bn (£2.1bn) contract with the agency to fly six operational crew missions to the ISS.  The first of these should occur at the end August, or very soon after; and will see four astronauts climb aboard a Dragon rather than just the two we saw on this occasion. Saturday's launch went ahead against the background of the coronavirus crisis.  Crowds were encouraged not to assemble near the Kennedy complex, and Nasa itself severely limited the number of guests invited on to the spaceport. As for the astronauts, they would ordinarily observe a quarantine before flight. But again Nasa reduced the number of people the men could come into contact with in the weeks running up to launch, and those that had to get close were instructed to wear masks. For SpaceX, Saturday marked another significant milestone for the company which was founded just 18 years ago. The firm has upended the launcher industry with its reusable vehicles and is now pioneering a new market-driven approach to human spaceflight. It hasn't all been plain sailing - as evidenced by a spectacular explosion at the  firm's prototyping facility in Boca Chica, Texas, on Friday. But the company has routinely proved naysayers wrong, and Nasa believes its relationship with Elon Musk will save billion of dollars that can be diverted to the more complex task of getting people back to the Moon and then to Mars.     "We want to establish a commercial environment in low-Earth orbit so that we can focus on the hard job of exploring beyond our home planet, to establish a sustained presence on the Moon and get to Mars to establish a presence there," said Bob Cabana, the director at Kennedy.  "We can't do that if we're locked here in low-Earth orbit, and commercial crew - that's the beginning of a whole new era of spaceflight." Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violence has broken out again in the US as protests continue across the country over the killing of an unarmed black man by police in the state on Minnesota on Monday.  George Floyd died in police custody while an officer kneeled on his neck to pin him down.  In Minnesota - where he was killed - the state's entire national guard was mobilised on Saturday to try to prevent further trouble. All pictures copyrightedShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has said he will postpone this year's G7 summit and invite leaders of other countries to participate in the talks. "I don't feel that... it properly represents what's going on in the world. It's a very outdated group of countries," Mr Trump said on Saturday. The G7 group, which the US hosts this year, includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the UK.  The president said Russia, South Korea, Australia and India should be invited. Speaking to reporters on board the presidential plane Air Force One, Mr Trump said that he was delaying the summit - which was scheduled to take place later in June  - until September.  Last week, Mr Trump said it might be possible to hold a gathering at the White House and potentially parts of Camp David, the US presidential country retreat, despite concerns over the coronavirus pandemic. German Chancellor Angela Merkel later rejected the president's invitation to attend a summit in person because of the outbreak.  Her spokesman thanked Mr Trump, but said the German leader "cannot agree to her personal participation, to a journey to Washington". On Friday, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson "agreed on the importance of convening the G7 in person in the near future" following a conversation with the US president, the White House said in a statement.  The G7 - or Group of Seven - leaders were scheduled to meet by videoconference in June in response to Covid-19. The group is made up of the seven of the world's largest economies. It regards itself as "a community of values", with freedom and human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and prosperity and sustainable development as its key principles.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Microsoft is to replace dozens of contract journalists on its MSN website and use automated systems to select news stories, US and UK media report. The curating of  stories from news organisations and selection of headlines and pictures for the MSN site is currently done by  journalists. Artificial intelligence will perform these news production tasks, sources told the Seattle Times.   Microsoft said it was part of an evaluation of its business.  The US tech giant said in a statement: "Like all companies, we evaluate our business on a regular basis. This can result in increased investment in some places and, from time to time, redeployment in others. These decisions are not the result of the current pandemic." Microsoft, like some other tech companies, pays news organisations to use their content on its website. But it employs journalists to decide which stories to display and how they are presented.  Around 50 contract news producers will lose their jobs at the end of June, the Seattle Times reports, but a team of full-time journalists will remain. "It's demoralising to think machines can replace us but there you go," one of those facing redundancy told the paper. Some  sacked journalists warned that artificial intelligence may not be fully familiar with strict editorial guidelines, and could end up letting through inappropriate stories.  Twenty-seven of those losing their jobs are employed by the UK's PA Media, the Guardian reports.  One journalist quoted in the paper said: "I spend all my time reading about how automation and AI is going to take all our jobs - now it's taken mine."  Microsoft is one of many tech companies experimenting with forms of so-called robot journalism to cut costs.   Google is also investing in projects to understand how it might work.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump has been criticised at home and abroad after announcing he is ending US ties with the World Health Organization (WHO).  The EU urged him to reconsider the decision, while Germany's health minister called it a "disappointing setback for international health". The head of the US Senate's health committee, a Republican like Mr Trump, said now was not the time to leave. Mr Trump said the WHO had failed to hold China to account over coronavirus. The WHO, a UN agency that helps countries promote healthcare and tackle outbreaks of disease, has faced regular criticism from the US president over its handling of the outbreak. He suspended US funding to the WHO last month and on Friday permanently halted the payment, which last year stood at more than $400m (£324m; €360m), the largest single contribution at around 15% of its total budget. European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and top EU diplomat, Josep Borrell, said in a statement: "In the face of this global threat, now is the time for enhanced co-operation and common solutions. Actions that weaken international results must be avoided. "We urge the US to reconsider its announced decision." German Health Minister Jens Spahn described the setback as "disappointing" although he accepted the WHO "needs reform". "The EU must take a leading role and engage more financially," he said. A spokesperson for the UK said: "Coronavirus is a global challenge and the World Health Organization has an important role to play in leading the international health response. We have no plans to withdraw our funding." The chair of the US Senate Health Committee, Lamar Alexander, said the move could hamper the discovery of a vaccine against Covid-19 and urged a reversal of the decision in the "strongest terms possible". "Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis has been dealt with, not in the middle of it," he said. Ex-presidential candidate and US Senator Elizabeth Warren tweeted: "President Trump's decision to leave the @WHO during a global pandemic alienates our allies, undermines our global leadership, and threatens the health of the American people." Anders Nordstrom, a former WHO acting director general, said he was "deeply concerned" the move would increase political tension at a time when "we need to have global solidarity". South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize called the decision "unfortunate".  WHO member states agreed on 19 May to set up an independent inquiry into the global response to the pandemic. Speaking  at the White House, Mr Trump said: "Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs."  It is not clear when any US withdrawal might take place. A 1948 agreement between the US and WHO allows for one year's notice before pulling out.  Mr Trump has accused China of trying to cover up the outbreak of coronavirus, which occurred in the city of Wuhan late last year. He also says that "China has total control over the World Health Organization". The president accused China of pressurising the WHO to "mislead the world" about the virus, without elaborating. "The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government," he said. The US will redirect its funds for the WHO  to other health groups. More than 102,000 people in the US have lost their lives to Covid-19 - by far the biggest death toll in the world.  Opponents say Mr Trump is trying to deflect criticism of his handling of the pandemic ahead of his re-election bid this year. Meanwhile, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has said that Mr Trump is trying to mislead the public, smear China and "shift the blame for [the US's] own incompetent response".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The private rocket company SpaceX has sent two Nasa astronauts into orbit. It's the first time since the retirement of the shuttles nine years ago that an American crew has made the journey from US territory. Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken are not only trialling a new capsule system, they are also initiating a new business model for Nasa. The agency will no longer own the vehicles it uses but merely purchase the "taxi" service offered by SpaceX. It's hoped companies other than tech billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX outfit will come in to expand the market. The aerospace giant Boeing already has a contract with Nasa to do so.  Mr Musk himself said he was overcome with emotion watching his hardware take the astronauts to orbit.  "I think this is something that should get people right in the heart, of anyone that has the spirit of exploration. And the US is the distillation of the spirit of exploration," he told reporters. The new capability the CEO is offering will end the reliance of Nasa on Russian rockets and capsules to get its people to the International Space Station (ISS). It was a point picked up on by President Donald Trump, who came to Florida to watch the launch. "Past leaders put the US at the mercy of foreign nations to send our astronauts into orbit. Not anymore," he said. "Today we once again proudly launched American astronauts on American rockets - the best in the world - from right here on American soil." Hurley's and Behnken's Dragon ship left Earth atop its Falcon-9 rocket precisely on time - at 15:22 EDT (19:22 GMT / 20:22 BST). Meteorologists had forecast only a 50:50 chance of favourable conditions around Florida's Kennedy Space Center at lift-off, but, as luck would have it, the weather window stayed open and the SpaceX controllers grabbed their opportunity. The Falcon soared off the spaceport's famous 39A pad to head northeast out over the Atlantic. After two-and-a-half minutes, the lower-stage of the vehicle had separated to return to a drone ship at sea. And after a further six minutes, the crew were safely inserted into orbit.  Hurley and Behnken are set to arrive at the ISS on Sunday. They'll use some of the intervening hours to test equipment and procedures in their capsule, including doing some manual flying.  Although the Dragon capsule is a fully automated vehicle capable of finding its own way to the ISS, the crew needs to prepare for all eventualities and that means knowing exactly how the ship will behave in their hands. Uniquely, the Dragon has no control stick; all flight commands must be entered via a touchscreen panel. One of their first tasks in orbit was simply to name their ship - in the tradition of past US spacefarers, all the way back to the Mercury programme. Radioing down to Earth, they announced it would be called Endeavour.  Doug Hurley said: "We chose Endeavour for a few reasons: One, because of this incredible endeavour that Nasa, SpaceX and the US have been on since the end of the shuttle programme back in 2011. The other reason is a little more personal to Bob and I. We both had our first flights on shuttle Endeavour and it just meant so much to us to carry on that name." Endeavour was the ship commanded by British explorer James Cook on his voyage to Australia in the late 18th Century. Hurley's and Behnken's stay at the ISS is not known currently, but is likely to be somewhere between one and four months.  Assuming their return to a splashdown in the Atlantic is as smooth as the launch, Nasa and SpaceX will move directly into the full terms of their new relationship. The company has a $2.6bn (£2.1bn) contract with the agency to fly six operational crew missions to the ISS.  The first of these should occur at the end August, or very soon after; and will see four astronauts climb aboard a Dragon rather than just the two we saw on this occasion. Saturday's launch went ahead against the background of the coronavirus crisis.  Crowds were encouraged not to assemble near the Kennedy complex, and Nasa itself severely limited the number of guests invited on to the spaceport. As for the astronauts, they would ordinarily observe a quarantine before flight. But again Nasa reduced the number of people the men could come into contact with in the weeks running up to launch, and those that had to get close were instructed to wear masks. For SpaceX, Saturday marked another significant milestone for the company which was founded just 18 years ago. The firm has upended the launcher industry with its reusable vehicles and is now pioneering a new market-driven approach to human spaceflight. It hasn't all been plain sailing - as evidenced by a spectacular explosion at the  firm's prototyping facility in Boca Chica, Texas, on Friday. But the company has routinely proved naysayers wrong, and Nasa believes its relationship with Elon Musk will save billion of dollars that can be diverted to the more complex task of getting people back to the Moon and then to Mars.     "We want to establish a commercial environment in low-Earth orbit so that we can focus on the hard job of exploring beyond our home planet, to establish a sustained presence on the Moon and get to Mars to establish a presence there," said Bob Cabana, the director at Kennedy.  "We can't do that if we're locked here in low-Earth orbit, and commercial crew - that's the beginning of a whole new era of spaceflight." Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violence has broken out again in the US as protests continue across the country over the killing of an unarmed black man by police in the state on Minnesota on Monday.  George Floyd died in police custody while an officer kneeled on his neck to pin him down.  In Minnesota - where he was killed - the state's entire national guard was mobilised on Saturday to try to prevent further trouble. All pictures copyrightedShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has said he will postpone this year's G7 summit and invite leaders of other countries to participate in the talks. "I don't feel that... it properly represents what's going on in the world. It's a very outdated group of countries," Mr Trump said on Saturday. The G7 group, which the US hosts this year, includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the UK.  The president said Russia, South Korea, Australia and India should be invited. Speaking to reporters on board the presidential plane Air Force One, Mr Trump said that he was delaying the summit - which was scheduled to take place later in June  - until September.  Last week, Mr Trump said it might be possible to hold a gathering at the White House and potentially parts of Camp David, the US presidential country retreat, despite concerns over the coronavirus pandemic. German Chancellor Angela Merkel later rejected the president's invitation to attend a summit in person because of the outbreak.  Her spokesman thanked Mr Trump, but said the German leader "cannot agree to her personal participation, to a journey to Washington". On Friday, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson "agreed on the importance of convening the G7 in person in the near future" following a conversation with the US president, the White House said in a statement.  The G7 - or Group of Seven - leaders were scheduled to meet by videoconference in June in response to Covid-19. The group is made up of the seven of the world's largest economies. It regards itself as "a community of values", with freedom and human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and prosperity and sustainable development as its key principles.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Microsoft is to replace dozens of contract journalists on its MSN website and use automated systems to select news stories, US and UK media report. The curating of  stories from news organisations and selection of headlines and pictures for the MSN site is currently done by  journalists. Artificial intelligence will perform these news production tasks, sources told the Seattle Times.   Microsoft said it was part of an evaluation of its business.  The US tech giant said in a statement: "Like all companies, we evaluate our business on a regular basis. This can result in increased investment in some places and, from time to time, redeployment in others. These decisions are not the result of the current pandemic." Microsoft, like some other tech companies, pays news organisations to use their content on its website. But it employs journalists to decide which stories to display and how they are presented.  Around 50 contract news producers will lose their jobs at the end of June, the Seattle Times reports, but a team of full-time journalists will remain. "It's demoralising to think machines can replace us but there you go," one of those facing redundancy told the paper. Some  sacked journalists warned that artificial intelligence may not be fully familiar with strict editorial guidelines, and could end up letting through inappropriate stories.  Twenty-seven of those losing their jobs are employed by the UK's PA Media, the Guardian reports.  One journalist quoted in the paper said: "I spend all my time reading about how automation and AI is going to take all our jobs - now it's taken mine."  Microsoft is one of many tech companies experimenting with forms of so-called robot journalism to cut costs.   Google is also investing in projects to understand how it might work.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump has been criticised at home and abroad after announcing he is ending US ties with the World Health Organization (WHO).  The EU urged him to reconsider the decision, while Germany's health minister called it a "disappointing setback for international health". The head of the US Senate's health committee, a Republican like Mr Trump, said now was not the time to leave. Mr Trump said the WHO had failed to hold China to account over coronavirus. The WHO, a UN agency that helps countries promote healthcare and tackle outbreaks of disease, has faced regular criticism from the US president over its handling of the outbreak. He suspended US funding to the WHO last month and on Friday permanently halted the payment, which last year stood at more than $400m (£324m; €360m), the largest single contribution at around 15% of its total budget. European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and top EU diplomat, Josep Borrell, said in a statement: "In the face of this global threat, now is the time for enhanced co-operation and common solutions. Actions that weaken international results must be avoided. "We urge the US to reconsider its announced decision." German Health Minister Jens Spahn described the setback as "disappointing" although he accepted the WHO "needs reform". "The EU must take a leading role and engage more financially," he said. A spokesperson for the UK said: "Coronavirus is a global challenge and the World Health Organization has an important role to play in leading the international health response. We have no plans to withdraw our funding." The chair of the US Senate Health Committee, Lamar Alexander, said the move could hamper the discovery of a vaccine against Covid-19 and urged a reversal of the decision in the "strongest terms possible". "Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis has been dealt with, not in the middle of it," he said. Ex-presidential candidate and US Senator Elizabeth Warren tweeted: "President Trump's decision to leave the @WHO during a global pandemic alienates our allies, undermines our global leadership, and threatens the health of the American people." Anders Nordstrom, a former WHO acting director general, said he was "deeply concerned" the move would increase political tension at a time when "we need to have global solidarity". South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize called the decision "unfortunate".  WHO member states agreed on 19 May to set up an independent inquiry into the global response to the pandemic. Speaking  at the White House, Mr Trump said: "Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs."  It is not clear when any US withdrawal might take place. A 1948 agreement between the US and WHO allows for one year's notice before pulling out.  Mr Trump has accused China of trying to cover up the outbreak of coronavirus, which occurred in the city of Wuhan late last year. He also says that "China has total control over the World Health Organization". The president accused China of pressurising the WHO to "mislead the world" about the virus, without elaborating. "The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government," he said. The US will redirect its funds for the WHO  to other health groups. More than 102,000 people in the US have lost their lives to Covid-19 - by far the biggest death toll in the world.  Opponents say Mr Trump is trying to deflect criticism of his handling of the pandemic ahead of his re-election bid this year. Meanwhile, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has said that Mr Trump is trying to mislead the public, smear China and "shift the blame for [the US's] own incompetent response".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window My Money is a series looking at how people spend their money - and the sometimes tough decisions they have to make. Here Alyssa Hulme from Heber City in Utah, US, takes us through a week in her life during the coronavirus pandemic. Alyssa, 31, is a freelance writer and educational consultant. She and her husband Randy have four children: Ellie, eight, Max, seven, Amethyst, four and Josie, one. She has been homeschooling her children for a year, months before the pandemic started.  She says her week started out mundane but ended up awesome! She had no idea on Monday where she would be by Sunday.  Over to Alyssa.... I started the day nursing my one-year-old, passed her off to her dad for breakfast and settled down for a solid 45 minutes of private time before spending the rest of the day homeschooling three kids and caring for a baby. After prayer, meditation, and setting my To-Dos for the day, I purchased a course, the 30-day Money Cure with Carol Tuttle for $297 (£242). The course is on gaining financial affluence by clearing out limiting belief systems that don't serve me and replacing them with healthy practices. I have been looking forward to this course for months and have set aside money for this specific purpose.  After that I moved on to begin my day with my family and set everyone to their beginning tasks of piano, chores, and math. We've been homeschooling for a year now, so it's been a pretty typical day. But at lunchtime instead of transitioning to a play date, my husband took our eldest out for one-on-one time to help supplement the loss of activities and outings that has come with Covid-19 lockdowns.  We've been isolating since the end of February and the loss of friends is wearing on us all. During our midday quiet time I taught two online vocal training lessons virtually to students who live in town. Typically they'd come to my home, but we are all still isolating. After that we settled into our evening routine: I made dinner, we ate together and then held our weekly "family night" - an evening of talent shows, games, treats and fun. Total spend: $297 (£242) I continued with the money course. I am starting up a homeschool consulting business and really want to get on the correct and mentally healthy track for the sake of my business. The course has helped me identify several limiting beliefs I can clear up to allow space for more growth. Then, as every weekday for months, we did homeschool, lunch and quiet time in the afternoon.  During quiet time I had a virtual occupational therapy appointment for my one-year-old in order to evaluate her for possible gross motor delays. This is free through our state. Next I had a virtual appointment with my therapist. This costs $110 after insurance and is withdrawn from my Health Saving Account, an account we pay into monthly through my husband's pay check and is tax free. Therapy always really takes it out of me and today it was compounded by some new business issues I'm working through, so my husband picked up dinner from a fastfood Chinese restaurant for $40. It ended up being a lot of food and will last a good two and a half meals for the six of us.  I took the evening to work more on my business and work on my personal goals. Normally I'd go out with friends or go to the gym, but everything is closed, so I get to save more money and get to know my bed a little better. Total spend: $150 (£122) Our big outing today was a trip up the canyon near our home. We spent two hours hiking in the woods, building fairy houses and crossing streams.  Later in the evening I started making plans for next year's homeschool and bought some notebooks and stationery through Target.com. I really dislike online shopping, especially for something as personal as a notebook. As a writer, the size, weight and binding of a notebook really matters to me, so buying from an online shop is very disorienting.  I also bought a summer dress through Target.com, something I can easily nurse in and hope to be able to wear out and about someday here soon when the quarantine is lifted. Our county just moved to a low-risk status, so hopefully my husband and I can start up our weekly date nights soon.  Total spend: $110.52 (£90) Late last night my husband discovered that he will not be returning to work in his office until the end of 2020. We discussed buying a motorhome, living in it for the next six months, renting out our home, and working and doing homeschool on the go. This has been a dream of ours for 10 years, but it never worked out with our careers. Now is the time.  Today we decided to rent an RV (recreational vehicle) - $1,160 for four nights - and start testing out different configurations and living quarters. We decided to head for Yellowstone National Park. Two of the four entrances are now open! I found an RV site and started packing up.  I normally would have gone grocery shopping last night but our travel plans halted that. As a result we were out of food today, so I grabbed lunch from a local shop for $33.50 and dinner from a restaurant for $45. This is not a normal thing for us to just pick up and drop a ton of money on travel, but we have now been in isolation since the end of February and we are all so ready to have a new experience.  This money is coming from the allotment my husband and I had set aside to celebrate our 10 year anniversary tomorrow, but all our kid-free-for-the-first-time-in-five-years international travel plans were squashed by the virus. This will be an interesting substitute.  We parked the RV along our path to Yellowstone at a Walmart. Anyone can park there overnight for free, so it's a great backup to have in mind when travelling.  Total spend: $1,238.50 (£1,005) Happy 10 year anniversary to my husband and me! We celebrate the day by first getting groceries from Walmart and starting the trek to Yellowstone. I bought groceries for the week for $233. Not too bad for a family of six with limited fridge and cupboard space. We stopped to fill up the RV with gas for $213. After several hours of driving, we arrived at the spot I had reserved online yesterday for two nights, a total of $180, including water and electricity plug-ins. It's a little high for an RV site, but it's the closest I could find to the park entrance online and we decided to value time in the park over the cost of the campsite. (All the sites inside the park are closed due to Covid-19.) Total spend: $626 (£510) More blogs from the BBC's My Money Series: We woke early and headed to the park today, but it was closed due to a snowstorm. The road ended up getting 12 inches of snow in some places! Instead of exploring the park we explored the National Forest just outside. Total spend: $0 We got up early again and were able to enter the park! We used our National Parks Pass to get in, so no cost today. We did everything that was open in the park, the big attractions for us being the Upper and Lower falls outlooks, the Grand Prismatic Spring, and Old Faithful.  We saw so much wildlife on this trip, far more than my husband or I even saw here as children. We drove by and hiked next to elk, bison, deer, egrets, and even several bears including a baby and mama bear. We attribute this expanse of wildlife to conservation efforts in the park as well as the closure of the park over the last several months.  The snow also allowed us to see all the animal tracks throughout the park which our kids loved! Old Faithful had the largest crowd, but still very small even for this time of year. We watched with a small, social distancing crowd for the big event, and then headed out. We were tempted to get take-out from the lodge near Old Faithful, but decided to continue eating the food we'd already purchased knowing the lodge food prices are really marked up.  We packed up and exited the park through the South Entrance and drove through Grand Tetons National Park and got gas in Jackson Hole for $176. Wyoming has lots of open land for free parking, but with a new vehicle and dark terrain, we decided to stay overnight in a National Forest campsite a half hour away for $15 for the night. We pulled in about 23:00, paid via cash in a drop box, and enjoyed sleeping next to a river and under a blanket of stars. Total spend: $191 (£156) Thanks for coming with me on my 10 year wedding anniversary trip! This is not the trip we'd planned, but it's been wonderful for our family. We've seen two more National Parks, taken a break from quarantine in a way that feels safe for us, and enjoyed our beautiful nation.  This is an unusually high week for us because we went on our trip. But considering $2,000 of that was spent on our trip and only $613.02 spent on our normal life, I feel good about that. We had $2,000+ saved for months now to go to Barbados later this summer, but we have given up all international travel until the virus settles down. All in, I feel like this was a successful trip. We would not be moving forward with purchasing an RV had we not had the real life experience of travelling in one for an extended period of time.  The remaining $613.02 also reflects an unusual cost in the money course I am taking. I haven't purchased class tuition in probably five years, but being home all the time has me under-stimulated and needing a project.  I think like many families these days, our spending in many areas has decreased (no extracurriculars, less shopping and self-care purchases, almost no gas purchases), but in other ways expanded. I don't bring my kids into any grocery stores anymore, so when my husband is too busy at work to be with them and we run out of food, I get take-out meals. When our mental health is being run down by monotony, we rent RVs, buy our kids bikes, and online shop for anything to help the kids make it through the day. This is survival for us.  I feel very privileged to be financially secure and have a very stable income. While the world is in chaos we will continue to use money as a tool to support our mental wellbeing and try to take advantage of the new opportunities opening up to us.  We're looking for more people to share what they spend their money on. If you're interested, please email my.money@bbc.co.uk or get in touch via our My Money (World) Facebook group, or if you live in the UK, please join our My Money (UK) Facebook group and we'll aim to contact you.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window As the US grapples with the coronavirus outbreak, President Donald Trump and and his likely election rival, Joe Biden, have been locking horns over the handling of the crisis. They've traded accusations about access to China for US health experts, and restrictions on flights from China following the outbreak. We've been looking at some of these claims and counter-claims. President Trump failed to get US health officials into China to inspect the outbreak Mr Biden has said there was "no effort" by the president to get US officials into China to inspect the initial outbreak, and also claimed that "Trump never got a CDC team on the ground in China."  But the Trump administration says it did try. Health Secretary Alex Azar told journalists in late January that the US had offered on 6 January to send a team from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) - an offer that was repeated later that month and in February. The CDC is the top government body responsible for protecting public health. Two US experts did get into China as part of a multinational delegation from the World Health Organization, which went in mid-February. These were Weigong Zhou from the US CDC, and Clifford Lane from the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.  It's also worth adding that the CDC itself has had an office in China for decades (more on this further down). Trump allowed 40,000 people to travel to US from China after the travel ban President Trump and Mr Biden have also clashed over how airtight the restrictions introduced on travel from China are. Mr Trump issued an order on 31 January which stopped foreign nationals who had been in China in the previous two weeks from entering the US. This came into effect on 2 February.  An advert by the Biden campaign claims the president let 40,000 travellers into the US from China after he signed the order. President Trump has hit back, saying these were US citizens coming home.  The order does have exemptions for US citizens, legal residents, and non-citizen relatives with close ties. Flight data analysed by the New York Times shows 40,000 people arrived in the US directly from China in the two months after President Trump's restrictions. We don't know how many of these were US citizens, but it is unlikely they all were  - as President Trump claims - with other exemptions also applying. President Trump cut the numbers of US disease experts in China before the outbreak This claim by Mr Biden refers to the presence of a CDC office inside China, which it's maintained for decades. Joe Biden said: "We had over 44, if I'm not mistaken, people from the CDC in China, to observe what was going on. The president brought home the vast majority of them and I think left only four in place." Mr Biden is right that overall numbers of CDC staff in China have come down significantly, but he's not correct about the numbers.  The CDC website says that as of March this year there were 14 staff in total working in China - three from the US and 11 employed locally. That's down from 47 CDC staff a year earlier, eight of whom were US employees and 39 of whom were locally recruited. Mr Biden further alleges that a key US expert role inside China has not been filled. He said: "We had an American official stationed inside the Chinese disease control agency serving as our eyes and ears. President Trump left the position vacant as the outbreak hit." It's true that the last American - a CDC employee -  left her role in China's disease control agency in 2019 before the coronavirus emerged, and was not replaced. When President Trump was asked about this on 22 March, he said that media reports about the CDC were "100 percent wrong" and then referred the question to Robert Redfield, the CDC director, who was with him.  Mr Redfield said the CDC "China office is actually being augmented, as we speak," but didn't explain why this particular role had ceased. Biden called Trump xenophobic for China travel ban President Trump claims Mr Biden "went crazy" and called him "xenophobic" for banning people entering the US from China. When the order was announced, Mr Biden did say it wasn't the time for "Donald Trump's record of hysterical xenophobia", and the next day tweeted a similar message. The Biden campaign says this wasn't a reference to the travel restrictions, but to the president's overall record in office. Mr Biden has never specifically said he opposed travel restrictions per se, but he did say in March that "travel restrictions based on favouritism and politics, rather than risk, will be counter-productive". He publicly supported the travel ban in early April, with his campaign saying: "Science supported this ban, therefore he did too." President Trump has also said Mr Biden wrote him a letter of apology regarding his comments about the China travel restrictions, but this isn't true, according to the Biden campaign. Read more from Reality Check Send us your questions Follow us on TwitterShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Tensions between Minneapolis' black community and the police did not start with the death of George Floyd. They have been years in the making. On a hot Thursday morning in the Longfellow neighbourhood of Minneapolis, a 28-year-old father named Nuwman stood outside the Minneapolis Police Department's Third Precinct drinking a large coffee as smoke wafted past from the smouldering ruins of nearby buildings.  It was day three of protests over the death of 46-year-old George Floyd, after a white police officer named Derek Chauvin kneeled on his neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds. Floyd begged for his life before falling unconscious and dying in the street, in full view of witnesses and a rolling mobile phone camera. Four officers, including Chauvin, were fired from the department for their involvement. The previous night, tensions ignited, and for the first time the city saw looting, arson and violence. At least one man died in a shooting at a pawn shop. "This is everyday. Everyday that these police officers have enforced their protocol has led up to this," said Nuwman, his voice rising with emotion over the din of protesters and sirens. "This is not just a singular moment. This is a cataclysm. A combination of all the things that happened before." That night, protesters stormed the precinct as police cruisers flew out of the rear parking lot, abandoning it to demonstrators who quickly moved from room to room lighting blazes.  The following afternoon, a Friday, saw the arrest of Chauvin by Minnesota's Bureau of Criminal Apprehension. Chauvin has been charged with murder. This is not the first instance of a controversial, police-involved killing in the region. In 2016, Philando Castile was shot and killed by a police officer in a neighbourhood just 15 minutes away from the current epicentre of protest.  In 2017, a Minneapolis officer was charged with the shooting death of Justine Damond after she called to report a possible sexual assault. In 2015, protests erupted over the shooting death of Jamar Clark, a 24-year-old man who was being pursued by Minneapolis officers. All three deaths sparked protest movements and yielded mixed results in terms of prosecution. Yanez was tried and acquitted. Mohamed Noor, Damond's shooter, was sentenced to 12.5 years. No charges were brought in Clark's case.  For some, Floyd's death was the continuation of those stories. "WE SHOULD HAVE BURNT THE CITY DOWN FOR PHILANDO CASTILE," one person posted on social media.  But in some ways, the pictures beamed around the world this week tell a story that's unique.  Demonstrations are occurring in the midst of a historic, global pandemic. The sheer amount of property damage and arson has been staggering. The swiftness with which officers were fired, and the speed in which Chauvin was arrested and charged surprised many. But Minneapolis - while a prosperous city that celebrates liberal policies and politicians - has struggled for years with socioeconomic inequality and segregation. It's a phenomena that's been dubbed the "Minnesota paradox".  The Twin Cities, as Minneapolis and St Paul are known, are still overwhelmingly white - about one-quarter of the population is non-white - and its neighbourhoods are still highly segregated. Most people of colour live on the cities' north sides.  They were shaped by racist red-lining policies dating to the early 20th Century, when black families were not allowed to buy homes in certain neighbourhoods. In the 1960s, the state built a major highway that cut through and destroyed a thriving black community known as Rondo in St Paul.  According to a 2018 study, the rate of black homeownership in the Twin Cities is among the lowest in the nation. Even before the pandemic caused massive layoffs, 10% of black residents were unemployed compared to 4% of whites. That disparity ranks as one of the nation's worst.  In 2016, the average white household in the Twin Cities made about $76,000 a year, while the average black household earned just $32,000. Thirty-two percent of black Twin Citians fell below the poverty line, while only 6.5% of whites did.  Racial disparities persist in the way the community is policed.  After Philando Castile was killed, data released about police traffic stops in the area showed that 44% of stops were black drivers, though the population was only 7% black.  According to the Minneapolis police department's own data, in 2018 55% of drivers stopped for "equipment violations" were black.  As Covid-19 ravages the area, these disparities are sure to worsen, as thousands lose their jobs, and their homes to evictions and foreclosures.  On Friday afternoon, residents of both St Paul and Minneapolis headed into the streets carrying brooms and pails, and slowly began to literally pick up the pieces of the town.  Following the announcement that former officer Chauvin had been jailed and charged with third-degree murder and manslaughter, protesters at Minneapolis City Hall let up a cheer.  But it was quickly replaced by a new demand: "One down, three to go." Follow Jessica on TwitterShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window For years, Twitter resisted calls to treat President Trump just like any other user. Then this week, everything changed. On Tech Tent, we examine the conflict between the president and his favourite social media platform. It began on Wednesday. Twitter had been under fire for allowing tweets in which the president shared a far-fetched conspiracy theory about an alleged crime involving a TV presenter and former Republican congressman.  But instead of taking action on those tweets, it fact-checked two others - about postal voting under a new policy which seeks to deter content which might suppress voting. Social media expert Chris Stokel-Walker tells Tech Tent that if Twitter thought limiting action to the area of elections was a cautious first step, it was wrong. "As soon as you start engaging in any sort of moderation or comment on politics, you run the risk of potentially alienating 50% of your audience - and given our very politically fractious times, that is more of a risk than ever," he said. Having taken that first step, and seeing President Trump immediately go nuclear and threatening to go so far as to shut the social media platform down, Twitter might have been tempted to go quiet for a bit. Instead, it chose escalation.  In the early hours of Friday morning, in a tweet about the protests in Minneapolis over the death of a black man, Mr Trump warned: "when the looting starts, the shooting starts".  Twitter's moderation team swung into action - after consulting CEO Jack Dorsey - and obscured the tweet with a message saying that rules on glorifying violence had been broken. Users could still see the tweet by clicking through that message, but sharing it was made harder.  A few hours later, as the president woke up, the official White House account simply repeated the offending tweet. We watched with bated breath to see what would happen and, sure enough, Twitter's moderators slapped the same warning on the tweet. It is difficult to see either side backing down now.  The White House is busy scouring Twitter to find examples of other world leaders who have glorified violence without any comeback. Others are finding all sorts of old Trump tweets that appear to have broken the rules by, for instance, spreading misinformation about treatments for coronavirus. Jack Dorsey, who had appeared very reluctant to apply anything but the most light-touch regulation, now finds himself faced with the unappealing prospect of cracking down on world leaders far and wide. Meanwhile, there is not exactly much solidarity being shown by Facebook. In general, it has been a more tightly-moderated platform than Twitter, but Mark Zuckerberg has made it clear he has no intention of following Jack Dorsey's lead when it comes to fact checking politicians. Donald Trump's Facebook page has simply replicated the posts which fell foul of Twitter - with no sign of fact-checking or finger-wagging. "This is the kind of thing that Donald Trump revels in," says Chris Stokel-Walker, "an ex-reality TV star who likes to stir the pot. He's now managed to set Mark Zuckerberg and Jack Dorsey against each other." For all the rage about freedom of speech from the president - and remember Twitter as a private company can do what it likes in that area - he seems unlikely to kill what has become his main platform for getting his message out.  Like the fighting couple in some dodgy romcom, Trump and Twitter need each other - though one suspects Jack Dorsey might be tempted to throw the President out and change the locks.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window It's an uncanny and almost tragically perfect piece of symmetry. The number of US servicemen and women killed in Korea, Vietnam, Iraq and Afghanistan - over an aggregate 44 years of fighting - is almost exactly the same as the number of Americans who've now lost their lives to coronavirus in just three months of America's war against the hidden enemy, as Donald Trump likes to refer to Covid-19.  He also calls it the Chinese virus, but we'll come to that. Now I know you could replace the Covid-19 deaths with US cancer deaths or road crash victims and come up with similarly stark or perhaps even more dramatic statistics. But sadly, fatal car accidents and terminal tumours have always been with us. A global pandemic has not. And out of nowhere 100,000 American families are this spring mourning loved ones, whose lives have been cut short by this virus. 1.5m Americans have been infected. Many millions more have lost their jobs. One of Donald Trump's first acts when he moved into the Oval Office in 2017, was to restore to a central position the bust of Winston Churchill that Barack Obama had moved out in favour of a bronze of Martin Luther King Jr.  And in this fight against coronavirus, Donald Trump does see himself as a war leader; the property tycoon who could work a shovel on a Manhattan building site was also going to be shown to be a man of destiny -  the untried field-marshal, with a baton in his knapsack ready to command the troops to get the job done. But also keeping the home fires burning, and lifting the morale of a frightened nation. It has all been far more jagged than that.  Donald Trump is not imbued with the gift of soaring Churchillian rhetoric; there have been no "we shall fight them on the beaches" moments. Nor has he conjured the Rooseveltian calm when delivering one of his fireside chats. There have been days of infamy, but they have been invariably generated by things that the president has said, rather than what has been done to the United States.  And anyway, for a self-styled war leader he must at least face the charge of ignoring the warnings about the enemy he was confronting in the early stages, appearing more Neville Chamberlain than Winston Churchill. Korean War (1950-1953): 36,500 Vietnam War (1961-1975): 58,000 Iraq War (2003-2011): 4,500 Afghanistan (2001-today): 2,000 Covid-19 (Feb 2020- today): 100,000 The initial period of the US effort against the virus was marked by one significant action in late January, when the president stopped non-American visitors from China entering the United States. That was smart and decisive (although some have argued, to my mind unfairly, that Trump should have stopped anyone and everyone coming from China). But any tactical advantage that had given the administration was squandered in February where there was a month of inaction and incompetence.  Attempts to roll out testing were woeful (the president was badly let down by the Centers for Disease Control). Procurement of PPE was weak. The federal emergency stockpile of vital equipment was like Old Mother Hubbard's cupboard: bare. The president had also disbanded the entire global-health-security unit of the National Security Council. He also eliminated the US government's $30m (£23m) Complex Crises Fund. These were decisions that badly undermined the American ability to counter the disease.  All while he was on a determined mission to tell America that this thing from China was no biggie, and certainly was not going to upend the economy - the centrepiece of his strategy for re-election in November.  It is worth just going through the president's quotes from these critical few weeks.  Jan 22: "It's one person coming in from China and we have it under control. It's going to be just fine." Feb 2: "We pretty much shut it down coming in from China." Feb 10: "Looks like by April, you know, in theory, when it gets a little warmer, it miraculously goes away. I hope that's true. But we're doing great in our country. China, I spoke with President Xi, and they're working very, very hard. And I think it's going to all work out fine." Feb 11: "In our country, we only have, basically, 12 cases and most of those people are recovering and some cases fully recovered. So it's actually less." Feb 24: "The coronavirus is very much under control in the USA. We are in contact with everyone and all relevant countries. CDC and World Health have been working hard and very smart. Stock market starting to look very good to me!" Feb 26: "When you have 15 people, and the 15 within a couple of days is going to be down to close to zero, that's a pretty good job we've done." Crisis? What crisis?  But in March the contours became clearer, and it was not pretty. The news was all grim. Because of a lack of testing, there had been extensive community transmission - people were coming down with coronavirus, but it wasn't clear where they'd contracted it, who they'd caught it from, how they'd got it. The "track and trace" (the language of coronavirus that we've all now become so familiar with) was now impossible.  Although the first reported outbreak was out on the West Coast in Washington state, Covid-19 was playing a mean sleight of hand on us all. This pesky virus got us to look in one direction, when we really should have been focused on the other. Where Covid-19 was really letting rip was on the East Coast, especially in the biggest, richest and most densely populated city in the US, New York, with devastating consequences.  If the city was quickly to become the most worrying centre of the outbreak, the borough of Queens became the epicentre of the epicentre - the district where Donald Trump had grown up. And the visuals from there drove home to Americans - and to the president - the scale of the unfolding disaster. At Elmhurst Hospital, refrigerated container lorries were parked to store bodies that the morgue had no way of dealing with. I interviewed a young doctor from there at the height of the pandemic who painted a harrowing picture of daily life and death.  In the richest city of the wealthiest country on the planet, we saw nurses heading into intensive care units to treat Covid patients wearing bin liners as PPE, because that is all they had. We saw the ER consultant putting on his ski goggles to examine a patient, because the hospital didn't have the right face masks. We saw mass graves being dug on a small island in the Bronx to accommodate all those who'd died with no next of kin, or with no money for a funeral. Like the inscription on the tomb of the unknown soldiers in the Commonwealth war graves: "known unto God".  America, this all-mighty superpower, with enough weaponry to blow the planet to smithereens many times over, was looking ragged and not in control of events in its own backyard. It's hard to see this chapter of America's story going down as another moment of this nation's greatness. If Queens is where Donald Trump grew up, Manhattan is where he made his money - and nothing says money like Wall Street, the pulse and oxygen monitor of the US economy. And the president likes to stand over its bed to take its vitals hourly. But as it became clear that the US economy was going to have to shut down, so the Dow Jones index went diving downwards - vertiginous drops, causing circuit-breakers to kick in, and causing the president and his advisers to fret that his whole re-election strategy had gone up in flames.  But then the precipitous falls would be followed by dizzying rises as word came from Capitol Hill that lawmakers might be close to some agreement to inject gazillions into the cryogenically frozen economy.  More than 25,000 of the deaths have come from New York state, and Governor Andrew Cuomo became coronavirus's first political superstar. His daily factual and highly detailed presentation of what was happening, where it was happening, what was being done to mitigate, and what still needed to be done, became appointment-to-view television across the US. Cometh the hour and all that. This lifelong Democrat - who also grew up in Queens - was drawing admiring glances from a lot of Republicans, and with many Democrats quietly thinking: "I wish he was our candidate for president in November, and not Joe Biden." Like an old-fashioned newspaper, he delineated clearly what was fact and what was opinion. In the space of 45 highly polished minutes he would deliver the news stories of New York's descent into the abyss, and then give you his op-ed column. He admitted his response wasn't perfect, acknowledging he could have acted earlier. And he also gave praise to Donald Trump where he thought it was due; he tweaked the tail of the administration when he thought it needed a bit of a kicking. At around the same time as Cuomo was capturing the nation's attention, Donald Trump decided he would go daily with a White House briefing too. It is hard to overstate how much Donald Trump loves - and needs - the roar of the crowd. Governing is dull. Campaigning - and the adoration from his rallies - is what gives him energy. It's what gets his heart pumping and the blood circulating. And because of the lockdown, here was a president who was deprived of the two things he yearns for most - a day out playing golf, and an evening rally addressing raucous, loving crowds. There were also no heads of states visiting him, where the cameras would record his thoughts on whatever was the subject du jour. He was being starved of the oxygen of publicity, and so daily to the briefing room he would come, with us reporters playing the most unlikely role as his ventilator. Being intubated to a bunch of journalists he's never trusted was never going to end well.   Vice President Mike Pence had been given the task of heading the coronavirus taskforce. A poisoned chalice it may have been, but it's a task he's performed with aplomb. He is across the detail of everything, and was the perfect link person between the different branches of government and the White House; between the different branches of government and the governors of the 50 states. And two other things he did with considerable deftness. He never forgot to praise the president to the hilt, saluting him for his leadership. Woe betide you if you don't. And he never forgets to display empathy - talking about the suffering of the American people, expressing condolences to those who'd lost loved ones. That is something that came easily to Mr Pence and is something Donald Trump hardly ever does.  Though there would be a revolving cast of characters in the briefing room - the two other stalwarts were Dr Anthony Fauci, the independent-minded head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and Dr Deborah Birx, who used to head the fight against Aids for the Obama administration, and was made the coronavirus response co-ordinator. These were the scientists who wanted to ensure that the judgements the president made were evidence based. They had limited success.   No sooner had the US economy gone into shutdown than other, more business-minded voices were in Donald Trump's other ear telling him that the remedy his doctors were prescribing was worse than the disease. Let people go back to work. Reopen the economy. The loss of jobs, the recession, depression, the devastation of the US economy will be worse than the death toll. And you could see where the president's sympathies lay. First he advocated that the US should reopen by Easter, with churches packed. Only to have that kyboshed by doctors Birx and Fauci. When asked about this Dr Fauci gave an object lesson in disagreeing with the president without disagreeing: "You don't set the timeline, the virus does," he told reporters. Masterful. But the impetus to reopen became overwhelming. The jobless totals were soaring, and Donald Trump saw his "strong economy" election strategy disappearing down the plug-hole.  And all the while the death toll was mounting, ever, ever higher. What started as a trickle at the end of February became a gradual flow. The gradual flow then became a steady stream. And by late April the stream became a torrent.  Coronavirus was indiscriminating about who it infected, but selective with who it killed. The statistics were striking - if you were black or Latino you were much more likely to die. Longstanding health inequalities came to the fore. If you'd grown up in an impoverished background, you were more likely to have the pre-existing conditions - the co-morbidities, as they say in the US - that would prove so deadly with coronavirus: hypertension, diabetes, obesity, heart disease. And if you live in densely packed, multi-generational households, and work in factories or meat-packing plants where social distancing is impossible, then - surprise, surprise - you're more likely to contract the disease.  The US Surgeon General, Admiral Jerome Adams - himself African American - addressed this directly, and spoke powerfully about it. But he seemed to pay a price for doing so - he was not seen again at another White House news conference. Someone must have taken exception to what he said. The president's own erratic performances at these briefings were coming to be seen as counterproductive by Republican strategists. The president's poll numbers were going down. I was at a couple of the most extraordinary briefings. There was the one where the president made it all about himself. His staff had produced a lengthy campaign style video detailing how brilliantly he'd handled the outbreak - for the first 45 minutes of this over two-hour-long news conference, Donald Trump spoke about himself. He spoke about how unfair the media was to him. It was "poor me". Not once in those first 45 minutes did he talk about those who'd died, nor about those who'd been infected. Nor about the millions who were fretting about how they were going to pay the bills having lost their jobs. I was also at the briefing where the president spoke about injecting disinfectant to treat coronavirus. Dr Birx, who was sitting at the side of the briefing room, looked like she was in some kind of gastric agony as she listened to the president, but never felt she had the space to stand up and say: "This is dangerous nonsense." His performance was lampooned and ridiculed.  But as the criticism piled up against the president, so Donald Trump bristled.  And there were two culprits who'd be forced onto the perp walk of shame. The first was China. Despite his early praise for President Xi, China was now in Donald Trump's cross-hairs. China had lied and covered up. This was the Wuhan flu, the city where the outbreak originated. The Chinese had taken actions to protect themselves, but not anyone else. Worse still in Donald Trump's eyes, China had intimidated the World Health Organization, and its weak, pusillanimous leadership had allowed itself to be cowed by Beijing, and therefore had failed to warn the world sufficiently of the dangers that this new strain of virus presented. In this, sure, there was blame shifting - but President Trump had a point, both about shortcomings of the WHO, and the candour of the Chinese leadership.  All of this fired up the Trump base, but it was as nothing compared with the president shifting firmly in favour of reopening the US economy. Wild demonstrations sprang up - particularly in Democrat-run states, which the president did nothing to tamp down. In California, surfer dudes, backed by libertarian Republicans and small business owners, protested at beachside locations in a bizarre Baywatch meets the Tea Party moment. In Michigan, heavily armed men carrying assault rifles and dressed as though they were auditioning as extras for a movie about mercenaries laid siege to the State House.  A public health emergency, with a virus that is no respecter of whether you are a Democrat or Republican, Trump lover or Trump hater, had divided and bitterly polarised the country. Like everything else.  If you want the country to reopen you're with Trump (broadly); if you're wary about reopening too soon you're a Dem (broadly). If you love the fact that the president has ignored the advice of the Food and Drug Administration over the dangers of hydroxychloroquine, and decided to take it anyway, then you are firmly in his camp.  And although the president has publicly stated that everyone ought to wear a mask, the fact that he chooses not to is taken as a clear dog-whistle to his supporters that you really don't have to. In the face - so to speak - of all medical advice, the mask is being seen by some as an act of provocation, a symbol of the nanny state.  Shopkeepers who insist that customers wear a mask are being intimidated by thuggish gangs patrolling outside their premises. It is grotesque. They are being ripped up and destroyed as though a symbol of oppression by the "Deep State", rather than a small effort to halt the spread of the disease. Our film crews have been jostled and abused for wearing face masks while filming these protesters. Needless to say, these people are no respecters of social distancing.  And now that America has reached this grim milestone of 100,000 dead, what of the future?  In public opinion there does seem to be a battle going on between head versus heart. Science pitted against gut instinct. The role of the state against the rights of the individual.  If a phone app that can track and trace your movements is the vital tool to prevent a second wave of the virus, it relies on a sizeable majority of the population handing over their personal data for it to be effective. Will that happen? In a country whose founding fathers fretted about the dangers of the state becoming too mighty, I just cannot see it (and this goes far wider than pro- and anti-Trump). And what if, please God, an effective vaccine is found? You can be sure that the anti-vaxx brigade (and remember Donald Trump was once one of its advocates) will be out in force, stirring up doubts about the science, the medicine, the state, Big Brother, you name it.  Donald Trump has boasted repeatedly in the past couple of months that no country has done more coronavirus testing that then USA. "It's not even close," he says. No country has built more ventilators or supplied so much PPE to its front-line workers, he says. The president has claimed that other world leaders are jealous of what the US has managed to achieve. Really? Germany, South Korea, Taiwan, Australia, New Zealand, Greece: envious?  Hard to believe somehow.  No country has had more deaths, more infections. Anywhere else, so far, is not even close.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violent protests over the death of an unarmed African-American man in the hands of police officers in Minnesota "are no longer in any way" about his killing, the state's governor has said. Tim Walz spoke after a night of unrest in several US cities over the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. He said that as a result he was taking the unprecedented step of mobilising the state's entire National Guard. There are also reports that military police units could deploy. An ex-Minneapolis policeman has been charged with murder over the death of Mr Floyd, 46, in police custody on Monday. Derek Chauvin, 44 and white, was shown in footage kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for several minutes, even after he said he couldn't breathe. He and three other officers have since been sacked. The video went viral online, reigniting US anger over police killings of black Americans, and reopening deep wounds over racial inequality across the nation. On Friday night protesters clashed with police in cities including New York, Atlanta and Portland. In Washington DC, the White House was briefly locked down. In Houston, where George Floyd grew up, a 19-year-old protester told the Associated Press: "My question is how many more, how many more? I just want to live in a future where we all live in harmony and we're not oppressed." In Minnesota, "our great cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul are under assault," Governor Walz said. "The situation in Minneapolis is now about attacking civil society, instilling fear and disrupting our great city." He said violence on Friday night had made "a mockery of pretending this is about George Floyd's death, or inequities or historical traumas to our communities of colour".  He and other officials have suggested that many violent protesters came from outside the state to cause trouble, but did not give details.  On Saturday, President Donald Trump said Mr Floyd's death had "filled Americans with horror, anger and grief".  "I stand before you as a friend and ally to every American seeking peace," he said in a televised address from Cape Canaveral in Florida, following the launch into orbit of two Nasa astronauts by billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX company.  The president denounced the actions of "looters and anarchists", saying that what was needed was "healing not hatred, justice not chaos".   "I will not allow angry mobs to dominate - won't happen," he added. Mr Trump earlier praised the US Secret Service for securing the White House but said if protesters breached the perimeter they "would have been greeted with the most vicious dogs, and most ominous weapons, I have ever seen". He blamed violence on "organised groups".  Minnesota remains the most volatile region, with curfews ordered for the Twin Cities of Minneapolis-Saint Paul from 20:00 to 06:00 on Friday and Saturday evening. Protesters defied the curfew on Friday. Fires, many from burning cars, were visible in a number of areas and television pictures showed widespread looting.  Hundreds of troops from the National Guard, a reserve military force that can be called on by the US president or state governors to intervene in domestic emergencies, moved in late at night. Minnesota officials said tens of thousands of people turned out on Friday and they are expecting more unrest on Saturday night.  As a result, Gov Walz said he was activating all National Guard troops available in the state  - reportedly up to 13,000 - for the first time in history to respond to rioters. The Pentagon said some US military units were on alert to support Minnesota if asked. There are long-standing tensions between the black community and police in Minneapolis. Another black man, Philando Castile, was shot and killed in 2016 during a traffic stop close to the epicentre of these protests in a case that gained international attention. African-Americans also suffer significant socio-economic inequalities, entrenched segregation and a higher level of unemployment than the white community.  In Atlanta, Georgia, where buildings were vandalised, a state of emergency was declared for some areas to protect people and property.  Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms issued an impassioned plea, saying: "This is not a protest. This is not in the spirit of Martin Luther King Jr. You are disgracing our city. You are disgracing the life of George Floyd." In New York's Brooklyn district, protesters clashed with police, throwing projectiles, starting fires and destroying police vehicles. A number of officers were injured and many arrests made. The mayor of Portland, Oregon, has declared a state of emergency amid looting, fires and an attack on a police precinct. An immediate curfew until 06:00 local time (13:00 GMT) was imposed and it will restart at 20:00. On Monday night, police received a phone call from a neighbourhood grocery store alleging that George Floyd had paid with a counterfeit $20 note. Officers responded and were attempting to put him in a police vehicle when he dropped to the ground, telling them he was claustrophobic. According to police, he physically resisted officers and was handcuffed. Video of the incident does not show how the confrontation started.  With Mr Chauvin's knee on his neck, Mr Floyd can be heard saying "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me". According to a preliminary autopsy by the county medical examiner, the police officer had his knee on Mr Floyd's neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds - almost three minutes of which was after Mr Floyd became non-responsive. Nearly two minutes before Mr Chauvin removed his knee the other officers checked Mr Floyd's right wrist for a pulse and were unable to find one. He was taken to hospital and pronounced dead around an hour later. The preliminary autopsy, included in the criminal complaint against Mr Chauvin, did not find evidence of "traumatic asphyxia or strangulation". The medical examiner noted Mr Floyd had underlying heart conditions and the combination of these, "potential intoxicants in his system" and being restrained by the officers "likely contributed to his death". Mr Chauvin was charged on Friday with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter over his role in Mr Floyd's death. Mr Floyd's family and their lawyer, Benjamin Crump, said that this was "welcome but overdue". The family said they wanted a more serious, first-degree murder charge as well as the arrest of the three other officers involved.  Hennepin County Prosecutor Mike Freeman said he "anticipates charges" for the other officers but would not offer more details.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violent protests over the death of an unarmed African-American man in the hands of police officers in Minnesota "are no longer in any way" about his killing, the state's governor has said. Tim Walz spoke after a night of unrest in several US cities over the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. He said that as a result he was taking the unprecedented step of mobilising the state's entire National Guard. There are also reports that military police units could deploy. An ex-Minneapolis policeman has been charged with murder over the death of Mr Floyd, 46, in police custody on Monday. Derek Chauvin, 44 and white, was shown in footage kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for several minutes, even after he said he couldn't breathe. He and three other officers have since been sacked. The video went viral online, reigniting US anger over police killings of black Americans, and reopening deep wounds over racial inequality across the nation. On Friday night protesters clashed with police in cities including New York, Atlanta and Portland. In Washington DC, the White House was briefly locked down. In Houston, where George Floyd grew up, a 19-year-old protester told the Associated Press: "My question is how many more, how many more? I just want to live in a future where we all live in harmony and we're not oppressed." In Minnesota, "our great cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul are under assault," Governor Walz said. "The situation in Minneapolis is now about attacking civil society, instilling fear and disrupting our great city." He said violence on Friday night had made "a mockery of pretending this is about George Floyd's death, or inequities or historical traumas to our communities of colour".  He and other officials have suggested that many violent protesters came from outside the state to cause trouble, but did not give details.  On Saturday, President Donald Trump said Mr Floyd's death had "filled Americans with horror, anger and grief".  "I stand before you as a friend and ally to every American seeking peace," he said in a televised address from Cape Canaveral in Florida, following the launch into orbit of two Nasa astronauts by billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX company.  The president denounced the actions of "looters and anarchists", saying that what was needed was "healing not hatred, justice not chaos".   "I will not allow angry mobs to dominate - won't happen," he added. Mr Trump earlier praised the US Secret Service for securing the White House but said if protesters breached the perimeter they "would have been greeted with the most vicious dogs, and most ominous weapons, I have ever seen". He blamed violence on "organised groups".  Minnesota remains the most volatile region, with curfews ordered for the Twin Cities of Minneapolis-Saint Paul from 20:00 to 06:00 on Friday and Saturday evening. Protesters defied the curfew on Friday. Fires, many from burning cars, were visible in a number of areas and television pictures showed widespread looting.  Hundreds of troops from the National Guard, a reserve military force that can be called on by the US president or state governors to intervene in domestic emergencies, moved in late at night. Minnesota officials said tens of thousands of people turned out on Friday and they are expecting more unrest on Saturday night.  As a result, Gov Walz said he was activating all National Guard troops available in the state  - reportedly up to 13,000 - for the first time in history to respond to rioters. The Pentagon said some US military units were on alert to support Minnesota if asked. There are long-standing tensions between the black community and police in Minneapolis. Another black man, Philando Castile, was shot and killed in 2016 during a traffic stop close to the epicentre of these protests in a case that gained international attention. African-Americans also suffer significant socio-economic inequalities, entrenched segregation and a higher level of unemployment than the white community.  In Atlanta, Georgia, where buildings were vandalised, a state of emergency was declared for some areas to protect people and property.  Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms issued an impassioned plea, saying: "This is not a protest. This is not in the spirit of Martin Luther King Jr. You are disgracing our city. You are disgracing the life of George Floyd." In New York's Brooklyn district, protesters clashed with police, throwing projectiles, starting fires and destroying police vehicles. A number of officers were injured and many arrests made. The mayor of Portland, Oregon, has declared a state of emergency amid looting, fires and an attack on a police precinct. An immediate curfew until 06:00 local time (13:00 GMT) was imposed and it will restart at 20:00. On Monday night, police received a phone call from a neighbourhood grocery store alleging that George Floyd had paid with a counterfeit $20 note. Officers responded and were attempting to put him in a police vehicle when he dropped to the ground, telling them he was claustrophobic. According to police, he physically resisted officers and was handcuffed. Video of the incident does not show how the confrontation started.  With Mr Chauvin's knee on his neck, Mr Floyd can be heard saying "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me". According to a preliminary autopsy by the county medical examiner, the police officer had his knee on Mr Floyd's neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds - almost three minutes of which was after Mr Floyd became non-responsive. Nearly two minutes before Mr Chauvin removed his knee the other officers checked Mr Floyd's right wrist for a pulse and were unable to find one. He was taken to hospital and pronounced dead around an hour later. The preliminary autopsy, included in the criminal complaint against Mr Chauvin, did not find evidence of "traumatic asphyxia or strangulation". The medical examiner noted Mr Floyd had underlying heart conditions and the combination of these, "potential intoxicants in his system" and being restrained by the officers "likely contributed to his death". Mr Chauvin was charged on Friday with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter over his role in Mr Floyd's death. Mr Floyd's family and their lawyer, Benjamin Crump, said that this was "welcome but overdue". The family said they wanted a more serious, first-degree murder charge as well as the arrest of the three other officers involved.  Hennepin County Prosecutor Mike Freeman said he "anticipates charges" for the other officers but would not offer more details.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The private rocket company SpaceX has sent two Nasa astronauts into orbit. It's the first time since the retirement of the shuttles nine years ago that an American crew has made the journey from US territory. Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken are not only trialling a new capsule system, they are also initiating a new business model for Nasa. The agency will no longer own the vehicles it uses but merely purchase the "taxi" service offered by SpaceX. It's hoped companies other than tech billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX outfit will come in to expand the market. The aerospace giant Boeing already has a contract with Nasa to do so.  Mr Musk himself said he was overcome with emotion watching his hardware take the astronauts to orbit.  "I think this is something that should get people right in the heart, of anyone that has the spirit of exploration. And the US is the distillation of the spirit of exploration," he told reporters. The new capability the CEO is offering will end the reliance of Nasa on Russian rockets and capsules to get its people to the International Space Station (ISS). It was a point picked up on by President Donald Trump, who came to Florida to watch the launch. "Past leaders put the US at the mercy of foreign nations to send our astronauts into orbit. Not anymore," he said. "Today we once again proudly launched American astronauts on American rockets - the best in the world - from right here on American soil." Hurley's and Behnken's Dragon ship left Earth atop its Falcon-9 rocket precisely on time - at 15:22 EDT (19:22 GMT / 20:22 BST). Meteorologists had forecast only a 50:50 chance of favourable conditions around Florida's Kennedy Space Center at lift-off, but, as luck would have it, the weather window stayed open and the SpaceX controllers grabbed their opportunity. The Falcon soared off the spaceport's famous 39A pad to head northeast out over the Atlantic. After two-and-a-half minutes, the lower-stage of the vehicle had separated to return to a drone ship at sea. And after a further six minutes, the crew were safely inserted into orbit.  Hurley and Behnken are set to arrive at the ISS on Sunday. They'll use some of the intervening hours to test equipment and procedures in their capsule, including doing some manual flying.  Although the Dragon capsule is a fully automated vehicle capable of finding its own way to the ISS, the crew needs to prepare for all eventualities and that means knowing exactly how the ship will behave in their hands. Uniquely, the Dragon has no control stick; all flight commands must be entered via a touchscreen panel. One of their first tasks in orbit was simply to name their ship - in the tradition of past US spacefarers, all the way back to the Mercury programme. Radioing down to Earth, they announced it would be called Endeavour.  Doug Hurley said: "We chose Endeavour for a few reasons: One, because of this incredible endeavour that Nasa, SpaceX and the US have been on since the end of the shuttle programme back in 2011. The other reason is a little more personal to Bob and I. We both had our first flights on shuttle Endeavour and it just meant so much to us to carry on that name." Endeavour was the ship commanded by British explorer James Cook on his voyage to Australia in the late 18th Century. Hurley's and Behnken's stay at the ISS is not known currently, but is likely to be somewhere between one and four months.  Assuming their return to a splashdown in the Atlantic is as smooth as the launch, Nasa and SpaceX will move directly into the full terms of their new relationship. The company has a $2.6bn (£2.1bn) contract with the agency to fly six operational crew missions to the ISS.  The first of these should occur at the end August, or very soon after; and will see four astronauts climb aboard a Dragon rather than just the two we saw on this occasion. Saturday's launch went ahead against the background of the coronavirus crisis.  Crowds were encouraged not to assemble near the Kennedy complex, and Nasa itself severely limited the number of guests invited on to the spaceport. As for the astronauts, they would ordinarily observe a quarantine before flight. But again Nasa reduced the number of people the men could come into contact with in the weeks running up to launch, and those that had to get close were instructed to wear masks. For SpaceX, Saturday marked another significant milestone for the company which was founded just 18 years ago. The firm has upended the launcher industry with its reusable vehicles and is now pioneering a new market-driven approach to human spaceflight. It hasn't all been plain sailing - as evidenced by a spectacular explosion at the  firm's prototyping facility in Boca Chica, Texas, on Friday. But the company has routinely proved naysayers wrong, and Nasa believes its relationship with Elon Musk will save billion of dollars that can be diverted to the more complex task of getting people back to the Moon and then to Mars.     "We want to establish a commercial environment in low-Earth orbit so that we can focus on the hard job of exploring beyond our home planet, to establish a sustained presence on the Moon and get to Mars to establish a presence there," said Bob Cabana, the director at Kennedy.  "We can't do that if we're locked here in low-Earth orbit, and commercial crew - that's the beginning of a whole new era of spaceflight." Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violence has broken out again in the US as protests continue across the country over the killing of an unarmed black man by police in the state on Minnesota on Monday.  George Floyd died in police custody while an officer kneeled on his neck to pin him down.  In Minnesota - where he was killed - the state's entire national guard was mobilised on Saturday to try to prevent further trouble. All pictures copyrightedShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has said he will postpone this year's G7 summit and invite leaders of other countries to participate in the talks. "I don't feel that... it properly represents what's going on in the world. It's a very outdated group of countries," Mr Trump said on Saturday. The G7 group, which the US hosts this year, includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the UK.  The president said Russia, South Korea, Australia and India should be invited. Speaking to reporters on board the presidential plane Air Force One, Mr Trump said that he was delaying the summit - which was scheduled to take place later in June  - until September.  Last week, Mr Trump said it might be possible to hold a gathering at the White House and potentially parts of Camp David, the US presidential country retreat, despite concerns over the coronavirus pandemic. German Chancellor Angela Merkel later rejected the president's invitation to attend a summit in person because of the outbreak.  Her spokesman thanked Mr Trump, but said the German leader "cannot agree to her personal participation, to a journey to Washington". On Friday, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson "agreed on the importance of convening the G7 in person in the near future" following a conversation with the US president, the White House said in a statement.  The G7 - or Group of Seven - leaders were scheduled to meet by videoconference in June in response to Covid-19. The group is made up of the seven of the world's largest economies. It regards itself as "a community of values", with freedom and human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and prosperity and sustainable development as its key principles.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Microsoft is to replace dozens of contract journalists on its MSN website and use automated systems to select news stories, US and UK media report. The curating of  stories from news organisations and selection of headlines and pictures for the MSN site is currently done by  journalists. Artificial intelligence will perform these news production tasks, sources told the Seattle Times.   Microsoft said it was part of an evaluation of its business.  The US tech giant said in a statement: "Like all companies, we evaluate our business on a regular basis. This can result in increased investment in some places and, from time to time, redeployment in others. These decisions are not the result of the current pandemic." Microsoft, like some other tech companies, pays news organisations to use their content on its website. But it employs journalists to decide which stories to display and how they are presented.  Around 50 contract news producers will lose their jobs at the end of June, the Seattle Times reports, but a team of full-time journalists will remain. "It's demoralising to think machines can replace us but there you go," one of those facing redundancy told the paper. Some  sacked journalists warned that artificial intelligence may not be fully familiar with strict editorial guidelines, and could end up letting through inappropriate stories.  Twenty-seven of those losing their jobs are employed by the UK's PA Media, the Guardian reports.  One journalist quoted in the paper said: "I spend all my time reading about how automation and AI is going to take all our jobs - now it's taken mine."  Microsoft is one of many tech companies experimenting with forms of so-called robot journalism to cut costs.   Google is also investing in projects to understand how it might work.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump has been criticised at home and abroad after announcing he is ending US ties with the World Health Organization (WHO).  The EU urged him to reconsider the decision, while Germany's health minister called it a "disappointing setback for international health". The head of the US Senate's health committee, a Republican like Mr Trump, said now was not the time to leave. Mr Trump said the WHO had failed to hold China to account over coronavirus. The WHO, a UN agency that helps countries promote healthcare and tackle outbreaks of disease, has faced regular criticism from the US president over its handling of the outbreak. He suspended US funding to the WHO last month and on Friday permanently halted the payment, which last year stood at more than $400m (£324m; €360m), the largest single contribution at around 15% of its total budget. European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and top EU diplomat, Josep Borrell, said in a statement: "In the face of this global threat, now is the time for enhanced co-operation and common solutions. Actions that weaken international results must be avoided. "We urge the US to reconsider its announced decision." German Health Minister Jens Spahn described the setback as "disappointing" although he accepted the WHO "needs reform". "The EU must take a leading role and engage more financially," he said. A spokesperson for the UK said: "Coronavirus is a global challenge and the World Health Organization has an important role to play in leading the international health response. We have no plans to withdraw our funding." The chair of the US Senate Health Committee, Lamar Alexander, said the move could hamper the discovery of a vaccine against Covid-19 and urged a reversal of the decision in the "strongest terms possible". "Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis has been dealt with, not in the middle of it," he said. Ex-presidential candidate and US Senator Elizabeth Warren tweeted: "President Trump's decision to leave the @WHO during a global pandemic alienates our allies, undermines our global leadership, and threatens the health of the American people." Anders Nordstrom, a former WHO acting director general, said he was "deeply concerned" the move would increase political tension at a time when "we need to have global solidarity". South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize called the decision "unfortunate".  WHO member states agreed on 19 May to set up an independent inquiry into the global response to the pandemic. Speaking  at the White House, Mr Trump said: "Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs."  It is not clear when any US withdrawal might take place. A 1948 agreement between the US and WHO allows for one year's notice before pulling out.  Mr Trump has accused China of trying to cover up the outbreak of coronavirus, which occurred in the city of Wuhan late last year. He also says that "China has total control over the World Health Organization". The president accused China of pressurising the WHO to "mislead the world" about the virus, without elaborating. "The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government," he said. The US will redirect its funds for the WHO  to other health groups. More than 102,000 people in the US have lost their lives to Covid-19 - by far the biggest death toll in the world.  Opponents say Mr Trump is trying to deflect criticism of his handling of the pandemic ahead of his re-election bid this year. Meanwhile, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has said that Mr Trump is trying to mislead the public, smear China and "shift the blame for [the US's] own incompetent response".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violent protests over the death of an unarmed African-American man in the hands of police officers in Minnesota "are no longer in any way" about his killing, the state's governor has said. Tim Walz spoke after a night of unrest in several US cities over the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. He said that as a result he was taking the unprecedented step of mobilising the state's entire National Guard. There are also reports that military police units could deploy. An ex-Minneapolis policeman has been charged with murder over the death of Mr Floyd, 46, in police custody on Monday. Derek Chauvin, 44 and white, was shown in footage kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for several minutes, even after he said he couldn't breathe. He and three other officers have since been sacked. The video went viral online, reigniting US anger over police killings of black Americans, and reopening deep wounds over racial inequality across the nation. On Friday night protesters clashed with police in cities including New York, Atlanta and Portland. In Washington DC, the White House was briefly locked down. In Houston, where George Floyd grew up, a 19-year-old protester told the Associated Press: "My question is how many more, how many more? I just want to live in a future where we all live in harmony and we're not oppressed." In Minnesota, "our great cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul are under assault," Governor Walz said. "The situation in Minneapolis is now about attacking civil society, instilling fear and disrupting our great city." He said violence on Friday night had made "a mockery of pretending this is about George Floyd's death, or inequities or historical traumas to our communities of colour".  He and other officials have suggested that many violent protesters came from outside the state to cause trouble, but did not give details.  On Saturday, President Donald Trump said Mr Floyd's death had "filled Americans with horror, anger and grief".  "I stand before you as a friend and ally to every American seeking peace," he said in a televised address from Cape Canaveral in Florida, following the launch into orbit of two Nasa astronauts by billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX company.  The president denounced the actions of "looters and anarchists", saying that what was needed was "healing not hatred, justice not chaos".   "I will not allow angry mobs to dominate - won't happen," he added. Mr Trump earlier praised the US Secret Service for securing the White House but said if protesters breached the perimeter they "would have been greeted with the most vicious dogs, and most ominous weapons, I have ever seen". He blamed violence on "organised groups".  Minnesota remains the most volatile region, with curfews ordered for the Twin Cities of Minneapolis-Saint Paul from 20:00 to 06:00 on Friday and Saturday evening. Protesters defied the curfew on Friday. Fires, many from burning cars, were visible in a number of areas and television pictures showed widespread looting.  Hundreds of troops from the National Guard, a reserve military force that can be called on by the US president or state governors to intervene in domestic emergencies, moved in late at night. Minnesota officials said tens of thousands of people turned out on Friday and they are expecting more unrest on Saturday night.  As a result, Gov Walz said he was activating all National Guard troops available in the state  - reportedly up to 13,000 - for the first time in history to respond to rioters. The Pentagon said some US military units were on alert to support Minnesota if asked. There are long-standing tensions between the black community and police in Minneapolis. Another black man, Philando Castile, was shot and killed in 2016 during a traffic stop close to the epicentre of these protests in a case that gained international attention. African-Americans also suffer significant socio-economic inequalities, entrenched segregation and a higher level of unemployment than the white community.  In Atlanta, Georgia, where buildings were vandalised, a state of emergency was declared for some areas to protect people and property.  Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms issued an impassioned plea, saying: "This is not a protest. This is not in the spirit of Martin Luther King Jr. You are disgracing our city. You are disgracing the life of George Floyd." In New York's Brooklyn district, protesters clashed with police, throwing projectiles, starting fires and destroying police vehicles. A number of officers were injured and many arrests made. The mayor of Portland, Oregon, has declared a state of emergency amid looting, fires and an attack on a police precinct. An immediate curfew until 06:00 local time (13:00 GMT) was imposed and it will restart at 20:00. On Monday night, police received a phone call from a neighbourhood grocery store alleging that George Floyd had paid with a counterfeit $20 note. Officers responded and were attempting to put him in a police vehicle when he dropped to the ground, telling them he was claustrophobic. According to police, he physically resisted officers and was handcuffed. Video of the incident does not show how the confrontation started.  With Mr Chauvin's knee on his neck, Mr Floyd can be heard saying "please, I can't breathe" and "don't kill me". According to a preliminary autopsy by the county medical examiner, the police officer had his knee on Mr Floyd's neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds - almost three minutes of which was after Mr Floyd became non-responsive. Nearly two minutes before Mr Chauvin removed his knee the other officers checked Mr Floyd's right wrist for a pulse and were unable to find one. He was taken to hospital and pronounced dead around an hour later. The preliminary autopsy, included in the criminal complaint against Mr Chauvin, did not find evidence of "traumatic asphyxia or strangulation". The medical examiner noted Mr Floyd had underlying heart conditions and the combination of these, "potential intoxicants in his system" and being restrained by the officers "likely contributed to his death". Mr Chauvin was charged on Friday with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter over his role in Mr Floyd's death. Mr Floyd's family and their lawyer, Benjamin Crump, said that this was "welcome but overdue". The family said they wanted a more serious, first-degree murder charge as well as the arrest of the three other officers involved.  Hennepin County Prosecutor Mike Freeman said he "anticipates charges" for the other officers but would not offer more details.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The private rocket company SpaceX has sent two Nasa astronauts into orbit. It's the first time since the retirement of the shuttles nine years ago that an American crew has made the journey from US territory. Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken are not only trialling a new capsule system, they are also initiating a new business model for Nasa. The agency will no longer own the vehicles it uses but merely purchase the "taxi" service offered by SpaceX. It's hoped companies other than tech billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX outfit will come in to expand the market. The aerospace giant Boeing already has a contract with Nasa to do so.  Mr Musk himself said he was overcome with emotion watching his hardware take the astronauts to orbit.  "I think this is something that should get people right in the heart, of anyone that has the spirit of exploration. And the US is the distillation of the spirit of exploration," he told reporters. The new capability the CEO is offering will end the reliance of Nasa on Russian rockets and capsules to get its people to the International Space Station (ISS). It was a point picked up on by President Donald Trump, who came to Florida to watch the launch. "Past leaders put the US at the mercy of foreign nations to send our astronauts into orbit. Not anymore," he said. "Today we once again proudly launched American astronauts on American rockets - the best in the world - from right here on American soil." Hurley's and Behnken's Dragon ship left Earth atop its Falcon-9 rocket precisely on time - at 15:22 EDT (19:22 GMT / 20:22 BST). Meteorologists had forecast only a 50:50 chance of favourable conditions around Florida's Kennedy Space Center at lift-off, but, as luck would have it, the weather window stayed open and the SpaceX controllers grabbed their opportunity. The Falcon soared off the spaceport's famous 39A pad to head northeast out over the Atlantic. After two-and-a-half minutes, the lower-stage of the vehicle had separated to return to a drone ship at sea. And after a further six minutes, the crew were safely inserted into orbit.  Hurley and Behnken are set to arrive at the ISS on Sunday. They'll use some of the intervening hours to test equipment and procedures in their capsule, including doing some manual flying.  Although the Dragon capsule is a fully automated vehicle capable of finding its own way to the ISS, the crew needs to prepare for all eventualities and that means knowing exactly how the ship will behave in their hands. Uniquely, the Dragon has no control stick; all flight commands must be entered via a touchscreen panel. One of their first tasks in orbit was simply to name their ship - in the tradition of past US spacefarers, all the way back to the Mercury programme. Radioing down to Earth, they announced it would be called Endeavour.  Doug Hurley said: "We chose Endeavour for a few reasons: One, because of this incredible endeavour that Nasa, SpaceX and the US have been on since the end of the shuttle programme back in 2011. The other reason is a little more personal to Bob and I. We both had our first flights on shuttle Endeavour and it just meant so much to us to carry on that name." Endeavour was the ship commanded by British explorer James Cook on his voyage to Australia in the late 18th Century. Hurley's and Behnken's stay at the ISS is not known currently, but is likely to be somewhere between one and four months.  Assuming their return to a splashdown in the Atlantic is as smooth as the launch, Nasa and SpaceX will move directly into the full terms of their new relationship. The company has a $2.6bn (£2.1bn) contract with the agency to fly six operational crew missions to the ISS.  The first of these should occur at the end August, or very soon after; and will see four astronauts climb aboard a Dragon rather than just the two we saw on this occasion. Saturday's launch went ahead against the background of the coronavirus crisis.  Crowds were encouraged not to assemble near the Kennedy complex, and Nasa itself severely limited the number of guests invited on to the spaceport. As for the astronauts, they would ordinarily observe a quarantine before flight. But again Nasa reduced the number of people the men could come into contact with in the weeks running up to launch, and those that had to get close were instructed to wear masks. For SpaceX, Saturday marked another significant milestone for the company which was founded just 18 years ago. The firm has upended the launcher industry with its reusable vehicles and is now pioneering a new market-driven approach to human spaceflight. It hasn't all been plain sailing - as evidenced by a spectacular explosion at the  firm's prototyping facility in Boca Chica, Texas, on Friday. But the company has routinely proved naysayers wrong, and Nasa believes its relationship with Elon Musk will save billion of dollars that can be diverted to the more complex task of getting people back to the Moon and then to Mars.     "We want to establish a commercial environment in low-Earth orbit so that we can focus on the hard job of exploring beyond our home planet, to establish a sustained presence on the Moon and get to Mars to establish a presence there," said Bob Cabana, the director at Kennedy.  "We can't do that if we're locked here in low-Earth orbit, and commercial crew - that's the beginning of a whole new era of spaceflight." Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violence has broken out again in the US as protests continue across the country over the killing of an unarmed black man by police in the state on Minnesota on Monday.  George Floyd died in police custody while an officer kneeled on his neck to pin him down.  In Minnesota - where he was killed - the state's entire national guard was mobilised on Saturday to try to prevent further trouble. All pictures copyrightedShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has said he will postpone this year's G7 summit and invite leaders of other countries to participate in the talks. "I don't feel that... it properly represents what's going on in the world. It's a very outdated group of countries," Mr Trump said on Saturday. The G7 group, which the US hosts this year, includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the UK.  The president said Russia, South Korea, Australia and India should be invited. Speaking to reporters on board the presidential plane Air Force One, Mr Trump said that he was delaying the summit - which was scheduled to take place later in June  - until September.  Last week, Mr Trump said it might be possible to hold a gathering at the White House and potentially parts of Camp David, the US presidential country retreat, despite concerns over the coronavirus pandemic. German Chancellor Angela Merkel later rejected the president's invitation to attend a summit in person because of the outbreak.  Her spokesman thanked Mr Trump, but said the German leader "cannot agree to her personal participation, to a journey to Washington". On Friday, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson "agreed on the importance of convening the G7 in person in the near future" following a conversation with the US president, the White House said in a statement.  The G7 - or Group of Seven - leaders were scheduled to meet by videoconference in June in response to Covid-19. The group is made up of the seven of the world's largest economies. It regards itself as "a community of values", with freedom and human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and prosperity and sustainable development as its key principles.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Microsoft is to replace dozens of contract journalists on its MSN website and use automated systems to select news stories, US and UK media report. The curating of  stories from news organisations and selection of headlines and pictures for the MSN site is currently done by  journalists. Artificial intelligence will perform these news production tasks, sources told the Seattle Times.   Microsoft said it was part of an evaluation of its business.  The US tech giant said in a statement: "Like all companies, we evaluate our business on a regular basis. This can result in increased investment in some places and, from time to time, redeployment in others. These decisions are not the result of the current pandemic." Microsoft, like some other tech companies, pays news organisations to use their content on its website. But it employs journalists to decide which stories to display and how they are presented.  Around 50 contract news producers will lose their jobs at the end of June, the Seattle Times reports, but a team of full-time journalists will remain. "It's demoralising to think machines can replace us but there you go," one of those facing redundancy told the paper. Some  sacked journalists warned that artificial intelligence may not be fully familiar with strict editorial guidelines, and could end up letting through inappropriate stories.  Twenty-seven of those losing their jobs are employed by the UK's PA Media, the Guardian reports.  One journalist quoted in the paper said: "I spend all my time reading about how automation and AI is going to take all our jobs - now it's taken mine."  Microsoft is one of many tech companies experimenting with forms of so-called robot journalism to cut costs.   Google is also investing in projects to understand how it might work.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump has been criticised at home and abroad after announcing he is ending US ties with the World Health Organization (WHO).  The EU urged him to reconsider the decision, while Germany's health minister called it a "disappointing setback for international health". The head of the US Senate's health committee, a Republican like Mr Trump, said now was not the time to leave. Mr Trump said the WHO had failed to hold China to account over coronavirus. The WHO, a UN agency that helps countries promote healthcare and tackle outbreaks of disease, has faced regular criticism from the US president over its handling of the outbreak. He suspended US funding to the WHO last month and on Friday permanently halted the payment, which last year stood at more than $400m (£324m; €360m), the largest single contribution at around 15% of its total budget. European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and top EU diplomat, Josep Borrell, said in a statement: "In the face of this global threat, now is the time for enhanced co-operation and common solutions. Actions that weaken international results must be avoided. "We urge the US to reconsider its announced decision." German Health Minister Jens Spahn described the setback as "disappointing" although he accepted the WHO "needs reform". "The EU must take a leading role and engage more financially," he said. A spokesperson for the UK said: "Coronavirus is a global challenge and the World Health Organization has an important role to play in leading the international health response. We have no plans to withdraw our funding." The chair of the US Senate Health Committee, Lamar Alexander, said the move could hamper the discovery of a vaccine against Covid-19 and urged a reversal of the decision in the "strongest terms possible". "Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis has been dealt with, not in the middle of it," he said. Ex-presidential candidate and US Senator Elizabeth Warren tweeted: "President Trump's decision to leave the @WHO during a global pandemic alienates our allies, undermines our global leadership, and threatens the health of the American people." Anders Nordstrom, a former WHO acting director general, said he was "deeply concerned" the move would increase political tension at a time when "we need to have global solidarity". South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize called the decision "unfortunate".  WHO member states agreed on 19 May to set up an independent inquiry into the global response to the pandemic. Speaking  at the White House, Mr Trump said: "Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs."  It is not clear when any US withdrawal might take place. A 1948 agreement between the US and WHO allows for one year's notice before pulling out.  Mr Trump has accused China of trying to cover up the outbreak of coronavirus, which occurred in the city of Wuhan late last year. He also says that "China has total control over the World Health Organization". The president accused China of pressurising the WHO to "mislead the world" about the virus, without elaborating. "The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government," he said. The US will redirect its funds for the WHO  to other health groups. More than 102,000 people in the US have lost their lives to Covid-19 - by far the biggest death toll in the world.  Opponents say Mr Trump is trying to deflect criticism of his handling of the pandemic ahead of his re-election bid this year. Meanwhile, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has said that Mr Trump is trying to mislead the public, smear China and "shift the blame for [the US's] own incompetent response".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window The private rocket company SpaceX has sent two Nasa astronauts into orbit. It's the first time since the retirement of the shuttles nine years ago that an American crew has made the journey from US territory. Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken are not only trialling a new capsule system, they are also initiating a new business model for Nasa. The agency will no longer own the vehicles it uses but merely purchase the "taxi" service offered by SpaceX. It's hoped companies other than tech billionaire Elon Musk's SpaceX outfit will come in to expand the market. The aerospace giant Boeing already has a contract with Nasa to do so.  Mr Musk himself said he was overcome with emotion watching his hardware take the astronauts to orbit.  "I think this is something that should get people right in the heart, of anyone that has the spirit of exploration. And the US is the distillation of the spirit of exploration," he told reporters. The new capability the CEO is offering will end the reliance of Nasa on Russian rockets and capsules to get its people to the International Space Station (ISS). It was a point picked up on by President Donald Trump, who came to Florida to watch the launch. "Past leaders put the US at the mercy of foreign nations to send our astronauts into orbit. Not anymore," he said. "Today we once again proudly launched American astronauts on American rockets - the best in the world - from right here on American soil." Hurley's and Behnken's Dragon ship left Earth atop its Falcon-9 rocket precisely on time - at 15:22 EDT (19:22 GMT / 20:22 BST). Meteorologists had forecast only a 50:50 chance of favourable conditions around Florida's Kennedy Space Center at lift-off, but, as luck would have it, the weather window stayed open and the SpaceX controllers grabbed their opportunity. The Falcon soared off the spaceport's famous 39A pad to head northeast out over the Atlantic. After two-and-a-half minutes, the lower-stage of the vehicle had separated to return to a drone ship at sea. And after a further six minutes, the crew were safely inserted into orbit.  Hurley and Behnken are set to arrive at the ISS on Sunday. They'll use some of the intervening hours to test equipment and procedures in their capsule, including doing some manual flying.  Although the Dragon capsule is a fully automated vehicle capable of finding its own way to the ISS, the crew needs to prepare for all eventualities and that means knowing exactly how the ship will behave in their hands. Uniquely, the Dragon has no control stick; all flight commands must be entered via a touchscreen panel. One of their first tasks in orbit was simply to name their ship - in the tradition of past US spacefarers, all the way back to the Mercury programme. Radioing down to Earth, they announced it would be called Endeavour.  Doug Hurley said: "We chose Endeavour for a few reasons: One, because of this incredible endeavour that Nasa, SpaceX and the US have been on since the end of the shuttle programme back in 2011. The other reason is a little more personal to Bob and I. We both had our first flights on shuttle Endeavour and it just meant so much to us to carry on that name." Endeavour was the ship commanded by British explorer James Cook on his voyage to Australia in the late 18th Century. Hurley's and Behnken's stay at the ISS is not known currently, but is likely to be somewhere between one and four months.  Assuming their return to a splashdown in the Atlantic is as smooth as the launch, Nasa and SpaceX will move directly into the full terms of their new relationship. The company has a $2.6bn (£2.1bn) contract with the agency to fly six operational crew missions to the ISS.  The first of these should occur at the end August, or very soon after; and will see four astronauts climb aboard a Dragon rather than just the two we saw on this occasion. Saturday's launch went ahead against the background of the coronavirus crisis.  Crowds were encouraged not to assemble near the Kennedy complex, and Nasa itself severely limited the number of guests invited on to the spaceport. As for the astronauts, they would ordinarily observe a quarantine before flight. But again Nasa reduced the number of people the men could come into contact with in the weeks running up to launch, and those that had to get close were instructed to wear masks. For SpaceX, Saturday marked another significant milestone for the company which was founded just 18 years ago. The firm has upended the launcher industry with its reusable vehicles and is now pioneering a new market-driven approach to human spaceflight. It hasn't all been plain sailing - as evidenced by a spectacular explosion at the  firm's prototyping facility in Boca Chica, Texas, on Friday. But the company has routinely proved naysayers wrong, and Nasa believes its relationship with Elon Musk will save billion of dollars that can be diverted to the more complex task of getting people back to the Moon and then to Mars.     "We want to establish a commercial environment in low-Earth orbit so that we can focus on the hard job of exploring beyond our home planet, to establish a sustained presence on the Moon and get to Mars to establish a presence there," said Bob Cabana, the director at Kennedy.  "We can't do that if we're locked here in low-Earth orbit, and commercial crew - that's the beginning of a whole new era of spaceflight." Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmosShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Violence has broken out again in the US as protests continue across the country over the killing of an unarmed black man by police in the state on Minnesota on Monday.  George Floyd died in police custody while an officer kneeled on his neck to pin him down.  In Minnesota - where he was killed - the state's entire national guard was mobilised on Saturday to try to prevent further trouble. All pictures copyrightedShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window US President Donald Trump has said he will postpone this year's G7 summit and invite leaders of other countries to participate in the talks. "I don't feel that... it properly represents what's going on in the world. It's a very outdated group of countries," Mr Trump said on Saturday. The G7 group, which the US hosts this year, includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the UK.  The president said Russia, South Korea, Australia and India should be invited. Speaking to reporters on board the presidential plane Air Force One, Mr Trump said that he was delaying the summit - which was scheduled to take place later in June  - until September.  Last week, Mr Trump said it might be possible to hold a gathering at the White House and potentially parts of Camp David, the US presidential country retreat, despite concerns over the coronavirus pandemic. German Chancellor Angela Merkel later rejected the president's invitation to attend a summit in person because of the outbreak.  Her spokesman thanked Mr Trump, but said the German leader "cannot agree to her personal participation, to a journey to Washington". On Friday, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson "agreed on the importance of convening the G7 in person in the near future" following a conversation with the US president, the White House said in a statement.  The G7 - or Group of Seven - leaders were scheduled to meet by videoconference in June in response to Covid-19. The group is made up of the seven of the world's largest economies. It regards itself as "a community of values", with freedom and human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and prosperity and sustainable development as its key principles.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Microsoft is to replace dozens of contract journalists on its MSN website and use automated systems to select news stories, US and UK media report. The curating of  stories from news organisations and selection of headlines and pictures for the MSN site is currently done by  journalists. Artificial intelligence will perform these news production tasks, sources told the Seattle Times.   Microsoft said it was part of an evaluation of its business.  The US tech giant said in a statement: "Like all companies, we evaluate our business on a regular basis. This can result in increased investment in some places and, from time to time, redeployment in others. These decisions are not the result of the current pandemic." Microsoft, like some other tech companies, pays news organisations to use their content on its website. But it employs journalists to decide which stories to display and how they are presented.  Around 50 contract news producers will lose their jobs at the end of June, the Seattle Times reports, but a team of full-time journalists will remain. "It's demoralising to think machines can replace us but there you go," one of those facing redundancy told the paper. Some  sacked journalists warned that artificial intelligence may not be fully familiar with strict editorial guidelines, and could end up letting through inappropriate stories.  Twenty-seven of those losing their jobs are employed by the UK's PA Media, the Guardian reports.  One journalist quoted in the paper said: "I spend all my time reading about how automation and AI is going to take all our jobs - now it's taken mine."  Microsoft is one of many tech companies experimenting with forms of so-called robot journalism to cut costs.   Google is also investing in projects to understand how it might work.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window President Donald Trump has been criticised at home and abroad after announcing he is ending US ties with the World Health Organization (WHO).  The EU urged him to reconsider the decision, while Germany's health minister called it a "disappointing setback for international health". The head of the US Senate's health committee, a Republican like Mr Trump, said now was not the time to leave. Mr Trump said the WHO had failed to hold China to account over coronavirus. The WHO, a UN agency that helps countries promote healthcare and tackle outbreaks of disease, has faced regular criticism from the US president over its handling of the outbreak. He suspended US funding to the WHO last month and on Friday permanently halted the payment, which last year stood at more than $400m (£324m; €360m), the largest single contribution at around 15% of its total budget. European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and top EU diplomat, Josep Borrell, said in a statement: "In the face of this global threat, now is the time for enhanced co-operation and common solutions. Actions that weaken international results must be avoided. "We urge the US to reconsider its announced decision." German Health Minister Jens Spahn described the setback as "disappointing" although he accepted the WHO "needs reform". "The EU must take a leading role and engage more financially," he said. A spokesperson for the UK said: "Coronavirus is a global challenge and the World Health Organization has an important role to play in leading the international health response. We have no plans to withdraw our funding." The chair of the US Senate Health Committee, Lamar Alexander, said the move could hamper the discovery of a vaccine against Covid-19 and urged a reversal of the decision in the "strongest terms possible". "Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis has been dealt with, not in the middle of it," he said. Ex-presidential candidate and US Senator Elizabeth Warren tweeted: "President Trump's decision to leave the @WHO during a global pandemic alienates our allies, undermines our global leadership, and threatens the health of the American people." Anders Nordstrom, a former WHO acting director general, said he was "deeply concerned" the move would increase political tension at a time when "we need to have global solidarity". South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize called the decision "unfortunate".  WHO member states agreed on 19 May to set up an independent inquiry into the global response to the pandemic. Speaking  at the White House, Mr Trump said: "Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs."  It is not clear when any US withdrawal might take place. A 1948 agreement between the US and WHO allows for one year's notice before pulling out.  Mr Trump has accused China of trying to cover up the outbreak of coronavirus, which occurred in the city of Wuhan late last year. He also says that "China has total control over the World Health Organization". The president accused China of pressurising the WHO to "mislead the world" about the virus, without elaborating. "The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government," he said. The US will redirect its funds for the WHO  to other health groups. More than 102,000 people in the US have lost their lives to Covid-19 - by far the biggest death toll in the world.  Opponents say Mr Trump is trying to deflect criticism of his handling of the pandemic ahead of his re-election bid this year. Meanwhile, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has said that Mr Trump is trying to mislead the public, smear China and "shift the blame for [the US's] own incompetent response".Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window My Money is a series looking at how people spend their money - and the sometimes tough decisions they have to make. Here Alyssa Hulme from Heber City in Utah, US, takes us through a week in her life during the coronavirus pandemic. Alyssa, 31, is a freelance writer and educational consultant. She and her husband Randy have four children: Ellie, eight, Max, seven, Amethyst, four and Josie, one. She has been homeschooling her children for a year, months before the pandemic started.  She says her week started out mundane but ended up awesome! She had no idea on Monday where she would be by Sunday.  Over to Alyssa.... I started the day nursing my one-year-old, passed her off to her dad for breakfast and settled down for a solid 45 minutes of private time before spending the rest of the day homeschooling three kids and caring for a baby. After prayer, meditation, and setting my To-Dos for the day, I purchased a course, the 30-day Money Cure with Carol Tuttle for $297 (£242). The course is on gaining financial affluence by clearing out limiting belief systems that don't serve me and replacing them with healthy practices. I have been looking forward to this course for months and have set aside money for this specific purpose.  After that I moved on to begin my day with my family and set everyone to their beginning tasks of piano, chores, and math. We've been homeschooling for a year now, so it's been a pretty typical day. But at lunchtime instead of transitioning to a play date, my husband took our eldest out for one-on-one time to help supplement the loss of activities and outings that has come with Covid-19 lockdowns.  We've been isolating since the end of February and the loss of friends is wearing on us all. During our midday quiet time I taught two online vocal training lessons virtually to students who live in town. Typically they'd come to my home, but we are all still isolating. After that we settled into our evening routine: I made dinner, we ate together and then held our weekly "family night" - an evening of talent shows, games, treats and fun. Total spend: $297 (£242) I continued with the money course. I am starting up a homeschool consulting business and really want to get on the correct and mentally healthy track for the sake of my business. The course has helped me identify several limiting beliefs I can clear up to allow space for more growth. Then, as every weekday for months, we did homeschool, lunch and quiet time in the afternoon.  During quiet time I had a virtual occupational therapy appointment for my one-year-old in order to evaluate her for possible gross motor delays. This is free through our state. Next I had a virtual appointment with my therapist. This costs $110 after insurance and is withdrawn from my Health Saving Account, an account we pay into monthly through my husband's pay check and is tax free. Therapy always really takes it out of me and today it was compounded by some new business issues I'm working through, so my husband picked up dinner from a fastfood Chinese restaurant for $40. It ended up being a lot of food and will last a good two and a half meals for the six of us.  I took the evening to work more on my business and work on my personal goals. Normally I'd go out with friends or go to the gym, but everything is closed, so I get to save more money and get to know my bed a little better. Total spend: $150 (£122) Our big outing today was a trip up the canyon near our home. We spent two hours hiking in the woods, building fairy houses and crossing streams.  Later in the evening I started making plans for next year's homeschool and bought some notebooks and stationery through Target.com. I really dislike online shopping, especially for something as personal as a notebook. As a writer, the size, weight and binding of a notebook really matters to me, so buying from an online shop is very disorienting.  I also bought a summer dress through Target.com, something I can easily nurse in and hope to be able to wear out and about someday here soon when the quarantine is lifted. Our county just moved to a low-risk status, so hopefully my husband and I can start up our weekly date nights soon.  Total spend: $110.52 (£90) Late last night my husband discovered that he will not be returning to work in his office until the end of 2020. We discussed buying a motorhome, living in it for the next six months, renting out our home, and working and doing homeschool on the go. This has been a dream of ours for 10 years, but it never worked out with our careers. Now is the time.  Today we decided to rent an RV (recreational vehicle) - $1,160 for four nights - and start testing out different configurations and living quarters. We decided to head for Yellowstone National Park. Two of the four entrances are now open! I found an RV site and started packing up.  I normally would have gone grocery shopping last night but our travel plans halted that. As a result we were out of food today, so I grabbed lunch from a local shop for $33.50 and dinner from a restaurant for $45. This is not a normal thing for us to just pick up and drop a ton of money on travel, but we have now been in isolation since the end of February and we are all so ready to have a new experience.  This money is coming from the allotment my husband and I had set aside to celebrate our 10 year anniversary tomorrow, but all our kid-free-for-the-first-time-in-five-years international travel plans were squashed by the virus. This will be an interesting substitute.  We parked the RV along our path to Yellowstone at a Walmart. Anyone can park there overnight for free, so it's a great backup to have in mind when travelling.  Total spend: $1,238.50 (£1,005) Happy 10 year anniversary to my husband and me! We celebrate the day by first getting groceries from Walmart and starting the trek to Yellowstone. I bought groceries for the week for $233. Not too bad for a family of six with limited fridge and cupboard space. We stopped to fill up the RV with gas for $213. After several hours of driving, we arrived at the spot I had reserved online yesterday for two nights, a total of $180, including water and electricity plug-ins. It's a little high for an RV site, but it's the closest I could find to the park entrance online and we decided to value time in the park over the cost of the campsite. (All the sites inside the park are closed due to Covid-19.) Total spend: $626 (£510) More blogs from the BBC's My Money Series: We woke early and headed to the park today, but it was closed due to a snowstorm. The road ended up getting 12 inches of snow in some places! Instead of exploring the park we explored the National Forest just outside. Total spend: $0 We got up early again and were able to enter the park! We used our National Parks Pass to get in, so no cost today. We did everything that was open in the park, the big attractions for us being the Upper and Lower falls outlooks, the Grand Prismatic Spring, and Old Faithful.  We saw so much wildlife on this trip, far more than my husband or I even saw here as children. We drove by and hiked next to elk, bison, deer, egrets, and even several bears including a baby and mama bear. We attribute this expanse of wildlife to conservation efforts in the park as well as the closure of the park over the last several months.  The snow also allowed us to see all the animal tracks throughout the park which our kids loved! Old Faithful had the largest crowd, but still very small even for this time of year. We watched with a small, social distancing crowd for the big event, and then headed out. We were tempted to get take-out from the lodge near Old Faithful, but decided to continue eating the food we'd already purchased knowing the lodge food prices are really marked up.  We packed up and exited the park through the South Entrance and drove through Grand Tetons National Park and got gas in Jackson Hole for $176. Wyoming has lots of open land for free parking, but with a new vehicle and dark terrain, we decided to stay overnight in a National Forest campsite a half hour away for $15 for the night. We pulled in about 23:00, paid via cash in a drop box, and enjoyed sleeping next to a river and under a blanket of stars. Total spend: $191 (£156) Thanks for coming with me on my 10 year wedding anniversary trip! This is not the trip we'd planned, but it's been wonderful for our family. We've seen two more National Parks, taken a break from quarantine in a way that feels safe for us, and enjoyed our beautiful nation.  This is an unusually high week for us because we went on our trip. But considering $2,000 of that was spent on our trip and only $613.02 spent on our normal life, I feel good about that. We had $2,000+ saved for months now to go to Barbados later this summer, but we have given up all international travel until the virus settles down. All in, I feel like this was a successful trip. We would not be moving forward with purchasing an RV had we not had the real life experience of travelling in one for an extended period of time.  The remaining $613.02 also reflects an unusual cost in the money course I am taking. I haven't purchased class tuition in probably five years, but being home all the time has me under-stimulated and needing a project.  I think like many families these days, our spending in many areas has decreased (no extracurriculars, less shopping and self-care purchases, almost no gas purchases), but in other ways expanded. I don't bring my kids into any grocery stores anymore, so when my husband is too busy at work to be with them and we run out of food, I get take-out meals. When our mental health is being run down by monotony, we rent RVs, buy our kids bikes, and online shop for anything to help the kids make it through the day. This is survival for us.  I feel very privileged to be financially secure and have a very stable income. While the world is in chaos we will continue to use money as a tool to support our mental wellbeing and try to take advantage of the new opportunities opening up to us.  We're looking for more people to share what they spend their money on. If you're interested, please email my.money@bbc.co.uk or get in touch via our My Money (World) Facebook group, or if you live in the UK, please join our My Money (UK) Facebook group and we'll aim to contact you.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window As the US grapples with the coronavirus outbreak, President Donald Trump and and his likely election rival, Joe Biden, have been locking horns over the handling of the crisis. They've traded accusations about access to China for US health experts, and restrictions on flights from China following the outbreak. We've been looking at some of these claims and counter-claims. President Trump failed to get US health officials into China to inspect the outbreak Mr Biden has said there was "no effort" by the president to get US officials into China to inspect the initial outbreak, and also claimed that "Trump never got a CDC team on the ground in China."  But the Trump administration says it did try. Health Secretary Alex Azar told journalists in late January that the US had offered on 6 January to send a team from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) - an offer that was repeated later that month and in February. The CDC is the top government body responsible for protecting public health. Two US experts did get into China as part of a multinational delegation from the World Health Organization, which went in mid-February. These were Weigong Zhou from the US CDC, and Clifford Lane from the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.  It's also worth adding that the CDC itself has had an office in China for decades (more on this further down). Trump allowed 40,000 people to travel to US from China after the travel ban President Trump and Mr Biden have also clashed over how airtight the restrictions introduced on travel from China are. Mr Trump issued an order on 31 January which stopped foreign nationals who had been in China in the previous two weeks from entering the US. This came into effect on 2 February.  An advert by the Biden campaign claims the president let 40,000 travellers into the US from China after he signed the order. President Trump has hit back, saying these were US citizens coming home.  The order does have exemptions for US citizens, legal residents, and non-citizen relatives with close ties. Flight data analysed by the New York Times shows 40,000 people arrived in the US directly from China in the two months after President Trump's restrictions. We don't know how many of these were US citizens, but it is unlikely they all were  - as President Trump claims - with other exemptions also applying. President Trump cut the numbers of US disease experts in China before the outbreak This claim by Mr Biden refers to the presence of a CDC office inside China, which it's maintained for decades. Joe Biden said: "We had over 44, if I'm not mistaken, people from the CDC in China, to observe what was going on. The president brought home the vast majority of them and I think left only four in place." Mr Biden is right that overall numbers of CDC staff in China have come down significantly, but he's not correct about the numbers.  The CDC website says that as of March this year there were 14 staff in total working in China - three from the US and 11 employed locally. That's down from 47 CDC staff a year earlier, eight of whom were US employees and 39 of whom were locally recruited. Mr Biden further alleges that a key US expert role inside China has not been filled. He said: "We had an American official stationed inside the Chinese disease control agency serving as our eyes and ears. President Trump left the position vacant as the outbreak hit." It's true that the last American - a CDC employee -  left her role in China's disease control agency in 2019 before the coronavirus emerged, and was not replaced. When President Trump was asked about this on 22 March, he said that media reports about the CDC were "100 percent wrong" and then referred the question to Robert Redfield, the CDC director, who was with him.  Mr Redfield said the CDC "China office is actually being augmented, as we speak," but didn't explain why this particular role had ceased. Biden called Trump xenophobic for China travel ban President Trump claims Mr Biden "went crazy" and called him "xenophobic" for banning people entering the US from China. When the order was announced, Mr Biden did say it wasn't the time for "Donald Trump's record of hysterical xenophobia", and the next day tweeted a similar message. The Biden campaign says this wasn't a reference to the travel restrictions, but to the president's overall record in office. Mr Biden has never specifically said he opposed travel restrictions per se, but he did say in March that "travel restrictions based on favouritism and politics, rather than risk, will be counter-productive". He publicly supported the travel ban in early April, with his campaign saying: "Science supported this ban, therefore he did too." President Trump has also said Mr Biden wrote him a letter of apology regarding his comments about the China travel restrictions, but this isn't true, according to the Biden campaign. Read more from Reality Check Send us your questions Follow us on TwitterShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window Tensions between Minneapolis' black community and the police did not start with the death of George Floyd. They have been years in the making. On a hot Thursday morning in the Longfellow neighbourhood of Minneapolis, a 28-year-old father named Nuwman stood outside the Minneapolis Police Department's Third Precinct drinking a large coffee as smoke wafted past from the smouldering ruins of nearby buildings.  It was day three of protests over the death of 46-year-old George Floyd, after a white police officer named Derek Chauvin kneeled on his neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds. Floyd begged for his life before falling unconscious and dying in the street, in full view of witnesses and a rolling mobile phone camera. Four officers, including Chauvin, were fired from the department for their involvement. The previous night, tensions ignited, and for the first time the city saw looting, arson and violence. At least one man died in a shooting at a pawn shop. "This is everyday. Everyday that these police officers have enforced their protocol has led up to this," said Nuwman, his voice rising with emotion over the din of protesters and sirens. "This is not just a singular moment. This is a cataclysm. A combination of all the things that happened before." That night, protesters stormed the precinct as police cruisers flew out of the rear parking lot, abandoning it to demonstrators who quickly moved from room to room lighting blazes.  The following afternoon, a Friday, saw the arrest of Chauvin by Minnesota's Bureau of Criminal Apprehension. Chauvin has been charged with murder. This is not the first instance of a controversial, police-involved killing in the region. In 2016, Philando Castile was shot and killed by a police officer in a neighbourhood just 15 minutes away from the current epicentre of protest.  In 2017, a Minneapolis officer was charged with the shooting death of Justine Damond after she called to report a possible sexual assault. In 2015, protests erupted over the shooting death of Jamar Clark, a 24-year-old man who was being pursued by Minneapolis officers. All three deaths sparked protest movements and yielded mixed results in terms of prosecution. Yanez was tried and acquitted. Mohamed Noor, Damond's shooter, was sentenced to 12.5 years. No charges were brought in Clark's case.  For some, Floyd's death was the continuation of those stories. "WE SHOULD HAVE BURNT THE CITY DOWN FOR PHILANDO CASTILE," one person posted on social media.  But in some ways, the pictures beamed around the world this week tell a story that's unique.  Demonstrations are occurring in the midst of a historic, global pandemic. The sheer amount of property damage and arson has been staggering. The swiftness with which officers were fired, and the speed in which Chauvin was arrested and charged surprised many. But Minneapolis - while a prosperous city that celebrates liberal policies and politicians - has struggled for years with socioeconomic inequality and segregation. It's a phenomena that's been dubbed the "Minnesota paradox".  The Twin Cities, as Minneapolis and St Paul are known, are still overwhelmingly white - about one-quarter of the population is non-white - and its neighbourhoods are still highly segregated. Most people of colour live on the cities' north sides.  They were shaped by racist red-lining policies dating to the early 20th Century, when black families were not allowed to buy homes in certain neighbourhoods. In the 1960s, the state built a major highway that cut through and destroyed a thriving black community known as Rondo in St Paul.  According to a 2018 study, the rate of black homeownership in the Twin Cities is among the lowest in the nation. Even before the pandemic caused massive layoffs, 10% of black residents were unemployed compared to 4% of whites. That disparity ranks as one of the nation's worst.  In 2016, the average white household in the Twin Cities made about $76,000 a year, while the average black household earned just $32,000. Thirty-two percent of black Twin Citians fell below the poverty line, while only 6.5% of whites did.  Racial disparities persist in the way the community is policed.  After Philando Castile was killed, data released about police traffic stops in the area showed that 44% of stops were black drivers, though the population was only 7% black.  According to the Minneapolis police department's own data, in 2018 55% of drivers stopped for "equipment violations" were black.  As Covid-19 ravages the area, these disparities are sure to worsen, as thousands lose their jobs, and their homes to evictions and foreclosures.  On Friday afternoon, residents of both St Paul and Minneapolis headed into the streets carrying brooms and pails, and slowly began to literally pick up the pieces of the town.  Following the announcement that former officer Chauvin had been jailed and charged with third-degree murder and manslaughter, protesters at Minneapolis City Hall let up a cheer.  But it was quickly replaced by a new demand: "One down, three to go." Follow Jessica on TwitterShare this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window For years, Twitter resisted calls to treat President Trump just like any other user. Then this week, everything changed. On Tech Tent, we examine the conflict between the president and his favourite social media platform. It began on Wednesday. Twitter had been under fire for allowing tweets in which the president shared a far-fetched conspiracy theory about an alleged crime involving a TV presenter and former Republican congressman.  But instead of taking action on those tweets, it fact-checked two others - about postal voting under a new policy which seeks to deter content which might suppress voting. Social media expert Chris Stokel-Walker tells Tech Tent that if Twitter thought limiting action to the area of elections was a cautious first step, it was wrong. "As soon as you start engaging in any sort of moderation or comment on politics, you run the risk of potentially alienating 50% of your audience - and given our very politically fractious times, that is more of a risk than ever," he said. Having taken that first step, and seeing President Trump immediately go nuclear and threatening to go so far as to shut the social media platform down, Twitter might have been tempted to go quiet for a bit. Instead, it chose escalation.  In the early hours of Friday morning, in a tweet about the protests in Minneapolis over the death of a black man, Mr Trump warned: "when the looting starts, the shooting starts".  Twitter's moderation team swung into action - after consulting CEO Jack Dorsey - and obscured the tweet with a message saying that rules on glorifying violence had been broken. Users could still see the tweet by clicking through that message, but sharing it was made harder.  A few hours later, as the president woke up, the official White House account simply repeated the offending tweet. We watched with bated breath to see what would happen and, sure enough, Twitter's moderators slapped the same warning on the tweet. It is difficult to see either side backing down now.  The White House is busy scouring Twitter to find examples of other world leaders who have glorified violence without any comeback. Others are finding all sorts of old Trump tweets that appear to have broken the rules by, for instance, spreading misinformation about treatments for coronavirus. Jack Dorsey, who had appeared very reluctant to apply anything but the most light-touch regulation, now finds himself faced with the unappealing prospect of cracking down on world leaders far and wide. Meanwhile, there is not exactly much solidarity being shown by Facebook. In general, it has been a more tightly-moderated platform than Twitter, but Mark Zuckerberg has made it clear he has no intention of following Jack Dorsey's lead when it comes to fact checking politicians. Donald Trump's Facebook page has simply replicated the posts which fell foul of Twitter - with no sign of fact-checking or finger-wagging. "This is the kind of thing that Donald Trump revels in," says Chris Stokel-Walker, "an ex-reality TV star who likes to stir the pot. He's now managed to set Mark Zuckerberg and Jack Dorsey against each other." For all the rage about freedom of speech from the president - and remember Twitter as a private company can do what it likes in that area - he seems unlikely to kill what has become his main platform for getting his message out.  Like the fighting couple in some dodgy romcom, Trump and Twitter need each other - though one suspects Jack Dorsey might be tempted to throw the President out and change the locks.Share this with Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Copy this link These are external links and will open in a new window It's an uncanny and almost tragically perfect piece of symmetry. The number of US servicemen and women killed in Korea, Vietnam, Iraq and Afghanistan - over an aggregate 44 years of fighting - is almost exactly the same as the number of Americans who've now lost their lives to coronavirus in just three months of America's war against the hidden enemy, as Donald Trump likes to refer to Covid-19.  He also calls it the Chinese virus, but we'll come to that. Now I know you could replace the Covid-19 deaths with US cancer deaths or road crash victims and come up with similarly stark or perhaps even more dramatic statistics. But sadly, fatal car accidents and terminal tumours have always been with us. A global pandemic has not. And out of nowhere 100,000 American families are this spring mourning loved ones, whose lives have been cut short by this virus. 1.5m Americans have been infected. Many millions more have lost their jobs. One of Donald Trump's first acts when he moved into the Oval Office in 2017, was to restore to a central position the bust of Winston Churchill that Barack Obama had moved out in favour of a bronze of Martin Luther King Jr.  And in this fight against coronavirus, Donald Trump does see himself as a war leader; the property tycoon who could work a shovel on a Manhattan building site was also going to be shown to be a man of destiny -  the untried field-marshal, with a baton in his knapsack ready to command the troops to get the job done. But also keeping the home fires burning, and lifting the morale of a frightened nation. It has all been far more jagged than that.  Donald Trump is not imbued with the gift of soaring Churchillian rhetoric; there have been no "we shall fight them on the beaches" moments. Nor has he conjured the Rooseveltian calm when delivering one of his fireside chats. There have been days of infamy, but they have been invariably generated by things that the president has said, rather than what has been done to the United States.  And anyway, for a self-styled war leader he must at least face the charge of ignoring the warnings about the enemy he was confronting in the early stages, appearing more Neville Chamberlain than Winston Churchill. Korean War (1950-1953): 36,500 Vietnam War (1961-1975): 58,000 Iraq War (2003-2011): 4,500 Afghanistan (2001-today): 2,000 Covid-19 (Feb 2020- today): 100,000 The initial period of the US effort against the virus was marked by one significant action in late January, when the president stopped non-American visitors from China entering the United States. That was smart and decisive (although some have argued, to my mind unfairly, that Trump should have stopped anyone and everyone coming from China). But any tactical advantage that had given the administration was squandered in February where there was a month of inaction and incompetence.  Attempts to roll out testing were woeful (the president was badly let down by the Centers for Disease Control). Procurement of PPE was weak. The federal emergency stockpile of vital equipment was like Old Mother Hubbard's cupboard: bare. The president had also disbanded the entire global-health-security unit of the National Security Council. He also eliminated the US government's $30m (£23m) Complex Crises Fund. These were decisions that badly undermined the American ability to counter the disease.  All while he was on a determined mission to tell America that this thing from China was no biggie, and certainly was not going to upend the economy - the centrepiece of his strategy for re-election in November.  It is worth just going through the president's quotes from these critical few weeks.  Jan 22: "It's one person coming in from China and we have it under control. It's going to be just fine." Feb 2: "We pretty much shut it down coming in from China." Feb 10: "Looks like by April, you know, in theory, when it gets a little warmer, it miraculously goes away. I hope that's true. But we're doing great in our country. China, I spoke with President Xi, and they're working very, very hard. And I think it's going to all work out fine." Feb 11: "In our country, we only have, basically, 12 cases and most of those people are recovering and some cases fully recovered. So it's actually less." Feb 24: "The coronavirus is very much under control in the USA. We are in contact with everyone and all relevant countries. CDC and World Health have been working hard and very smart. Stock market starting to look very good to me!" Feb 26: "When you have 15 people, and the 15 within a couple of days is going to be down to close to zero, that's a pretty good job we've done." Crisis? What crisis?  But in March the contours became clearer, and it was not pretty. The news was all grim. Because of a lack of testing, there had been extensive community transmission - people were coming down with coronavirus, but it wasn't clear where they'd contracted it, who they'd caught it from, how they'd got it. The "track and trace" (the language of coronavirus that we've all now become so familiar with) was now impossible.  Although the first reported outbreak was out on the West Coast in Washington state, Covid-19 was playing a mean sleight of hand on us all. This pesky virus got us to look in one direction, when we really should have been focused on the other. Where Covid-19 was really letting rip was on the East Coast, especially in the biggest, richest and most densely populated city in the US, New York, with devastating consequences.  If the city was quickly to become the most worrying centre of the outbreak, the borough of Queens became the epicentre of the epicentre - the district where Donald Trump had grown up. And the visuals from there drove home to Americans - and to the president - the scale of the unfolding disaster. At Elmhurst Hospital, refrigerated container lorries were parked to store bodies that the morgue had no way of dealing with. I interviewed a young doctor from there at the height of the pandemic who painted a harrowing picture of daily life and death.  In the richest city of the wealthiest country on the planet, we saw nurses heading into intensive care units to treat Covid patients wearing bin liners as PPE, because that is all they had. We saw the ER consultant putting on his ski goggles to examine a patient, because the hospital didn't have the right face masks. We saw mass graves being dug on a small island in the Bronx to accommodate all those who'd died with no next of kin, or with no money for a funeral. Like the inscription on the tomb of the unknown soldiers in the Commonwealth war graves: "known unto God".  America, this all-mighty superpower, with enough weaponry to blow the planet to smithereens many times over, was looking ragged and not in control of events in its own backyard. It's hard to see this chapter of America's story going down as another moment of this nation's greatness. If Queens is where Donald Trump grew up, Manhattan is where he made his money - and nothing says money like Wall Street, the pulse and oxygen monitor of the US economy. And the president likes to stand over its bed to take its vitals hourly. But as it became clear that the US economy was going to have to shut down, so the Dow Jones index went diving downwards - vertiginous drops, causing circuit-breakers to kick in, and causing the president and his advisers to fret that his whole re-election strategy had gone up in flames.  But then the precipitous falls would be followed by dizzying rises as word came from Capitol Hill that lawmakers might be close to some agreement to inject gazillions into the cryogenically frozen economy.  More than 25,000 of the deaths have come from New York state, and Governor Andrew Cuomo became coronavirus's first political superstar. His daily factual and highly detailed presentation of what was happening, where it was happening, what was being done to mitigate, and what still needed to be done, became appointment-to-view television across the US. Cometh the hour and all that. This lifelong Democrat - who also grew up in Queens - was drawing admiring glances from a lot of Republicans, and with many Democrats quietly thinking: "I wish he was our candidate for president in November, and not Joe Biden." Like an old-fashioned newspaper, he delineated clearly what was fact and what was opinion. In the space of 45 highly polished minutes he would deliver the news stories of New York's descent into the abyss, and then give you his op-ed column. He admitted his response wasn't perfect, acknowledging he could have acted earlier. And he also gave praise to Donald Trump where he thought it was due; he tweaked the tail of the administration when he thought it needed a bit of a kicking. At around the same time as Cuomo was capturing the nation's attention, Donald Trump decided he would go daily with a White House briefing too. It is hard to overstate how much Donald Trump loves - and needs - the roar of the crowd. Governing is dull. Campaigning - and the adoration from his rallies - is what gives him energy. It's what gets his heart pumping and the blood circulating. And because of the lockdown, here was a president who was deprived of the two things he yearns for most - a day out playing golf, and an evening rally addressing raucous, loving crowds. There were also no heads of states visiting him, where the cameras would record his thoughts on whatever was the subject du jour. He was being starved of the oxygen of publicity, and so daily to the briefing room he would come, with us reporters playing the most unlikely role as his ventilator. Being intubated to a bunch of journalists he's never trusted was never going to end well.   Vice President Mike Pence had been given the task of heading the coronavirus taskforce. A poisoned chalice it may have been, but it's a task he's performed with aplomb. He is across the detail of everything, and was the perfect link person between the different branches of government and the White House; between the different branches of government and the governors of the 50 states. And two other things he did with considerable deftness. He never forgot to praise the president to the hilt, saluting him for his leadership. Woe betide you if you don't. And he never forgets to display empathy - talking about the suffering of the American people, expressing condolences to those who'd lost loved ones. That is something that came easily to Mr Pence and is something Donald Trump hardly ever does.  Though there would be a revolving cast of characters in the briefing room - the two other stalwarts were Dr Anthony Fauci, the independent-minded head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and Dr Deborah Birx, who used to head the fight against Aids for the Obama administration, and was made the coronavirus response co-ordinator. These were the scientists who wanted to ensure that the judgements the president made were evidence based. They had limited success.   No sooner had the US economy gone into shutdown than other, more business-minded voices were in Donald Trump's other ear telling him that the remedy his doctors were prescribing was worse than the disease. Let people go back to work. Reopen the economy. The loss of jobs, the recession, depression, the devastation of the US economy will be worse than the death toll. And you could see where the president's sympathies lay. First he advocated that the US should reopen by Easter, with churches packed. Only to have that kyboshed by doctors Birx and Fauci. When asked about this Dr Fauci gave an object lesson in disagreeing with the president without disagreeing: "You don't set the timeline, the virus does," he told reporters. Masterful. But the impetus to reopen became overwhelming. The jobless totals were soaring, and Donald Trump saw his "strong economy" election strategy disappearing down the plug-hole.  And all the while the death toll was mounting, ever, ever higher. What started as a trickle at the end of February became a gradual flow. The gradual flow then became a steady stream. And by late April the stream became a torrent.  Coronavirus was indiscriminating about who it infected, but selective with who it killed. The statistics were striking - if you were black or Latino you were much more likely to die. Longstanding health inequalities came to the fore. If you'd grown up in an impoverished background, you were more likely to have the pre-existing conditions - the co-morbidities, as they say in the US - that would prove so deadly with coronavirus: hypertension, diabetes, obesity, heart disease. And if you live in densely packed, multi-generational households, and work in factories or meat-packing plants where social distancing is impossible, then - surprise, surprise - you're more likely to contract the disease.  The US Surgeon General, Admiral Jerome Adams - himself African American - addressed this directly, and spoke powerfully about it. But he seemed to pay a price for doing so - he was not seen again at another White House news conference. Someone must have taken exception to what he said. The president's own erratic performances at these briefings were coming to be seen as counterproductive by Republican strategists. The president's poll numbers were going down. I was at a couple of the most extraordinary briefings. There was the one where the president made it all about himself. His staff had produced a lengthy campaign style video detailing how brilliantly he'd handled the outbreak - for the first 45 minutes of this over two-hour-long news conference, Donald Trump spoke about himself. He spoke about how unfair the media was to him. It was "poor me". Not once in those first 45 minutes did he talk about those who'd died, nor about those who'd been infected. Nor about the millions who were fretting about how they were going to pay the bills having lost their jobs. I was also at the briefing where the president spoke about injecting disinfectant to treat coronavirus. Dr Birx, who was sitting at the side of the briefing room, looked like she was in some kind of gastric agony as she listened to the president, but never felt she had the space to stand up and say: "This is dangerous nonsense." His performance was lampooned and ridiculed.  But as the criticism piled up against the president, so Donald Trump bristled.  And there were two culprits who'd be forced onto the perp walk of shame. The first was China. Despite his early praise for President Xi, China was now in Donald Trump's cross-hairs. China had lied and covered up. This was the Wuhan flu, the city where the outbreak originated. The Chinese had taken actions to protect themselves, but not anyone else. Worse still in Donald Trump's eyes, China had intimidated the World Health Organization, and its weak, pusillanimous leadership had allowed itself to be cowed by Beijing, and therefore had failed to warn the world sufficiently of the dangers that this new strain of virus presented. In this, sure, there was blame shifting - but President Trump had a point, both about shortcomings of the WHO, and the candour of the Chinese leadership.  All of this fired up the Trump base, but it was as nothing compared with the president shifting firmly in favour of reopening the US economy. Wild demonstrations sprang up - particularly in Democrat-run states, which the president did nothing to tamp down. In California, surfer dudes, backed by libertarian Republicans and small business owners, protested at beachside locations in a bizarre Baywatch meets the Tea Party moment. In Michigan, heavily armed men carrying assault rifles and dressed as though they were auditioning as extras for a movie about mercenaries laid siege to the State House.  A public health emergency, with a virus that is no respecter of whether you are a Democrat or Republican, Trump lover or Trump hater, had divided and bitterly polarised the country. Like everything else.  If you want the country to reopen you're with Trump (broadly); if you're wary about reopening too soon you're a Dem (broadly). If you love the fact that the president has ignored the advice of the Food and Drug Administration over the dangers of hydroxychloroquine, and decided to take it anyway, then you are firmly in his camp.  And although the president has publicly stated that everyone ought to wear a mask, the fact that he chooses not to is taken as a clear dog-whistle to his supporters that you really don't have to. In the face - so to speak - of all medical advice, the mask is being seen by some as an act of provocation, a symbol of the nanny state.  Shopkeepers who insist that customers wear a mask are being intimidated by thuggish gangs patrolling outside their premises. It is grotesque. They are being ripped up and destroyed as though a symbol of oppression by the "Deep State", rather than a small effort to halt the spread of the disease. Our film crews have been jostled and abused for wearing face masks while filming these protesters. Needless to say, these people are no respecters of social distancing.  And now that America has reached this grim milestone of 100,000 dead, what of the future?  In public opinion there does seem to be a battle going on between head versus heart. Science pitted against gut instinct. The role of the state against the rights of the individual.  If a phone app that can track and trace your movements is the vital tool to prevent a second wave of the virus, it relies on a sizeable majority of the population handing over their personal data for it to be effective. Will that happen? In a country whose founding fathers fretted about the dangers of the state becoming too mighty, I just cannot see it (and this goes far wider than pro- and anti-Trump). And what if, please God, an effective vaccine is found? You can be sure that the anti-vaxx brigade (and remember Donald Trump was once one of its advocates) will be out in force, stirring up doubts about the science, the medicine, the state, Big Brother, you name it.  Donald Trump has boasted repeatedly in the past couple of months that no country has done more coronavirus testing that then USA. "It's not even close," he says. No country has built more ventilators or supplied so much PPE to its front-line workers, he says. The president has claimed that other world leaders are jealous of what the US has managed to achieve. Really? Germany, South Korea, Taiwan, Australia, New Zealand, Greece: envious?  Hard to believe somehow.  No country has had more deaths, more infections. Anywhere else, so far, is not even close.