High angle view of video conference with teacher on laptop at home. College student learning maths ... [+] while watching online webinar, listening audio course. Top view of girl in video call with personal tutor on computer, distance and e-learning education concept. When colleges and universities announced indefinite shutdowns and students were abruptly ushered out of their dorms, AnitaB.org and the Last Mile Education Fund collaborated to launch a Covid-19 Emergency Fund for undergraduate women in computing.  The initial investment was exhausted in just six days. Students who were already walking a tightrope to afford college had rapidly fallen into crisis level financial insecurity.  To date, this fund has supported more than 250 young women in computing with emergency grants up to $599. Throughout this process, our teams saw firsthand the critical role financial security places in achieving a college education.  Device access is an issue - even for tech majors. One of the biggest surprises was the number of applicants asking for funds to repair, rent, or purchase a laptop. Students reported not being able to access online classes or participate in coursework due to campus computer labs being closed.  How can a student compete as a technology major without access to a computer of their own?  The opportunity to explore, tinker and create is at the foundation of success in technology. If we truly want to diversify the tech industry, academic institutions must equip all students with the same set of tools. The digital divide is wider than you think. The most frequently cited need was access to the internet. As students disbursed to their homes or other off-campus refuges, access to the internet became critical.  Many students reported trying to participate in online classes while parked outside McDonald’s, or running up hefty data charges using their phones as hotspots. Rural and Native American students were particularly affected, often having no broadband option in their homes and driving long distances daily to attend their remote classes. Now that virtual is the norm, access to the internet is a basic need. Home does not necessarily mean ‘safe haven’. While scores of international students were stranded by dorm evictions and closed borders, a surprising number of domestic applicants indicated that going home wasn’t an option.  In some cases, the student couldn’t risk potentially endangering a medically fragile family member. In others, home wasn’t an option due to space, distance, or the home environment. Some students simply didn’t have a home to go to, like students who have aged out of foster care, or those from abusive homes.  A campus is often a safe haven for young adults. Home does not have the same context for all students. Low-income students are one paycheck or unexpected bill from poverty. Again and again, applicants cited losing employment - both on and off campus - resulting in housing, food and transportation insecurity among others.  An early applicant stated, “I don’t have the money to stockpile food like everyone else and I’m afraid it will run out.” Many others were stressed about contributing to family expenses, or being “one more mouth to feed” in a financially fragile household.  These young people simply do not have a safety net - whether it be a credit card, a family member, or the institution they attend. And the CARES Act left out students over the age of 16, which is most college students. It is clear that students have fallen through the cracks of the U.S. Covid-19 response. They have lost jobs both on and off campus - but often do not qualify to receive unemployment benefits. College students are ineligible for the $1,200 recovery rebate checks themselves, but their parents also cannot claim the $500 recovery rebate for them as a qualifying child. Many institutions have not refunded students for the housing and meal plans from the Spring term, and many won't be issuing refunds at all.  Even worse, CARES Act funding that was targeted for students in crisis has still largely not reached them, and both DACA and international students are excluded from receiving Federal assistance. Meanwhile, thousands of internships have been cancelled, and alternate summer employment opportunities have evaporated.  As the Covid-19 crisis continues, we are facing the potential attrition of thousands of low-income youth from the education pipeline. A National College Attainment Network analysis from early May 2020 shows that nearly 250,000 fewer students from the lowest-income backgrounds have renewed their FAFSA for the 2020-21 cycle, and FAFSA renewals were down nearly 5 percent overall (4.7 percent) compared to last year - an anticipated decline of more than 350,000 students. When people say, ‘children are the future’, it’s both a fact and appeal for a better-built world. Investing in future talent is critical to societal growth and economic security. This weekend, a team of inspirational leaders including former president and first lady, Barack and Michelle Obama will come together to host “Dear Class of 2020”, a virtual commencement on YouTube celebrating the accomplishment and importance of receiving an education - especially during these challenging times. With Covid-19 dramatically changing the global economy and our ways of work, incubating homegrown talent is one of the nation’s most critical responsibilities – both to ensure we have the talent to support economic recovery and to address the egregious income inequality plaguing our nation. At present, an anticipated 350,000 students may not return for the next academic year, and only a fraction will ever complete their degrees. This loss inhibits the strides taken to bridge the inclusion gaps and does long lasting damage to the uniquely diverse talent pipeline in the U.S.  Covid-19 has laid bare the danger of our assumptions when imagining the resources it takes to support students for success in post-secondary education. Students need resources beyond annual financial aid, grants and scholarships that only cover costs for books, tuition and fees. They need resources to thrive.  To ensure the next generation of leaders, thinkers and problem solvers receive the education they need to reach for what comes next, it’s time to invest in the value of potential and build a system that offers academic equity to all. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusIn this Jan. 14, 2019 photo, a patient sits in the living room of her apartment in the Brooklyn ... [+] borough of New York during a telemedicine video conference with Dr. Deborah Mulligan. Telemedicine often involves diagnosing and treating a new health problem but is also used to keep tabs on an existing, long-term condition. (AP Photo/Mark Lennihan) In mid-March, stay-at-home orders aimed at ‘flattening the curve’ transformed the US economy as businesses closed their doors and put millions out of work. Even healthcare systems — the ostensible beneficiaries of these actions — were negatively impacted, as they saw their lucrative fee-for-service revenue streams abruptly dry up. In the spirit of enabling healthcare systems to care for the anticipated onslaught of Covid-19 patients, elective surgeries and ‘non-essential’ procedures were curtailed, the lifeblood of most delivery organizations. Ironically, as I noted in a prior Forbes post, a significant number of these organizations saw empty parking lots, empty ERs, and empty beds, as they furloughed or laid off thousands of staff.  Two and a half months later some of the largest healthcare systems in the country — some traded on the New York Stock Exchange — have received billions of dollars in aid from the Federal Government as a means of offsetting losses caused by the pandemic. In the short term these same institutions have tried to bolster their revenues with telehealth visits, but the reimbursement for telehealth, even though it has increased in the last couple of months, doesn’t come close to the reimbursement for face-to-face encounters.  For most of these systems, executives are anxiously awaiting the return of the past and getting back to what they know best — making money in a specialty dominated, fee-for-service, transaction- based business with precious little accountability for outcomes and value. On the other hand, those few institutions that have made meaningful commitments to value-based approaches in which they get paid to keep people healthy have fared a lot better. Despite the elimination of elective surgeries, their PMPM payments come in reliably each month. It does not matter if patients are seen through telehealth or office visits.  Most businesses outside of healthcare actively look for ways to reconfigure their product or service to yield a predictable revenue stream. But conventional healthcare systems have fought that idea for years. They have ironically called that ‘going at risk’. But if that is going at risk, what can we call what is going on now? In my firm’s annual State of Population Health Survey, the biggest barrier to moving toward a value-based at-risk model has been executives’ fear of potential loss if they move away from fee-for-service. But the coronavirus has taught us that the potential for loss in fee-for-service is bottomless.  The landscape is strewn with the wreckage of business models that outlived their functionality — from Blockbuster to Sears to Kodak to Toys R Us and a whole host of others.  Yet healthcare continues to get bailed out — denying the reality that the current model is increasingly out of step with what consumers would value and technology has made possible. In an echo of the past, many hospitals are resisting the migration of hip and knee replacements to ambulatory surgery centers, as they did in the late 1980s and early 1990s when technology enabled ophthalmologists to safely remove cataracts in their offices.  In all fairness, the demise of Blockbuster did not happen overnight. There was a period when vending machines in supermarkets offered convenience for consumers wanting to pick up a video. These, in turn, were replaced by streaming services like Netflix. The reality is that we might still be renting video cassettes from Blockbuster if consumers had not the opportunity to vote with their feet for options that better met their needs at lower cost. But for healthcare, that opportunity is rapidly taking shape. Challengers like CVS, Walgreens, and Walmart, and any number of other, technology enabled competitors are popping up. Amazon recently rolled out its own telehealth offering, called Amazon Care, to its nearly 54,000 employees in the Seattle area. The app-based service connects employees and their family members to a physician or nurse practitioner through live chat or video, with the option for in-person follow up services from a registered nurse. In combination with its other acquisitions, Amazon is on track to reinvent outpatient healthcare like Netflix reinvented movie-watching.  Healthcare delivery organizations cannot help but see telehealth as a poor second choice to in-person visits — unless they have embraced value-based care – in which case they see it as an important tool in the delivery of cost effective healthcare services across the continuum. For those organizations, capitated payment tied to outcomes that matter allows them to deliver the right care by the right provider in the right setting at the right time. Even CMS has come to embrace this. Seema Verma announced this week that value-based care can help ensure healthcare resiliency, noting that capitated payments enable providers ‘to weather fluctuations in utilization,’ and that value-based payments can provide ‘stable, predictable revenue.’ The challenge ahead for delivery organizations will be embracing a different model, building the competencies to execute on it, and the cultural commitment to sustain it. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusThe market opened higher on Friday after a better than expected monthly jobs report—showing a gain of 2.5 million—gave investors confidence that the economy is beginning to stabilize after months of damage caused by the coronavirus pandemic. Employment data stunned Wall Street with a record number of jobs added to the economy last month. The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 3.8%, over 1,000 points, by midday Friday, while the S&P 500 was up 3% and the tech-heavy Nasdaq gained 2.2%. Stocks got a boost after the biggest monthly job gains on record: The U.S. economy added 2.5 million jobs in May, versus an expected decline of 8.3 million jobs.  The unemployment rate fell to 13.3% last month, which beat estimates of 19.5%, according to the Labor Department. The latest jobs data is a promising sign that the economy is beginning to stabilize after months of damage to the labor market caused by business shutdowns during the coronavirus pandemic. Stocks that would benefit from an economic reopening, like airlines, continued to soar on Friday: American Airlines was up 20%, United Airlines 15% and Delta 10%.  Casino stocks such as MGM Resorts, Wynn Resorts and Las Vegas Sands also jumped after Nevada allowed casinos to reopen on Thursday. “Today was a shocking jobs number – and for the first time this year it was a positive shock – it’s very encouraging to see workers being recalled back by their employers and the unemployment rate dropped back down in May,” says Chris Zaccarelli, chief investment officer for Independent Advisor Alliance. “At 13.3%, we are still at a higher rate than any that we hit during the Financial Crisis in 2007-2009, but as long as that continues to move lower, it will show that the re-opening of the economy is proceeding smoothly.” Stocks have been moving higher this week, despite widespread civil unrest across the country stemming from the death of George Floyd. Wall Street doesn’t see the mass protests as a threat to either corporate earnings or an economic recovery, at least not yet: The S&P 500 is up over 4% since the unrest began on May 26.  Friday’s jobs report comes after another 1.9 million people filed new unemployment claims last week—but the pace of those claims has been slowing for nine straight weeks. The market has had a strong start so far in June, building on back-to-back monthly gains, thanks to optimism about reopening the economy. Both the Dow and S&P rose more than 4% in May, after rallying more than 11% in April. The S&P is now up over 40% from its coronavirus crisis-level low on March 23, 2020. The Nasdaq-100 index briefly jumped to a new record high on Thursday, becoming the first major index to fully erase its losses from the coronavirus downturn, before paring back gains. The Unemployment Rate Fell To 13.3% In May (Forbes) Stocks Fall After Larger-Than-Expected Job Losses (Forbes) Dow Jumps 500 Points As Investors Focus On Reopening The Economy (Forbes) As Las Vegas Reopens, Should Investors Bet On Casino Stocks Rebounding? (Forbes) Mass Protests Across The U.S. Have No Impact On Stocks, What Gives? (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusAs Gap Inc. reported disappointing fiscal first quarter results after coronavirus forced store ... [+] closings, the Gap brand's decreased demand showed the brand continues to lose its cool. (Photo by Dave Rushen/SOPA Images/LightRocket via Getty Images) The rub isn’t the 43% decline in first-quarter sales Gap Inc. 
  
  GPS 
  reported Thursday after it shut about 90% of its global store fleet because of the coronavirus.  Commerce Department data showed U.S. clothing retailers saw a nearly 90% slide in April retail sales from a year earlier, following a 50% plunge in March, and San Francisco-based Gap wasn’t immune from the shutdown impact. Old Navy, the company’s biggest unit, which represented about half of the retailer’s total sales, saw its physical-store receipts slump 60% in the quarter that ended May 2. Gap’s eponymous brand, the second-largest unit, accounting for 28% of the company’s $16 billion in sales last year, posted a 64% slide in brick-and-mortar store sales. But here’s the contrast. While Old Navy and the company’s much smaller Athleta chain saw declining physical-store sales, online demand for each of them shot up, a familiar pattern seen in the results of other apparel retailers including American Eagle Outfitters 
  
  AEO 
 , Abercrombie & Fitch 
  
  ANF 
  and Urban Outfitters 
  
  URBN 
 . On the other hand, the Gap brand’s online sales fell 5%, suggesting the iconic American brand’s struggle to regain its footing as a key wardrobe staple shows few signs of easing. The same goes for the decline at more-upscale Banana Republic, the company’s third-largest label, representing about 15% of the retailer’s business.  Gap management acknowledged there’s plenty of work to do with its eponymous brand and said it will continue to trim the brand’s physical footprint, using the pandemic as an opportunity to exit or renegotiate lease terms with landlords. “Gap has been a challenge for us,” CEO Sonia Syngal said on a conference call late Thursday, adding that one of the revamp strategies for the label includes instilling in its design team “creative confidence.” But few details were given on how that would come about.  “Years of inconsistent execution have depleted brand health,” she said. As both Gap and Banana Republic fell out of favor, their combined store count declined by about 170 stores in the past two years, to 718 last year, while the better-performing Old Navy and Athleta together rose by more than 180 stores, to nearly 1,400. With looting dealing a major blow to retailers already reeling from the coronavirus, Gap said it will continue to lower costs. The company has suspended dividends and stock buybacks and halted rent payments while stores were closed. It also plans to cut 15% of jobs across company, with most of the headcount reduction expected to come from its eponymous unit. Gap said that more than 1,500 stores, or a little over half of the total, had been reopened in North America and that it expects to have a “vast majority” reopened this month. Similar to other merchants that have reopened stores, Gap observed better performance at stores outside malls. Meanwhile, about 20 stores recently suffered “extensive damage” from looters amid protests over the death of George Floyd, the company said.  Gap’s shares dropped 6% in after-hours trading after it posted a bigger-than-expected loss. The stock was also under pressure after the largest U.S. mall operator, Simon Property 
  
  SPG 
 , reportedly sued Gap for choosing not to pay its rents amid the shutdown. With various wild cards complicating its turnaround plans, the Gap brand’s bid to be cool again will only get harder. Related on Forbes: Looting is dealing a major blow to retailers already reeling from coronavirus Related on Forbes: Coronavirus isn’t hurting all discretionary spending  Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusCAMBRIDGE, MA - MAY 18: Moderna Therapeutics headquarters in Cambridge, MA are pictured on May 18, ... [+] 2020. Moderna is one of a number of companies making progress on a Coronavirus vaccine. (Photo by Blake Nissen for The Boston Globe via Getty Images) Biotech company Moderna, which is among the leaders in the race to develop a coronavirus vaccine, on Thursday named a sector veteran its new finance chief, as it gears up to launch commercial operations and potentially oversee explosive growth if it releases a successful treatment. The Cambridge, Massachusetts-based company said David Meline will assume the post of CFO June 8. Meline will arrive at Moderna from drugmaker Amgen, where he was the top financial executive between 2014 and 2019, according to press statements. Before Amgen, Meline filled the CFO position for industrial conglomerate 3M. Meline brings with him strong international and commercial experience, said Ray Jordan, head of corporate affairs for Moderna. During his time at Amgen, Meline also demonstrated the ability to maintain fiscal discipline even in the face of robust growth, Jordan added. “He took on some financial transformation projects at Amgen even as Amgen was growing,” Jordan said to Forbes. Meline joins Moderna at a time when the company, which is vying to pioneer a treatment for the virus that causes Covid-19, is preparing to pivot from a purely developmental phase to building commercial operations. The company currently has nine vaccines in the pipeline. “As we prepare for the phase three studies of our SARS-CoV-2 vaccine and our CMV vaccine, we are entering another critical phase for the company,” said Stéphane Bancel, chief executive officer of Moderna in a media statement. “We have started to build commercial capabilities and started to set up commercial subsidiaries in several countries.”  Investors also see Moderna’s potential. Share prices for the company have soared 209% over the last 12 months, according to FactSet. “I look forward to joining the Moderna team to help the company enter this new phase of growth and assist the full build out of its business model, including positive impact on large populations and entry into new geographies,” Meline said in a press statement.  In a recent research report, Edward Tenthoff, a senior biotech analyst for Piper Sandler Cos, noted that in 2019 vaccines were among the top four therapeutic areas by revenue with global sales exceeding $33 billion. GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, Pfizer and Sanofi are the largest global vaccine manufacturers with cumulative 2019 sales of $25 billion, he added.  Biotech companies have scrambled to address the coronavirus pandemic. “Moderna, I really believe has risen to the challenge—they are obviously on the frontline,” Tenthoff said to Forbes. “They were the first company to present phase one data.” However, it’s not clear if Moderna would climb the ranks of larger biotech rivals if it releases a successful coronavirus treatment. “Great question,” Tenthoff said. “It will sure be a big start.”  Moderna, with a market cap of $22.2 billion, collected annual revenue of $60.2 million in 2019, down 55% from 2018. According to regulatory documents, the company explained the slide in sales as partially the result of lower revenue from its strategic alliances, including partnerships with AstraZeneca and Merck. Meline replaces outgoing CFO Lorence Kim, who announced his departure plans in May. Before joining Moderna, Kim was managing director and co-head of the U.S. biotechnology investment banking effort at Goldman Sachs. “I spoke with him, he’s leaving to pursue other interests,” Tentoff said. “He feels that the company is in a strong financial position and he’s leaving to do something different.” Moderna didn’t release further details of Kim’s plans after his departure. Kim prepares to exit following some controversy. Kim was among top executives of the company who reaped a windfall of millions from selling shares only days after Moderna released the promising results of early trials of its Covid-19 vaccine in May. Some company observers questioned whether the executives timed the announcement to benefit from a temporary surge of share prices. The company has said that the shares were sold as part of an automatic arrangement aiming to protect against insider trading concerns.  “Executive sales are made under pre-planned 10b5-1 plans, which are executed during open trading windows in accordance with the Company’s insider trading policy,” the company said in a statement to Forbes. “As a matter of practice, Moderna does not intend to comment on any alleged or potential litigation or investigation; nor on purchases or sales by individual investors or groups.” A spokesperson for the Securities and Exchange Commission declined to comment on the stock sale. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusCiting an inability to verify the data from the study authors, top medical journal the Lancet retracted a controversial study published in May that found that hydroxychloroquine is not an effective treatment against Covid-19, and could actually increase risk for coronavirus death. Update 6/4/20: the New England Journal of Medicine also retracted a paper written by the same group.  A bottle and pills of Hydroxychloroquine sit on a counter at Rock Canyon Pharmacy in Provo, Utah, on ... [+] May 20, 2020. (Photo by GEORGE FREY/AFP via Getty Images) Earlier this week, scientists and researchers on social media pointed out that the authors of the study, affiliated with a small healthcare analytics company called Surgisphere, likely didn’t have access to all the data that they reported in the study.  The study was one of several that have found no link between hydroxychloroquine and improvement in Covid-19, but it contributed to the World Health Organization’s decision to halt its trials of hydroxychloroquine.  Three of the study’s four co-authors wrote that they attempted to conduct an independent review of the data provided by Surgisphere, but the company, led by Sapan Desai who was also a coauthor on the study, refused to share the data.  Since they could not verify the data, the three study coauthors asked that the medical journal retract their paper.  Yesterday, the World Health Organization announced it would be resuming its trials of hydroxychloroquine in Covid-19 patients.  Yesterday, the World Health Organization announced it would be resuming its trials of hydroxychloroquine in Covid-19 patients after its Data Safety Monitoring Board reviewed evidence and found no increased risk of death from the medication in Covid-19 patients.  “We all entered this collaboration to contribute in good faith and at a time of great need during the Covid-19 pandemic,” wrote the three study coauthors, “We deeply apologize to you, the editors, and the journal readership for any embarrassment or inconvenience that this may have caused.”  Full coverage and live updates on the Coronavirus Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced New York will open Covid-19 testing facilities to protesters in the wake of demonstrations responding to George Floyd’s killing, allegedly by a Minneapolis police officer, as health officials nationwide work to ramp up testing after mass rallies. New York has opened up state Covid-19 testing facilities to anyone who has attended a protest.  From Thursday, New York’s state Covid-19 testing facilities will expand testing to anyone who took part in a demonstration, Cuomo said. All of the thousands of New Yorkers who protested statewide have a “civic duty” to be tested for COVID-19, Cuomo said, as well to assume they have been infected with the virus and inform others they may have been exposed, “out of an abundance of caution.” Because of the lag in numbers of actual viral infections and confirmed cases, anyone who was infected at a protest may not show symptoms—if they show symptoms at all—until four or five days after they were infected, and if seriously ill, may not be admitted to the hospital until as long as 12 days after, Curomo said, which gives the virus plenty of time to spread. Protests across the U.S. have spurred local health authorities to encourage protesters to get tested for the virus—Minnesota Health Commissioner Jan Malcolm said this week that anyone involved in demonstrations or community cleanups afterward should be tested for Covid-19, even if they show no symptoms. Philadelphia officials have offered new Covid-19 guidelines to recommend anyone who was at a protest to get a test a week after any possible exposure at a demonstration, and to watch for developing symptoms over the next two weeks. But in Los Angeles, officials shut down about half of the roughly 40 government testing sites in the county for at least some time since Saturday, with 15 still closed or with reduced operation as of Wednesday, the Los Angeles Times reported, drawing criticism from the local community. Health officials previously warned that mass protests could exacerbate the spread of the virus, while some states have pushed back their planned Covid-19 restriction rollbacks as a result of the protests and potential virus exposure. “Dealing with the coronavirus in and of itself was the greatest challenge that a government in society has had in modern day. You put on top of that the situation with the murder of Mr. Floyd and the unrest after, those two compound each other,” Cuomo told reporters at a press conference Thursday. Americans have turned out in droves to protest racism and police brutality since the death of George Floyd last week, who died after Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin pinned him to the ground by knee to the neck. Chauvin and three other officers involved in the arrest were fired the next day. Chauvin has been charged with second degree unintentional murder, and the other three with aiding and abetting. According to the Associated Press, more than 10,000 people have been arrested in the U.S. during the ensuing protests, with Los Angeles having the largest chunk of arrests, followed by New York, and then by Dallas and Philadelphia.  Some Coronavirus Reopenings Delayed Because Of Protests—And Chicago, Philadelphia Reconsider (Forbes) Experts Fear Minneapolis Protests Will Trigger Spike In Coronavirus Cases (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusStocks took a hit from disappointing jobless claims data this morning as investors continued to assess the prospects for an economic recovery from the coronavirus pandemic. The market fell for the first time in June. The Dow Jones Industrial Average was flat on Thursday, while the S&P 500 fell 0.3% and the tech-heavy Nasdaq lost 0.7%. The Nasdaq-100 index briefly jumped to a new record high, becoming the first major index to fully erase its losses from the coronavirus downturn, before paring back gains. Stocks opened lower on the back of disappointing U.S. jobless claims data: Another 1.9 million Americans filed for unemployment in the week ending May 30, 2020, higher than the 1.8 million expected.  While jobless claims have been slowing steadily, continuing claims were higher than expected and increased from last week. The damage caused by the coronavirus evidently continues to take a major toll on the economy.  The market’s losses were kept in check, however, after the European Central Bank said it would buy an additional 600 billion euros’ worth of government bonds, bringing the total for its Pandemic Emergency Purchase Program to more than 1.35 trillion euros. With Las Vegas reopening on Thursday, casino stocks rallied: MGM Resorts rose more than 6%, while Wynn Resorts was up over 1%.  Other stocks that would directly benefit from a reopening also continued to move higher on Thursday, including airlines and some retailers. That’s how many Americans have filed for unemployment since the coronavirus crisis began. Stocks rallied for three straight days earlier this week, moving higher despite widespread civil unrest across the country stemming from the death of George Floyd. Wall Street doesn’t see the mass protests as a threat to either corporate earnings or an economic recovery, at least not yet: The S&P 500 is up over 4% since the unrest began on May 26.  The market has moved steadily higher so far in June, building on back-to-back monthly gains, thanks to optimism about reopening the economy. Both the Dow and S&P rose more than 4% in May, after rallying more than 11% in April. The S&P is now up over 40% from its coronavirus crisis-level low on March 23, 2020. Dow Jumps 500 Points As Investors Focus On Reopening The Economy (Forbes) Jobless Claims Slowed To 1.9 Million Last Week, But The Labor Market Crisis Isn’t Over Yet (Forbes) As Las Vegas Reopens, Should Investors Bet On Casino Stocks Rebounding? (Forbes) Mass Protests Across The U.S. Have No Impact On Stocks, What Gives? (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusSpring Township, PA - June 3: During a protest march Wednesday afternoon June 3, 2020 in support of ... [+] the Black Lives Matter movement and in response to the killing of George Floyd. The march started at Wilson High School and went to the Spring Township Police Department on 724. Many of the marchers wore masks as a precaution against the spread of coronavirus. (Photo by Ben Hasty/MediaNews Group/Reading Eagle via Getty Images) As anti-racism protests erupt across the world and people gather in mass, it’s easy to forget that we’re still in the middle of a pandemic. Despite health officials' continued warnings to the public that gathering in large groups is dangerous and increases the risk of spreading Covid-19, people are still going out with only a mask and gloves for protection.  Yes, there’s good scientific evidence to suggest that a mask will help reduce the risk of getting the coronavirus, but it doesn’t reduce the risk to zero.  “Despite the serious and important issues that are causing these protests, we can’t forget that closeness with our fellow citizens is not a good thing. It feeds the virus,” former FDA Associate Commissioner and Professor Peter Pitts told NBC in a recent interview.  But even before the protests, it seemed like people were willing to take more risks as soon as they put on personal protective equipment, like a mask or gloves.  Sometimes they’re small slips, like not staying the recommended 6-feet apart. Other times, they’re more damning like crowding into a park on a sunny day.  So why does a simple piece of fabric or latex make us feel like we’re Covid-proof?   “There are psychological factors that make us not anticipate unintended consequences,” explains social psychologist and assistant professor at Washington State University Joyce Ehlinger, mentioning how prohibition actually increased alcohol consumption.  First, the way we assess risk and make decisions is inherently flawed.  “People are not so good at assessing exposure to a risk,” says Ann Bostrom, a professor at University of Washington whose research focuses on risk perception, communication, and management.  She notes how both technically and subjectively it’s hard to evaluate by how much the risk of infection increases if we are outside versus inside.  Sure, right now we know that being in an elevator is riskier than being in a park, but we can’t quantify by how much. Is it 2%? 5%? 20%? Honestly, no one knows.  “Trying to adjust our mask usage to correspond with that is hard to do,” adds Bostrom. Also, while we’d all love to think we logically assess risk, leaving our emotions out of it, that’s not the case – especially in a pandemic.  According to a new study slated to be published later this year in the journal Frontiers, during a time of pandemic emotions are a huge part of how we look at risk.   “Risk perception is based in feelings,” says the paper’s lead author Spike Lee, an associate professor of marketing at University of Toronto. He goes on to explain that because the current pandemic is constantly on our minds but also highly uncertain we tend to act irrationally.   “What we found is that in times of a contagious pandemic if you make that disease salient then participants overestimate their risk in all domains,” he says, adding that this “risk overgeneralization” leads to risk-averse behaviors like stockpiling enough toilet paper to last you until the next century or something less irrational like wearing a mask or gloves.  And unlike bulk buying toilet paper, wearing a mask is a good way to lessen the risk of Covid-19 but many people don’t think further than the mask or gloves. It’s like as soon as people put on a mask or gloves they forget about all the other risk avoidance behaviors – like social distancing, hand washing, etc. – that also helps reduce the risk of catching or spreading the virus. “When people think about assessing any kind of risk or making a decision of some sort, there’s often a tendency to focus on what’s right in front of you,” explains Bostrom.  “So that means you may not be considering more than one aspect of the problem or one potential solution to the problem. So that can lead to an anchoring or a specific focus on what comes to mind first. It is an efficient approach but it can lead to satisfying too soon. ” Bostrom continues, saying that because protective equipment has been front and center talking point since the beginning of the pandemic this can result in bounded cognition or bounded rationality.  The term, which first made an appearance in the 50’s thanks to the work of Herbert Simon, is the idea that when humans make decisions rationality is limited, so we often go for a satisfactory solution, not necessarily an optimal one.   “People are wearing masks and doing things, not necessarily consciously. We make a decision to do something and then we think we’ve achieved most of the solution. Some of that’s unintentional, we’re making a simplification and not thinking about the weaknesses of that simplification,” she said.  Plus as both Ehlinger and Bostrom point out, our simplified decisions are then further validated because we don’t get sick right after.  All the usual cues and symptoms of risk aren’t there because coronavirus can be asymptomatic, or if it does show symptoms they can take up to two weeks to present.   “The fact that we can [go out] and come home and not instantly start coughing and dying of Covid-19 gives us information that’s highly available to us that says ‘I guess we’re not sick’,” says Ehlinger.  In psychology this is called an availability bias and is one of the many shortcuts our brain uses when making decisions.  Another one that’s at fault for the false sense of security we have when we put masks on is the confirmation bias – our natural tendency to look for proof of our own assumptions. “We think ‘I’m probably not going to get sick’ [and] we come up with reasons why we’re not going to get sick just out of fear,” says Ehlinger.  “We’ll come up with some logic to make us believe that we’re not at risk. Just the desire to believe that we’re not going to die is going to lead you to believe that the idea that maybe we’re safe.”  These types of bias reinforce our idea that masks or gloves are foolproof protection against the coronavirus. Ehlinger reasons that this type of thinking can lure us into a false sense of security and makes us overconfident in their ability to keep us safe.  And this false sense of security, coupled with overconfidence as well as our poor ability to evaluate risks can lead to what Bostrom calls compensatory risk  – which is the theory that people adjust their behavior to the perceived level of risk.  For example, a study done in 1994 found that people drove faster and more recklessly when they wore seatbelts.  Another study looking at bicycle helmets found “evidence to suggest that some cyclists ride less cautiously when helmeted because they feel more protected”.  And it’s not just protective equipment that can have this effect, one study published in 2011 found that dietary supplements gave people an illusory sense of invulnerability.  So when you take all these biases and inherently flawed ways of thinking into consideration it totally makes sense why wearing a mask gives us the feeling of being invincible in the face of Covid-19.  And while as Bostrom says there’s always better ways to communicate so people are aware of the flaws in their thinking at least wearing a mask is something. Like with bicycle helmets and seatbelts, the positives vastly outweigh the negatives. So wear the mask. Just try and remember that they’re not perfect. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusPrescription drug costs One of the core tenets of economics is that resource allocation decisions invariably involve trade-offs. As an illustration, there is an opportunity cost of allocating a large amount of resources towards the novel coronavirus. The dollars spent on combating the coronavirus can’t be used to address other diseases or conditions. This doesn’t mean that a substantial amount of resources shouldn’t be spent on developing and eventually paying for coronavirus vaccines or Covid-19 treatments. It does, however, imply that policymakers be made aware of foregone alternative uses of resources. Policymakers must account for the extent to which society can afford to crowd out non-Covid-19 resources. A budget impact analysis evaluates whether an investment, an intervention, or a service, is affordable. In the absence of information about opportunity cost, decision makers cannot achieve an efficient use of resources. In other words, merely performing a cost-effectiveness analysis to evaluate the return on investment, or whether a medical intervention or service provides value relative to an existing standard of care, isn’t sufficient. But, in the literature the budget impact consideration has tended to play second fiddle to cost-effectiveness. Naturally, policymakers want to know whether a medical technology or service is cost-effective. For that purpose, analysts calculate cost-per-Quality Adjusted Life Year (QALY) estimates. But, a positive cost-per-QALY estimate for a new treatment, even if a product is relatively cost-effective, implies that more is being spent to get more benefit. The resources currently used to fund the existing technology are insufficient to support the new treatment. And, the efficiency of adopting the new treatment is contingent on there being additional resources to support its uptake. Here, budget impact refers to the total costs that the intervention’s reimbursement and use entail with respect to one part of the healthcare system, pharmaceutical care, or to the entire healthcare system, taking into account the possible reallocation of resources across budgets or within sectors of the healthcare system.  In reallocating resources to address the novel coronavirus, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) states that new drug and biologics programs are being impacted by “considerable increases in Covid-19 related work.” As a result, the agency said “it’s possible that we will not be able to sustain our current performance level in meeting goal dates.”  Janet Woodcock, Director of the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research at FDA, has temporarily suspended her work on FDA approvals. She is 100% focused on coronavirus vaccines and Covid-19 treatments. This is understandable given the nature of the Covid-19 crisis. Nevertheless, policymakers must be made aware of the opportunity costs of these kinds of reallocation decisions. With deficits running at record levels, it’ll be extraordinarily difficult to expand budgets to sustain non-Covid-19 related work at the desired levels. Of course, this is not simply a resource or R&D issue. Suppose the Trump Administration’s Operation Warp Speed delivers on its promise of a vaccine by year’s end. If the price of the vaccine is “too high” there will be a sizeable opportunity cost. For example, when a closed system with a fixed budget, like the Department of Veterans Affairs or a state Medicaid program, “overpays” in one area, it must extract resources from elsewhere in the budget. So, if a new vaccine costs $100 million more than an alternative that provides the same level of benefit, that’s $100 million less that can be allocated towards other services that would improve patients’ health.  The economic rationale for carrying out budget impact analyses is opportunity cost, or benefits forgone, by using resources in one way rather than another. By choosing to draw down the budget in one way, decision makers forgo other opportunities to use the same resources. Budget impact analyses lay bare the individuals or groups who lose out - those who bear the opportunity cost of spending resources in accordance with one decision rule rather than another. And, these individuals or groups may be suffering from non-Covid-19 diseases and conditions. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusTener Veenema, a fellow at the American Academy of Nursing; and Diane Meyer, an analyst at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security explain why nurses were not prepared for Covid-19, and how systems can change to better handle future public health emergencies. Despite the 2009 influenza pandemic and the 2014 Ebola outbreak, America's nurses were not properly ... [+] prepared for a major pandemic like this one. As Covid-19 continues to spread across the United States, it has become evident that the country was woefully unprepared to staff, mobilize and protect our nation’s nurses in order to meet the surge of patients presenting with a severe and contagious respiratory disease. This lack of workforce preparedness is particularly shocking in light of warnings that a new pandemic would eventually emerge and the abundance of guidance and lessons learned from other events such as the 2009-2010 H1N1 pandemic and the 2013-2016 Ebola outbreak. Nurses on the frontlines are working under extraordinary stressful circumstances and without the proper personal protective equipment (PPE) and other resources needed to keep themselves, their patients, and their own families safe. A recent survey of 32,000 nurses revealed that 87% of nurses are afraid to go to work and 36% reported having to care for an infectious patient despite inadequate PPE. Nurses reported an urgent need for education on caring for Covid-19 patients, PPE usage, personal safety and Covid-19 testing. Nursing represents the largest sector of the global healthcare workforce. Ideally, nurses would play a critical role in preparedness and response initiatives including strategic planning, community engagement, health education and promotion, and rapid implementation of interventions safeguarding public health. So what are some of the factors that have contributed to a lack of preparedness within the national nursing workforce during this pandemic and how do we address them? Nurses currently lack emergency preparedness education Nursing schools don't typically teach pandemic preparedness responses, including appropriate PPE ... [+] use. It is critical for nurses to have the knowledge, skills and willingness to respond to pandemics. Schools of Nursing over the past 20 years have resisted integrating public health emergency preparedness and response (PHEPR) content into nursing curricula. They cite the trend of shorter and accelerated nursing programs has resulted in less time for what is deemed ‘non-essential’ content.  Following 9/11 and the 2001 Anthrax attacks, there was interest from several schools of nursing to add core competencies for nursing PHEPR; however, these efforts were short-lived.  While schools of nursing teach students the basics of infection control and prevention, they lack training for disease surveillance, containment, and PPE use.  As a result, new graduates enter the profession lacking critical knowledge necessary to keep themselves and their patients safe. In the workplace, lack of knowledge is compounded as hospitals fail to make comprehensive continuing education programs available to nurses. We can address this issue by making baccalaureate and post-graduate emergency preparedness programs mandatory. The public health system has not drilled nurses on emergency situations Budget cuts have reduced the number of emergency drills performed by hospitals. Experiential exercises enable healthcare professionals to better understand their roles during an emergency. These exercises are critical in identifying gaps that can severely limit a real-time response. The Joint Commission requires that hospitals conduct emergency drills twice a year, but budget cuts have limited the scope, size and number of exercises.  The primary source for funding preparedness is through the Public Health Emergency Preparedness Cooperative Agreement and the Hospital Preparedness Program (HPP). But both programs have experienced significant funding cuts since 2003. Fortunately, the recent passage of the CARES Act includes significant funding for public health preparedness through the CDC and a $250 million appropriation to the HPP. Going forward, the use of these funds should mandate that all hospital-based and public health drills and exercises are inclusive of nurses in their design, delivery and evaluation. Staffing shortages and a lack of cross-training left nurses ill-prepared to help their patients A shortage of nurses and a lack of cross-training leads to stress and burnout. Nurses have a long history of being understaffed, which has proved catastrophic for pandemic response. The Bureau of Labor and Statistics estimates that an additional 200,000 nurses will be needed each year through 2026 to fill open positions and replace retiring nurses. Investing in growing this workforce, including through education and incentivizing hospitals to maximize their nursing workforce, would greatly improve our ability to respond to future public health emergencies.  Each public health emergency will likely require a different set of competencies. For example, many Covid-19 patients have required critical care, which includes advanced skills that not all nurses possess. A radiological or nuclear emergency would require different competencies, such as decontamination and the management of thermal burns. By cross-training nurses to have skills in multiple different areas such as these, the healthcare system can better prepare itself for the inevitable fluctuations in patient needs that will occur during emergencies.     Despite stress, anxiety and long hours, nurses aren’t provided with adequate mental health care. Nurses are lacking the support they need for their mental health.  During the pandemic, nurses have had to care for sick colleagues, be isolated from friends and family, experience lack of physical security and more. While some hospitals have increased resources available to support the mental health and wellbeing of healthcare workers, these services remain unavailable to many nurses across the U.S. Clinician ‘burnout’ is already common amongst healthcare providers and Covid-19 will likely hasten the adverse emotional and mental health effects upon nurses. The healthcare system should move aggressively towards implementing support services in order to retain staff and keep quality of care high. Nurses have the highest degree of contact — both in terms of time and intimacy — with patients. Investing in nursing will have a significant return on investment for disaster preparedness and response. Now is the time to heed the message that the Covid-19 pandemic has sent to drastically ramp up and expand efforts to prepare nurses for this and future pandemics. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusUnitedHealth Group Inc. signage stands in front of company headquarters in Minnetonka, Minnesota, ... [+] U.S., on Wednesday, March 9, 2016. Photographer: Mike Bradley/Bloomberg UnitedHealth Group will increase investments in affordable housing to $500 million to address social determinants of health as insurers intensify strategies to reduce costs and improve outcomes beyond covering traditional medical treatments. UnitedHealth Group, parent of health insurance giant UnitedHealthcare, said it has reached $500 million in affordable housing investments following an effort announced Thursday to invest $100 million in the Health & Housing Fund, a partnership with Stewards of Affordable Housing for the Future and National Affordable Housing Trust. “This investment will bring more than 1,000 new homes to older adults and families struggling with housing insecurity,” the company said. “UnitedHealth Group, with its UnitedHealthcare and Optum businesses, will also provide an additional $1 million in grants to support on-site health-related services for residents. SAHF will measure, analyze and report on property residents’ health outcomes.” UnitedHealth and rival health insurers that include CVS Health, its Aetna health insurance unit, and Anthem are increasingly investing in an array of services and capital projects to address social determinants from food insecurity and loneliness to homelessness.  Many of these health plans are also paying for an array of services from food and nutrition to housing to make sure patients are getting the right care in the right place and at the right time. And by paying for these new benefits, insurers see cost savings if more expensive hospital care or other adverse health outcomes are avoided down the road. “The connection between housing and health is undeniable and the COVID-19 pandemic has increasingly brought this further to the forefront as an urgent need throughout the communities we serve,” UnitedHealthcare community & state chief executive Heather Cianfrocco, said. “Through our continued leadership and investments in affordable housing and support services, we are helping drive better health outcomes for some of the nation’s most underserved populations.” Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusFrench luxury conglomerate LVMH said it will not buy up shares of Tiffany & Co on the market in a bid to get a lower price for the American jeweler, as the company is seeking to renegotiate its $16.2 billion deal for the retailer hard hit by the coronavirus crisis. AFP via Getty Images The world’s most valuable luxury brand secured a deal to acquire Tiffany & Co in a deal that valued the company at $16.2 billion in November 2019. But the biggest ever luxury deal now looks to be on the rocks as LVMH is reportedly seeking to lower the agreed price. Sources close to negotiations told Reuters that LVMH CEO Bernard Arnault is now looking to convince Tiffany & Co to lower the price of $135 per share agreed in the deal.  LVMH discussed the takeover in a board meeting this week, with management said to be concerned about the coronavirus crisis, the economic fallout and unrest in the U.S. weighing on consumer demand for luxury goods. LVMH is reportedly concerned about Tiffany’s ability to repay its debt obligations. The luxury conglomerate, owned by billionaire Arnault, said in a statement on Thursday: “Considering the recent market rumours, LVMH confirms, on this occasion, that it is not considering buying Tiffany shares on the market.” LVMH’s acquisition was seen as yet another bid for the conglomerate to strengthen its foothold in the U.S. But the deal, which was expected to close mid-2020, is likely to be reconsidered. Tiffany shares plunged 9% on Tuesday after a WWD report suggested the luxury conglomerate was considering backing out of the $16.2 billion deal in pursuit of a cheaper price. November’s deal followed weeks of negotiations between Arnault and Tiffany’s, after Arnault initially made a bid of $120 per share.  Tiffany’s Q1 results are out on Friday. Merger and acquisition deals have slowed dramatically amid the coronavirus crisis, which has forced businesses to close and focus on staying afloat.  M&A Activity Plunges, It Could Get Much Worse As Coronavirus Hits Markets And Prevents Face-To-Face Meetings (Forbes) Louis Vuitton Owner LVMH Buys Tiffany For $16.2 Billion (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusBusinesses that are reopening, or expanding from a skeleton crew, are finding employees sometimes hard to bring back to work. The most successful companies develop a flexible strategy for reemployment of their workers. Why won’t employees come back? A variety of reasons includes unemployment benefits, child care, health and safety and plain old inertia. Most of theses can be overcome, but not easily. Some workers are making more money unemployed. Right now unemployment benefits provide more money than working for employees who earn less than about $30 a hour. (The exact amount varies from state to state.) The bonus payments of $600 a week end on July 31, but until then, not working is better financially for a lot of people. Child care is a challenge for parents. Not only are schools closed, but many summer camps and day cares are closed. Work-arounds may be available, but the options vary from family to family. Some workers may be afraid of catching Covid-19 in the workplace. This fear is more common among older workers, but some younger people have health issues that place them at higher risk. A person may appear to be perfectly healthy but have legitimate health concerns the employer doesn’t know about. And fear is an emotional response, not just a scientific assessment, so some low-risk workers may dread returning to the job site.. Inertia may delay some people’s return to the workplace. They have started new routines, they are comfortable, so don’t feel an urgency to get back to the job. Employers cannot solve all of these problems, but they can do a lot to bring workers back. And the process of helping workers come back will identify those very unlikely to return, so the manager will know how many new hires to find. Communication is the critical first step. (This could be written about any number of employment issues, of course.) Well before the reopening or expansion, the manager should be on the phone with every employee. In these calls, company plans will be explained. The most important part of the conversation, however, are the questions: How are you doing? Any worries or concerns about coming back to work? Eager or hesitant to work? The call is also a chance to have relaxed conversations. Often a hectic workday prevents a manager from getting to know employees well. Good understanding of individual employees is critical to retention, as I argued in my article about Stay Interviews. Those employees worried about health should be asked their opinions about ways to make the job site safer. Rather than the manager reading off a list of changes, ask the employee for suggested safety measures. In some cases, the manager can say the item is on the list. In others, the manager may need to take it under advisement, or reply that the idea was considered but not chosen to be implemented it for particular reasons. Some employees will be reassured of the company’s commitment to safety. (If the conversation fails to reassure the employee, the company may not be thinking clearly enough about the problem, though it’s also possible that some employees simply cannot be reassured.) Child care concerns can sometimes be met through flexible scheduling, though that’s not always feasible. Even if the manager cannot solve the problem, understanding the employee’s issue helps identify workers unlikely to return. The conversation with employees can end with a discussion of purpose. People want to do useful things. A company’s purpose, I’ve written before, is not just making money. A convenience store “helps people get on with their day.” Walmart’s purpose, according to Sam Walton, is “to save people money so they can live better.” Every business helps people, either directly or indirectly. Employees are more dedicated to their work when business leaders remind them of their purpose. Back in the good old days of 2019, the U.S. labor market was tight, with record low unemployment. The demographic driver of the tight market will not only continue, but worsen. Baby boomers are retiring, and the next generation doesn’t match their size. Foreign migration could hold the size of the working-age population steady, but the Covid-19 pandemic is severely slowing down movement of people into this country. The challenge of getting workers back on the job in 2020 is just the beginning of a long, hard slog getting workers in the decade of the 2020s. A plan that begins with talking to employees will distinguish the most successful businesses from those destined to fail. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusGetty As the coronavirus pandemic has forced businesses across the country to change the way they work, many employers have sought to support their workforces through investments in learning and development, or L&D. According to LinkedIn’s “Leading with Learning” report, released on Monday, 56% of L&D leaders believe that their companies have stronger cultures of learning now than before Covid-19. While L&D initiatives have started to move online over the past couple of decades, the transition has been accelerated by the public health crisis. Some 70% of L&D leaders say their CEOs are champions of learning, a 159% increase over the past seven months. On LinkedIn, users consumed 18.8 million hours of content from March to May, a 154% uptick from December to February. L&D teams have played a critical role in helping workforces adapt to telecommuting. Some 66% of L&D professionals believe their function has become a more strategic part of their organizations, while 68% say the level of urgency around launching learning programs has risen significantly.  PayPal is just one company that has encouraged employees to pursue professional development as part of their remote routines. Since instituting a global work-from-home policy in March due to the pandemic, the employer has seen an increase in workers taking courses through its PayPal Online Learning Portal, with those on subjects such as adjusting to and collaborating in new working environments proving most popular. “We believe this demonstrates a strong desire for professional and personal development to navigate a new reality,” says Louise Pentland, EVP and chief business affairs and legal officer at PayPal. “Ensuring we are able to support our employees with the tools and resources necessary to help them adapt to this new environment continues to be a top priority.” As employers have promoted participation in L&D, they’ve invested in making programs more scalable, cost-effective and virtual. Some 60% of L&D professionals plan to spend more on online learning this year, and 66% expect to allocate more funds to virtual instructor-led training than they did in 2019. And they aren’t investing for the short-term: 74% of those surveyed by LinkedIn anticipate conducting more L&D programs online moving forward.  Thor Flosason, senior director of global L&D at Kellogg Company, says his organization was already in the process of scaling its virtual programs when the coronavirus started to spread. As such, his team was able to quickly convert in-person onboarding and leadership development programs into online experiences and has been reconfiguring and redesigning others to better meet the needs of remote workers. “We are self-reflecting and looking at what are the things that we can do differently as L&D professionals, what are the new skill sets, what are some new expectations we need to set for ourselves, how do we support the business differently,” Flosason says. “The pressure is on for L&D.”  Employers expect their investments in L&D will ensure employees have the skills they need to remain competitive in the future. LinkedIn’s survey shows that 74% of L&D professionals are focused on rebuilding or reshaping their organizations for the post-pandemic world. When Verizon closed its physical stores in response to Covid-19, it leveraged L&D to reskill retail workers for new roles in call centers, customer service and telesales. It also created courses to upskill newly remote managers on topics like engaging teams and hosting virtual meetings. “Having a culture of continuous learning is highly important to our employees and to our leaders,” says Lou Tedrick, VP of L&D at Verizon. “The pace with which things change in our environment, the technology, the day to day operations, requires people who can learn constantly. We devote a lot of time to learning.”  The coronavirus crisis has transformed the world of work, making adaptability and resilience more important than ever before. L&D may very well be what organizations need to keep pace. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusGetty Paycheck Protection Plan or PPP loan borrowers are breathing a huge sigh of relief. In the afternoon hours of June 3rd, the Senate unanimously passed by voice vote the Paycheck Protection Plan Flexibility Act. This bill had been approved by the House last week on May 28th. The House’s vote was 417-1 with the lone dissent by Representative Thomas Massie (R-Ky). As the bill heads to President Donald Trump’s desk for signature, across the country, tax professionals are starting to get greater guidance to help their clients who took PPP loans. “The bill doesn’t include everything, but it’s a good start,” says Brian Streig, CPA and Tax Director of Calhoun, Thomson + Matza, LLP in Austin, Texas. “I do think this bill is good for small business owners who have taken out Paycheck Protection Program loans.” The PPP loan program has weathered intense criticism since the passage of the CARES Act. From early confusion regarding the loan application process to the slow pace in which the Small Business Administration (SBA) has released guidance, it has not been an easy path for borrowers. But this new bill provides hope that greater flexibility to the PPP loan forgiveness process will help many small business owners survive the Covid-19 crisis. Longer Period To Spend One of the key provisions in the new bill is that PPP borrowers will now have a longer time period to use the funds. In the original CARES Act, employers were limited to an 8-week period to use the funds. The new bill extends this period to 24 weeks. This change addresses one of the challenges in the PPP loan program. When the initial law was enacted, Congress was focused on providing various types of liquidity. One of the unintended consequences is that the increase in federal unemployment coverage of $600 per week was in conflict directly with the purpose of PPP loans. Some employees were making more on unemployment than when they were employed. As a result, this caused problems for employers seeking to rehire their employees with PPP money. “Some small businesses are finding it hard to get some of their employees to come back to work,” explains Streig. “This could be for a number of reasons but under the original bill, the amount of the loan eligible for forgiveness would be reduced because the employee didn’t come back to work.” Thus, PPP borrowers were in a tough position. Some struggled with the fact that they felt bad asking employees to come back and earn less. Others were frustrated that forgiveness was conditioned in a manner where they lacked control. “The House bill that the Senate passed makes it so the employer won’t be penalized when they calculate the forgiveness amount because an employee doesn’t return to work,” says Streig. Greater Flexibility in Spending The other challenge the PPP loan borrowers were struggling with was that they felt forced to use the loan predominately on payroll when there were other pressing concerns to keep their businesses afloat. “The Treasury and Small Business Administration set a level of 75% of the loan proceeds that needed to be spent on payroll in order to be eligible for forgiveness,” explains Streig. “Congress used this bill to lower the amount to 60%, so now businesses have some more options on how they spend the funds and still get their loan forgiven.” This opens the door for many business owners who are trying to pay rent and utilities. Further the flexibility will allow these small businesses to have a longer lifeline to keep their monthly expenses going. The law also will allow the loan period to be extended. Under the initial plan, the loan would have been a 2-year loan at 1% interest rate. This has been extended to up to 5 years. Again, this will alleviate some of the pressures felt by small businesses. Still Hoping But despite the benefits this new bill will provide, it does not address all the issues that tax professionals were seeking.  Streig is quite pragmatic on what he hopes the SBA does next in its guidance on PPP loans. “I would also like to see a blanket forgiveness for the smaller PPP loans,” he says. “For example, loans under $100,000 or $150,000 would only have a minimal amount of paperwork to get forgiveness. The effort to gather the information and prepare the application for forgiveness can be very burdensome for small businesses.”  As we wait for the President to sign the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act, we can only hope that additional guidance is on its way to continue to help small business owners. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusWith so much change, business leaders shouldn’t ignore the crucial task of rebuilding company ... [+] culture. As companies transformed to respond to the economic crisis brought on by the Covid pandemic, they made dramatic changes to corporate strategies, objectives and processes. With so much change, business leaders shouldn’t ignore the crucial task of rebuilding company culture. Yet, creating a sense of shared purpose virtually, at a distance, presents its own set of unique challenges. Employees may be confused about evolving priorities, new policies, and job security. It’s critical to rebuild a connection for employees to the company’s mission. Finance leaders that are able to empathize with their team’s personal experiences and be human, through sharing humor or grief, forge these links with their team. Before they can contribute, employees have the need to connect. Leaders who are more human by ... [+] sharing humor or grief or a sense of purpose make an impactful connection with their team.  Employees Need to Feel Connected Before They Contribute Employees who feel connected to the company and its leadership stay longer and perform better. Those ties, however, have been tested as the Covid-19 crisis eroded employee morale and created anxiety and depression.  “While execution and process are still important in remote work, leadership style should shift to a focus of making people feel connected to one another and the organization’s purpose,” said Bill Bala, senior vice president of finance at Verb Inc., a leadership development software company. This is easier said than done. Malek Bohsali, managing director at Value Realty, Inc., a real estate management company, said it’s inevitable that performance will slip in the shift to remote work. He predicts that many workplaces will founder and initiatives and project languish undone. “It will not be entirely efficient, effective nor enable us to hit our goals,” he said.     Cultural Misunderstanding Even More Likely on the Virtual Media Leading a remote team comes with its own set of unique obstacles and challenges. In a remote workplace, finance leaders are able to pull together team members without the limit of geography, even reaching beyond national borders. But there are some distances technology cannot easily bridge, said Cindy Zamora, president of an eponymous investment firm. Zamora has been leading virtual teams in finance for 15 years and noted cultural differences between team members from different nations. “Time is required to delve into these personal differences and adjust meetings, management and communication accordingly,” Zamora said. Create Connections With Small Personal Gatherings Online Many workplaces have held virtual town hall meetings and other similar all-hands-on-deck gatherings in hopes of strengthening ties. But some CFOs have looked to smaller, more personal gatherings. “Recently, I hosted a Mother's Day call mid - morning with some of my working colleagues to talk about our children and the silver linings we are finding during working from home,” said Christine Battist, principal and chief financial officer of Avison Young, a commercial real estate firm.  “It was exactly what my colleagues and I needed after a long week.”  Humanize with Sharing Humor or Grief  Some CFOs shared stories of using humor in videoconferences to connect with employees. The use of funny costumes or virtual backdrops or unexpected incidents with children or pets appearing on screen helped these executives appear  more human. While some may dismiss these events as silly and trivial during a global crisis, they are a welcome break from dark times for others. Sharing vulnerabilities is humanizing and  connects us. Some leaders can show empathy by sharing grief. At my former company, Draper Richards Kaplan, a nonprofit foundation, when a colleague died of Covid-19, we started the next team meeting call by allowing everyone to share a remembrance of the lost colleague. I felt the loss personally and it showed. We took some time to grieve.  Employees need that connection before they can plow ahead with the tasks at hand. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusAriana Grande’s list of titles over the years has included Nickelodeon star, YouTube sensation and powerhouse vocalist. Now she’s adding another—meteorologist—if a recent video is any indication. Donning her iconic long ponytail and white graphic eyeliner, she appears to be giving a report from inside a Beverly Hills building while holding a Weather Channel umbrella to shield herself from an unlikely downpour. “Water like misery but the people are still going,” Grande says, imitating a newsy television voice before the minute-long video cuts to Lady Gaga, who is also posing as a weather-woman, but in downtown Los Angeles. Cameras zoom out from each of them to show that the precipitation was being sprayed on them from hoses, just out of frame. Both popstars grin as they say in unison, “Rain on me!”  The parody skit seen on Instagram is a quintessential, quarantine-style promotional video for Grande’s latest collaboration since the onset of coronavirus. She penned her record-breaking fourth No. 1 single  “Rain On Me” with Gaga as a part of the latter’s new album, Chromatica, released on Friday after originally being scheduled to drop April 10.  Grande, the highest-earning female musician on the 2020 Celebrity 100 (No. 17, $72 million), has emerged as a leader in release strategy during the pandemic. While Lady Gaga (No. 88, $38 million) and a slew of other big-name artists delayed albums and tours, Grande—along with rap giants Drake and Travis Scott—rejected the notion that new music should be put on hold.    Before Black Out Tuesday paused the music industry in observance of “long-standing racism and inequality” earlier this week, the pandemic had flipped it on its head. Touring had been the most lucrative avenue for musicians; with live shows on hold along with press runs and major music video productions, artists were sent back to the drawing board in March.  Grande, Scott and Drake leveraged their most valuable assets—social media and their obsessive fan bases—to speak out about #BlackLivesMatter after laying the groundwork for a necessary shift in release strategy: creating interactive musical experiences that fans can participate in from home.  “That is the essence of—in a period like this—what really separates the ones that are smart, creative and can pivot on a dime to be able to put something out that people want,” says David Bakula, head of analytics at Nielsen Music/MRC Data. Audience engagement, especially involving visual content, is crucial to an artist’s success while fans remain in quarantine, Bakula explains. Video music consumption has exploded during Covid-19 while audio music streams have only recently climbed back to normalcy from a 9% decline.  Before collaborating with Gaga, Grande teamed up with Justin Bieber and their shared management team to create a music video for their first-ever duet, “Stuck With U.” Inspired by living in social isolation during Covid-19, the song was released on May 8 to benefit the First Responders Children's Foundation.  The music video—a montage of home videos of dancing in quarantine submitted by fans and celebrities alike on Twitter—has garnered more than 56 million views on YouTube to date. The song debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100.  Travis Scott also managed a No. 1 debut on Billboard and Spotify by reimagining music video visuals. The rapper and producer (No. 83, $39.5 million) made history in April by premiering his hit collaboration with Kid Cudi, “The Scotts,” during a concert series hosted on the popular video game-turned social network Fortnite. In the video, an animated figure of Scott soars through space as multi-colored meteors and stars pulsate to the beat. The virtual venue drew in more than 27 million viewers over the course of five “tour dates” in three days.  Recent consumption patterns show that—contrary to earlier discourse in the industry—the pandemic could be a prime time to release new music, especially when social media trends are incorporated.  According to Nielsen Music/MRC Data’s latest Covid-19 entertainment impact report, 54% of people surveyed said they engaged with new music from popular artists and 67% of people said they’re opting for short form videos like those on TikTok.  Trendsetting mastermind Drake (No. 49, $49 million) saw this coming. The rapper, who has seen a 33% jump in streams during Covid-19 compared to the months prior, called on hip-hop dancer Toosie via DM in March to create the viral dance challenge that launched his single “Toosie Slide.” The track debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100—and, perhaps more critically, helped Drake earn a spot on our list. “That’s pretty much my objective every year,” he once told Forbes. “Other than making good music.” The song—which has remained in the top five on Spotify’s weekly Global Top 200 since its release—sparked anticipation for a new album before Drake dropped his surprise mixtape, Dark Lane Demo Tapes, less than a month later on May 1. That project debuted at No. 2 on the Billboard 200 with no promotion other than Drake’s Instagram post reveal of the cover and tracklist just hours before the release.  The stardom of musicians on the Celebrity 100 may be enough alone for a successful release during the pandemic, but the innovative moves from Drake and his peers on the list are blazing a trail for the medium-term future of music. Rather than try to wait for a return to some form of normalcy, musicians now have a few blueprints to try out in the meantime. “Drake could probably put out an album of him breathing into the microphone, and it would do very well because he's Drake,” Bakula says. “But he is so smart about this stuff. He knows exactly where to go and how to go there.”George Floyd had the coronavirus when he died May 25 while being forcibly restrained by Minneapolis police, according to the Hennepin County Medical Examiner’s autopsy report, but the pathologist determined that COVID-19 did not play a role in Floyd’s death. A mural of George Floyd is shown painted on the side of Scott Food Mart in the Third Ward before a ... [+] march in his honor on June 2, 2020 in Houston, Texas. A postmortem nasal swab found that Floyd had COVID-19 when he died, according to the autopsy report, which was released publicly with permission from Floyd’s family. The medical examiner said Floyd tested positive for the disease on April 3 and was likely asymptomatic when he died. Covid-19 has disproportionately impacted black Americans and Minnesota is no different: Blacks make up 5.3% of the state population, but account for 22% of total Covid-19 cases in the state, according to Minnesota Health Department data. The toxicology report said Floyd had fentanyl and methamphetamine in his system when he died, as well as cannabis compounds and morphine; a press release summarizing the report Monday listed arteriosclerotic and hypertensive heart disease, “fentanyl intoxication” and “recent methamphetamine use” as “other significant conditions” but not “cause of death.” The medical examiner found Floyd died of cardiopulmonary arrest while being restrained, ruling his death a homicide—a different finding than a separate autopsy commissioned by Floyd’s family, which found the cause of death to be asphyxia. "Whether or not he was intoxicated or had medications in his system is irrelevant to the cause of death, which is homicide, which is death by the hand of another," Floyd family attorney Antonio Romanucci told CNN. "The end result, which is George Floyd's death, would not be any different." After a week of protests and riots across the county, all four officers who were on the scene when Floyd was killed have now been charged with felonies. Derek Chauvin, the officer who pinned Floyd to the ground and continued to kneel on his neck while Floyd yelled that he couldn’t breathe, had his charges bumped up to second-degree murder on Wednesday while the other three officers were charged with aiding and abetting. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusDoctor online. The doctor conducts a consultation advises a young woman patient using a gadget. Girl ... [+] talking to a doctor online conference sitting on the sofa at home. Medical consultation online. For the last few months, people going through fertility treatment have had their lives and plans put on hold. As clinics and physicians were advised to suspend all treatments until further notice specialists have had to adapt. The general advice has been that if you can avoid being in a medical setting where you’re more likely to catch Covid-19 then you should. However, patients have been waiting for treatments long before the pandemic. Appointments and treatments have changed throughout the Covid-19 crisis and experts explain why how things may be different forever. On April 24 the American Society for Reproductive Medicine outlined that fertility clinics could start to reopen so long as key procedures are being followed to prevent the spread of Covid-19. Up until that point, many procedures had been suspended throughout the pandemic.  The American College of Surgeons, American Society for Reproductive Medicine, Society of Gynecologic Surgeons, Society of Reproductive Surgeons and other professional organizations released a statement outlining which procedures should be prioritized going forwards. “Patients who want treatment now should contact their physicians. Patients will be prioritized based on the severity of their clinical condition but also how soon they want to be treated,” says leading reproductive endocrinologist, Clinical Professor ACF at Stanford University and past president of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine Dr. David Adamson.  Endometriosis was listed as a high priority diagnosis as fertility clinics reopen and Dr. Adamson says, “patients suffering from endometriosis frequently have pain as well as infertility. These women should see their fertility physician to undergo fertility treatment in conjunction with pain management as soon as possible.” However, as clinics begin to reopen things haven’t gone back to how they were before the Covid-19 crisis.  According to the Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, 7.3 million women of childbearing age in the U.S. have used fertility treatments to get pregnant and it’s a costly process. At-home testing and video checkups have become the norm during lockdown. While clinics re-opening appears to mark a move towards normality, some have said that a lot will need to be done to ease patients anxieties about Covid-19.  “It’s much more expensive to see a reproductive endocrinologist in their office than virtual care. It’s much more cost-effective, accessible and faster to work virtually,” says Amy Beckley, founder of Proov, the first FDA cleared progesterone testing kit, “right now not having to go into an office and still conveying results of tests with your doctor virtually is the safer and more emotionally calming thing to do.”  Instead of visiting their clinicians for advice, medication and tests, patients have had to turn to forums and video consultations. For those going through fertility treatment “there’s really good at home sperm testing kits and you can monitor ovulation which are the two main causes of infertility. If you can pinpoint that one of those things is wrong you can contact your doctor virtually,” says Beckley, “a couple can have fertility success without physically going into a clinic.”  The Economist reported globally tens of millions of surgeries and procedures have had to be postponed and as a consequence, it will take hospitals months to work through the backlog. There are some treatments and procedures you can’t do from home and Dr. Adamson says “every person who has a medical condition they would like assessed or treated should contact their physician to find out how soon they can be seen, even if its a video or phone consultation. That way they can begin to plan how to get the health care they need.” A move to virtual care for IVF and fertility patients has meant that many patients have had to get to grips with at-home testing and video consultations. While it has progressed some peoples fertility journey during lockdown, there are some treatments that can’t be conducted at home and hospitals face months of processing treatments that should have been completed during the crisis. As clinics begin to rebook procedures the virtual changes that have been made during lockdown may continue long after the Covid-19 pandemic. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusSaks's Fifth Avenue flagship beefed up security on Tuesday after looters ransacked other luxury ... [+] chains Monday night.  In Midtown Manhattan on Tuesday afternoon, about eight private security guards—each with a dog—stood in front of Saks’ luxury flagship on Fifth Avenue, where windows boarded up in recent days had been reinforced with a chain-link wire fence after many of the store’s luxury peers were looted the night before. A few short blocks away, ten private security guards were stationed outside Nike 
  
  NKE 
 ’s flashy Fifth Avenue location.  Across town, national chains like Apple 
  
  AAPL 
 , Starbucks 
  
  SBUX 
 , Target 
  
  TGT 
  and Bed, Bath & Beyond 
  
  BBBY 
  as well as regional and local merchants including the supermarket Fairway and bankrupt sporting goods retailer Modell’s were busy boarding up some of their locations, joining a list of others including Louis Vuitton and Uniqlo that had begun to cover up their windows only in the past few days, even though the coronavirus pandemic had kept their stores closed in New York since mid-March.  Several New York shops could be seen cleaning and boarding up after opportunistic looters ransacked many stores, including Macy’s 
  
  M 
  Herald Square flagship, amid protests over the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. The social unrest and upheaval seen in New York and many other cities across the U.S. will likely derail the recovery many retailers and other merchants had been hoping for as cities gradually allow nonessential businesses to reopen. It could even deal a fatal blow to those already struggling for survival, including many small, independent merchants that reportedly may not even have insurance to cover their property damage and losses. As looting and violent protests broke out in cities including New York, Target, CVS and H&M were among national chains that temporarily shut some stores. In New York, which implemented a weeklong curfew on Monday, Shake Shack 
  
  SHAK 
 ’s original outdoor stand at the city’s Madison Square Park, which had remained open throughout the coronavirus pandemic, has been temporarily closed. Grocer Trader Joe’s shortened its hours again after recently extending them, and 24-hour chains like drugstore Rite Aid 
  
  RAD 
  shut stores in the early evening. These closings and shortened hours come just as the city was set to begin Phase 1 of reopening on June 8, allowing nonessential stores to open for curbside or in-store pickup.  A Nike store in New York's Flat Iron neighborhood was broken into by looters.  “It’s gonna be a hard haul for all of us,” Tilman Fertitta, CEO of Landry’s, which owns Bubba Gump Shrimp, Rainforest Cafe and Morton’s The Steakhouse, said on CNBC on Tuesday. “It’s gonna be a long time for New York and other big cities to come back. … The protests are happening in urban areas where a lot of restaurants and retail were just opening up literally in the last seven days. … I’ve been in New York when there were protests, but you didn’t have the few bad apples out there trying to cause the issue.”  A single Kate Spade shoe was left behind after looters ransacked Macy's New York flagship Monday ... [+] night.  Fertitta, who is also the owner of the NBA’s Houston Rockets, said his group of 600-plus restaurants had to close 83 outlets at some point on Monday while at least half a dozen locations were “vandalized.” “It’s really a disappointment as people are just starting to go out again,” he said on CNBC. “The roads were desolate last night in Houston.” While well-resourced retailers like Target could well withstand any business fallout of the looting and store closings, many other retailers may not have the same luck. The pandemic led to a nearly 90% decline in clothing sales in April from a year earlier and a plunge of nearly half of the business for department stores and restaurants during the same time. Macy’s and Nordstrom 
  
  JWN 
  are among chains that have announced some store closing plans that will lead to job cuts. Others including J. Crew, J.C. Penney and Neiman Marcus have filed for bankruptcy protection; Modell’s is set to host liquidation sales after its stores reopen.  As brands seek to strike a sensitive tone and stand with the protesters in championing reform and justice, the perfect storm hitting the retail and foodservice sectors may turn out to be too big for many to weather.  Related on Forbes: Expect Peet’s Coffee to be a bigger contender against Starbucks Related on Forbes: Coronavirus isn’t hurting all discretionary sales   Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusIn May, two prominent medical journals, the Lancet and the New England Journal of Medicine, published papers studying different aspects of hospital patient risk for Covid-19;  those studies are now being scrutinized based on reports that they were based on potentially faulty data from a mysterious private company. Update (6/4/20): The Lancet retracted its study; more information here.  A chemist displays hydroxychloroquine tablets in Mumbai, India, Tuesday, May 19, 2020. (AP ... [+] Photo/Rafiq Maqbool) Hydroxychloroquine, a drug used to treat malaria, was an early contender as a medication that could potentially treat Covid-19.  The study published in the Lancet said that the drug may be linked to an increased risk of death in Covid-19 patients. The study in the New England Journal of Medicine, said that patients who are taking common drugs for heart disease, including ACE inhibitors, are not at higher risk for getting complications from Covid-19.  Both studies were based on data from a Chicago-based company called Surgisphere and co-authored by the company’s CEO, but doctors and scientists have questioned whether the small company fabricated the data. An investigation by the Guardian found that Surgisphere did not work with several of the hospitals it claimed to partner with, and few members of the small company actually have a background in science.  After finding out the trial results may not be authentic, the WHO decided on June 3rd to resume testing hydroxychloroquine as a possible treatment for coronavirus.  President Trump has been a vocal supporter of hydroxychloroquine, declaring on May 19th that he was taking the drug regularly to prevent getting coronavirus, despite the fact that no evidence yet suggests it is effective against the disease.  In addition to the study from Surgisphere, the New England Journal of Medicine notes that two other independent studies report that there is no effect on taking ACE inhibitors on coronavirus severity. There have also been several other independent studies showing that hydroxychloroquine is not effective in treating coronavirus.  “We are issuing an Expression of Concern,” the Lancet editorial board wrote on June 3rd, “to alert readers to the fact that serious scientific questions have been brought to our attention.” Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusThe stock market finished higher on Wednesday as optimism about reopening the economy offset concerns about the coronavirus pandemic, U.S.-China trade tensions and nationwide protests over the death of George Floyd. Wall Street is clinging to optimism for a smooth economic reopening. The Dow Jones Industrial Average was up 2%, over 500 points, on Wednesday, while the S&P 500 rose 1.4% and the tech-heavy Nasdaq gained 0.8%. Stocks posted a third straight day of gains, moving higher on optimism about reopening the economy and despite widespread civil unrest across the country stemming from the death of George Floyd.  Investors don’t see the mass protests as a threat to either corporate earnings or an economic recovery, at least not yet: The S&P 500 is up over 3% since the unrest began on May 26. The market got a boost Wednesday from better-than-expected economic data: ADP and Moody’s Analytics reported that private payrolls fell by another 2.76 million in May—far less than the 8.75 million expected.  “The good news is I think the recession is over, the Covid-19 recession is over, barring another second wave, a major second wave, or real serious policy errors,” Moody’s chief economist Mark Zandi told CNBC. The bad news, however, is that “the recovery will be a slog until there’s a vaccine.” Stocks that would directly benefit from a reopening continued to rally on Wednesday, including airlines, cruise operators, casinos, banks and some retailers.  Zoom shares surged another 7% on Wednesday after the company reported a 169% increase in revenue during the first quarter; the stock is up over 200% so far in 2020. “Good news on vaccines helped stocks in May, but U.S.-China relations and civil unrest could steal the spotlight in June,” warned Lori Calvasina, chief U.S. equity strategist for RBC Capital Markets, in a recent note. “The S&P 500 remains highly news flow driven.” “It is still hard to get comfortable with valuations while the fundamental narrative is growing increasingly disconnected with reality,” argues Vital Knowledge founder Adam Crisafulli. Many investors are inaccurately conflating reopening with economic normalization, he says, and several risks looming on the horizon (think rising U.S.-China tensions) are being ignored. The market is moving steadily higher so far in June, building on back-to-back monthly gains. Both the Dow and S&P rose more than 4% in May, after rallying more than 11% in April. The S&P is now up over 40% from its coronavirus crisis-level low on March 23. Mass Protests Across The U.S. Have No Impact On Stocks, What Gives? (Forbes) Dow Gains 250 Points As Stocks Rally Despite Civil Unrest (Forbes) Stocks Turn Positive After Trump Keeps Phase One China Trade Deal Intact (Forbes) Dow Closes Above 25,000 For First Time Since March (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusForrester says 52,000 advertising jobs could be cut as a result of the Covid-19 crisis and create ... [+] new challenges for CMOs during the recovery. Advertising agencies will be forced to shed more than 50,000 jobs through 2021 as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, according to new research from Forrester. And that’s a loss that could change the way CMOs work with their various external partners. Agencies will see two years of negative growth—including a decline of 30% for 2020 and 20% for 2021—with U.S. agencies losing 35,167 jobs this year and another 16,758 next year, the report projects. And while they have initiated a “good amount” of business transformation through consolidation, new technology and new data, says Forester analyst and report author Jay Pattisall, agencies’ media and creative operations are still not as integrated as they should be. For example, digital marketing feels like a “bolt-on” for some agencies with an economic model that is “woefully out of date,” Pattisall says. As a result, the industry overall has failed to keep up with last year’s “blockbuster” performance on Wall Street. “That’s the end game for restructuring,” he adds. “This forecast is dismal. It is not encouraging for the advertising industry, the agency industry. It is not encouraging for their CMO clients because it’s going to present some challenges for how they’ll grow.” Small and large agencies alike have endured cuts of varying size since the crisis began. In the past few months, WPP, McCann, VaynerMedia, R/GA, Omnicom Group, MullenLowe, Giant Spoon and others have reportedly either laid off or furloughed employees. Advertising agencies accounted for more than half of all reported layoffs as of May, according to Forrester, while digital and media agencies were less affected—partially thanks to their accelerated focus on digital media. Overall, Forrest projects overall media spend will decline by 23% through through 2020. With smaller agencies and fewer agencies, technology could fill some gaps. For example, the changes could accelerate marketing automation as it plays a more prominent role for both agencies and corporate marketing teams. That move is already happening within some of the larger agencies to improve tools for audience segmentation, channel selection and measurement. M1, Dentsu’s data platform, was cited by the Japanese agency for helping propel organic growth of 2.2% in the U.S during the first quarter although it endured falling revenue elsewhere. Others have their own versions of “people-based” marketing platforms: Omnicom built Omni, IPG gained the Acxiom Marketing Solutions when it acquired Acxiom in 2018, and Publicis Groupe gained the PeopleCloud when it acquired Epsilon for $4 billion last year.  Agency headcount might not return to pre-pandemic levels, according to Forrester. And with an overall decline of 13.5%, it could hinder CMOs as they try to navigate increasingly complex marketing challenges. To address the changes, Pattisall says CMOs should start thinking about how to compensate agencies in a way that’s based not just on people but also the fees for tech. He says the evolution also will help CMOs to restructure resources inside of agencies. “Imagine being a CMO and you’re seeing the (agency) team is not what is what was because of what we’re living through,” he says. “And what we will live through over the next year-plus, it’s a bit of a threat for the company to come back and meet the pent-up demand of consumers (are expected to) unleash when Covid starts to abate.” Even before the Covid-19 crisis, brand marketers were increasingly looking to bring some marketing functions internally. According to a report published back in February by WARC and MediaLink, around 30% of marketers surveyed last fall said they manage ad-tech and programmatic buying in-house while 38% reported still using media agencies and 17% had a hybrid model. However, 34% said they planned on bringing more in-house this year while 53% said they had no plans to change and 13% expected to outsource more.  According to a separate WARC report released last month, global ad investment 2020 is expected to decline by 8.1%. That’s a stark contrast to the 7.1% increase predicted pre-outbreak. However, the firm still expects this year’s downturn will still be “softer” than in 2009 when ad industry fell by 12.7%. As companies have looked to cut back or pause expenses, some agencies have been told their payments will be delayed by as much as 90 or 120 days—putting an already weak industry in a situation that could exacerbate the situation. “This is an opportunity for CMOs, CFOs and agency executives to restructure resources and the economic model for services,” Pattisall says. “CMOs need to take on compensation as part of the broader transformation initiative to drive growth.” The shifting landscape with agencies is happening even as the tenure of CMOs themselves continues to shorten. In its 2020 analysis of CMO tenure for the top 100 most advertised brands, the executive search firm Spencer Stuart found that the average CMO tenure in 2019 fell from 43 months to 41 months while 60% have been in their role for less than three years. However, CMOs themselves are becoming more diverse. According to Spencer Stuart, the percentage of women in the CMO role jumped last year to 43%, up from 36% in 2018 and 28% in 2017. The firm also found that the total percentage of CMOs coming from diverse backgrounds also increased slightly from 10% in 2018 to 14% in 2019 while the percentage of new CMOs with diverse backgrounds jumped from 0% to 19%.  Greg Welch, Spencer Stuart's leader for the marketing practice, says marketers need to become more like Leonardo Da Vinci: part engineer, part artist, part architect, and part scientist.  “Over the last several years, I have observed a pretty massive pendulum shift as our CEO clients have been more interested in the ‘performance’ side of marketers versus the creative’ side,” he says. “But now, we are suggesting that it is key for marketers to strike a balance between the two.” Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusUS president Donald Trump and the Director General of the World Health Organisation (WHO), Tedros ... [+] Adhanom (L-R) at the G20 summit in Hamburg. Trump has announced that US will withdraw from WHO, even as coronavirus pandemic rages on. Mikhail Metzel/TASS (Photo by Mikhail Metzel\TASS via Getty Images) Even as the coronavirus pandemic rages on, last week, on 29th May, President Trump announced: “We will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization (WHO) and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs.” In response, on 1st June, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the WHO Director General responded with this statement: “The US government and people’s contribution and generosity towards global health over many decades has been immense, and it has made a great difference in public health all around the world. It is WHO’s wish for this collaboration to continue.” Over the past 15 years, I have had several opportunities to engage with WHO and see how it operates. I will admit - I have had my highs and lows. At times, I have been frustrated with WHO’s bureaucracy, internal politics, and slow pace. I know it is not a perfect agency. And yet, I have volunteered hundreds of hours of my time and expertise to the agency, by serving on expert groups, helping produce guidelines, and by co-authoring scientific papers with WHO staff. I currently direct a tuberculosis center that is a WHO Collaborating Center. What motivates me to contribute my time and expertise? Because WHO is a global good resource that we simply cannot do without. The world needs an honest broker agency that can provide objective, science-informed advice on all health-related matters. This agency must be accountable to all countries, and must be free of industry or commercial conflicts. At this time, the only agency that can play this role is WHO, warts and all. We should make WHO stronger, not kill it. WHO: an easy target 'Trump needs to find an easy target to deflect blame from the abysmal US response to the pandemic and the George Floyd outrage,” said Devi Sridhar, a global health professor at the University of Edinburgh. “WHO is an easy target. But WHO did indeed raise the highest level of alarm for the world (Public Health Emergency of International Concern) on January 30th. Countries then had to do the hard work of preparing, or not,” she added. Clearly, many countries failed to act on WHO advice in a timely manner. Sophie Harman, a professor of international politics at the University of London, concurs. “We must defend the WHO but not play to Trump’s tactic to distract from the high cases and deaths from Covid-19 in the US or the murder of George Floyd. The two issues – responding to Covid-19 and racial injustice – are not and cannot be seen in isolation of one another; you just need to look at who is dying from the virus to see this,” she argued. “The backlash from conservatives in the US against WHO, and those in the USA who use global health funding in imperial ways, is nothing new for feminists,” said Asha George, a professor at the University of Western Cape in South Africa. “The problematic conditionalities and curtailments date back to the Mexico City conference on population when the global gag rule started.” Trump’s global gag rule has had a devastating impact on women’s sexual and reproductive health. Can the US withdraw from WHO? There is considerable uncertainty and debate about this issue. The US government is yet to clarify what ‘terminating’ its relationship with WHO actually means. “The President does not have the legal authority to withdraw the United States from WHO, with US law requiring one-year notice and the full payment of assessed contributions prior to withdrawal,” said Benjamin Mason Meier, an expert in international law and global health at UNC Chappel Hill. “This announcement appears to be little more than an election promise masquerading as a health policy, and it is likely that WHO will diplomatically ignore it – considering the US an “inactive member” and leaving open the door for US re-engagement under the next administration,” he speculated. “It’s preposterous,” said Harman. “When Trump talks about withdrawal, I assume he’s talking about money. This could potentially have long reaching consequences for not just WHO budgets, but how global health research and innovation works and is shared around the world. However the US contribution is more than just the government, much of global health financing comes from US private philanthropy and the private sector. What’s Trump going to do, try and sanction the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation from supporting WHO? Stop research created in the US being read and used around the world?” Withdraw during a crisis?  WHO has been at the forefront of the global pandemic response. While its performance must be reviewed by member states, nobody expected the US to freeze funding in the middle of a global crisis. “It’s a disaster for public health and to do it at this time is simply unimaginable,” said David Gold, a global health advocate and CEO of Global Health Strategies. “It is unconscionable for Trump to take this step amid the pandemic when the WHO is coordinating the international response,” said Thomas Bollyky, author of the book Plagues and the Paradox of Progress. “Pulling out financial support in the midst of the response to pandemic of the century is suicidal,” said Joanne Liu, a former president of Médecins Sans Frontières, who now works as an ER doctor. “It is as if, in a middle of a patient crashing in my ER, someone from the hospital board of directors would come and cut off the oxygen flow. You may not agree about the way I manage the case but the time for accountability is not when I am trying to saves lives.” she added. “In times of crisis, real leadership is characterized by constructive engagement not destructive disengagement,” said Tim Evans, Director of the School of Population and Global Health at McGill University, and former Director of Health, Nutrition and Population at the World Bank. “During the Ebola crisis in 2014-2015, the US and other countries were rightly concerned about WHO's performance. But rather than withdraw membership and funds, the US, under the excellent leadership of Ambassador Jimmy Kolker, helped WHO reform on the fly and land in a much better place,” he added. Putting America in danger Many experts are clear that Trump’s move will put America in grave danger. "President Trump's threatened move is the height of folly, shortsightedness, and stupidity and will cause irreparable damage to the WHO and worldwide efforts to cope with Covid-19,” said Theodore Brown, a historian who co-authored the book The World Health Organization: A History. “If his actions match his rhetoric (they don't always), his reckless decision will also cause immense damage to the United States. Not only will the US leave WHO and its global health partners less able to cope with the Covid-19 pandemic which if left unchecked will threaten the US for years to come, but the US withdrawal will disconnect the country from vital sources of information and collective action which will add an enormous additional threat to the country's survival,” he added. “The USA will not be safe from Covid-19 until it is eradicated everywhere. A US withdrawal from the WHO will weaken global health and weaken the global response to the pandemic. That will be bad for the health of people everywhere and bad for health and economy in America,” said Roopa Dhatt, Director of Women in Global Health. Loyce Pace, Director of the Global Health Council, agrees. “Leaving WHO or pulling critical resources in the middle of a pandemic is incredibly dangerous for the US to do. WHO plays a central role in the global response to Covid-19, from country guidance to vaccine trials, and we are by no means out of the woods with regards to the pandemic. But even beyond the current crisis, withholding essential funds or technical support could jeopardize polio eradication and other immunization campaigns not to mention work preventing or controlling infectious diseases that - left unchecked - put us at risk for yet another wave of economic and humanitarian fallout,” she added. Clare Wenham, a professor of global health policy at the London School of Economics, echoes these concerns. “If USA withdraws from WHO – they will no longer have access to disease pertinent information, and the US will be left to fight against a disease without intelligence,” she said. David Gold points out that the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), headquartered in Washington DC, will be hit hard by the US exit from WHO. “PAHO is especially dependent on US funding. PAHO prevents outbreaks from spreading across Latin America and to the US. To stop its funding is insane and a threat to all Americans” he said. Time for other countries to step up? For decades, America has dominated the global health landscape with its financial might, research and technological prowess. Trump’s move might bring about a seismic shift. If the US could indeed withdraw from WHO, can other countries step up and play a bigger role in global health?  Ilona Kickbusch, a global health professor at the Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies in Geneva thinks so. “No matter how this plays out in the end - the US move provides the opportunity for other alliances of countries to reform the WHO, make it stronger and less dependent on one large contributor - multilateralism should be just that. Think India, European Union, South Africa and the alliances of smaller states,” she said. Wenham is optimistic that funding and leadership gaps can be plugged. “Since the talk of US halting funds to WHO in April, we have seen moves by other governments and donors to fill the gap. Simultaneously, the normative leadership gap can also be plugged. What legitimacy does the US have to contribute to leadership in global health security anyway, given its abysmal response to Covid-19? New leaders are emerging; both from other Western Governments, such as Germany, and LMICs, such as Nigeria, Uganda – who have all manged to keep a handle on this outbreak where the US has failed,” she said. Global solidarity needs a stronger WHO “If ever there was a need for global solidarity, this is it,” said Pascale Allotey, Director, UN University -International Institute for Global Health. And solidarity requires all countries to cooperate during this crisis, and back the WHO to do its job.  This includes the United States, which simply cannot afford to abdicate its global health responsibilities. “The US needs to decide if they are in or out to ensure that serious debates can be had about global health futures, and actions taken without being disruptive with the constant prevarication and equivocation,” said Allotey. Mario Raviglione, the former director of the Global TB Programme at WHO laments that the US has “missed the chance of exploiting the Covid-19 crisis to strengthen an organization that is vital to the world. Instead they are pursuing the disastrous consequence of returning to a pre-WWII chaotic, anarchic health situation.” He hopes that the US will rapidly revert the decision and resume support to the WHO. “This is also a tremendous opportunity for other countries to build further leadership by helping finance the orphaned WHO programmes,” he added. For years, WHO has struggled to get adequate funding from countries. The resultant lack of capacity was exposed during the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. During this Covid-19 pandemic, WHO was forced to raise money by creating a COVID-Solidarity Response Fund. WHO has also been forced to accept funds from philanthropic foundations, which often have over-sized influence on WHO’s agenda. It is well known that WHO has limited flexibility with budgets, and that makes the agency less able to deal with sudden crises which demand new resources. In addition to the chronic lack of discretionary funds, WHO suffers from the problem of reporting to many masters. The agency is accountable to all member countries and is often unable to publicly criticize countries that misbehave (e.g. by delaying release of vital information, or violating International Health Regulations). Given these structural problems, why do countries expect so much out of WHO, when they are unwilling to fully fund it? In fact, over the past decades, many new agencies and partnerships have been launched in global health, progressively weakening WHO. The world has a critical choice to make: to either make WHO stronger and more capable, or to undercut the agency and withdraw from it. “You want a strong WHO? Then pay for it to deliver common goods,” said Kickbusch. I agree and have made the same argument. We simply cannot expect an under-resourced agency to deliver consistent, quality performance. Also, even if countries chose to shut down WHO, what agency could take it’s place and coordinate the health agenda? If a new international health agency were to be created, what would we call it? Wait, I can think of a good name: the World Health Organization.  Disclosure: I have served on several WHO expert groups, including STAG-TB and SAGE-IVD. I have contributed to many WHO policies and guidelines. I direct the McGill International TB Centre, a WHO/PAHO Collaborating Center. I have no commercial or industry relations to disclose. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusThe Trump administration suspended flights by Chinese passenger airlines to the U.S., according to a Department of Transportation order released Wednesday, after the Chinese government had previously taken the same course of action against U.S. airlines flying to China. President Trump returns to the White House after visiting St. John's Church Monday.  Chinese aviation authorities issued a decision March 26 that limited foreign carriers to one flight per week to China, the New York Times reported. The decision basically cut off carriers from flying to China, but at that point, all three major U.S. airlines had stopped service to China due to the coronavirus pandemic. Reuters reported that the Trump administration accused Beijing on May 22 of making it impossible for U.S. carriers to fly to China, and demanded that four Chinese airlines file flight schedules with the U.S. government. Meanwhile, Chinese carriers have been flying to the U.S., according to the Times. According to the DOT order, the Chinese government’s failure to approve flight schedules for U.S. carriers is a violation of “bilateral rights” to resume routes to China. The Trump administration’s restrictions will take effect June 16 or earlier, according to the text of the order. “In the meantime,” DOT wrote in a statement, “we will allow Chinese carriers to operate the same number of scheduled passenger flights as the Chinese government allows ours.” Wednesday’s development comes amid deteriorating relations between the U.S. and China over a number of issues, with the most recent being the coronavirus pandemic. According to the Times, two major U.S. carriers, Delta and United, had hoped to resume flights to China this month—and had appealed to China’s aviation authority—which did not respond to the carriers. DOT officials believe China’s actions are in violation of a 1980 agreement between the two countries which is supposed to guarantee that rules governing flights are applied equally to domestic and commercial carriers.  Trump administration bans Chinese passenger airlines from flying to U.S. (CNBC) Exclusive: Trump administration to bar Chinese passenger carriers from flying to U.S. (Reuters) U.S. Bullies China To Allow More Passenger Flights Despite Coronavirus Travel Restrictions (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusDr. Mark Kortepeter, who has been on the front lines of multiple epidemics, takes a look at what we know so far about the possibility of getting a coronavirus infection a second time. It's not clear if you can get a second Covid-19 infection, but it remains a distinct possibility. Whenever I lecture on the Covid-19 outbreak, someone always asks me, “Can I get infected twice?” This is a natural concern. After all, if someone suffers through the prolonged fever, hacking cough, and profound weakness and misery caused by the virus, one small positive aspect might be not having to suffer through it a second time.  Such fears were ratcheted up after there were reports in Korea about people who had recovered from illness and tested negative, only to have a later test come up positive again. This prompted fear of new spread, even from recovered victims. Back in early March, a mayor in Texas, blasted the CDC for releasing a recovered patient from isolation, only to have that patient test positive again after release. As a health care provider, the last thing you want to do is tell someone they are cured and release them back into the community, only to learn later that they started a whole new chain of virus transmission. Fortunately, a new study from the South Korean Center for Disease Control helps to answer part of the question. They studied patients who tested negative upon recovery, but in later tests became positive again. Could they spread the virus again?  It turns out, despite the positive test, they found that none of them were secreting live, infectious virus. It was a quirk of the rapid tests, which sample for low levels of genetic material, not whole virus. They concluded that the recovered patients had residual genetic fragments that still triggered the tests to turn positive. Those individuals were no longer contagious.  This was a relief. In other good news, a new draft paper reports that monkeys that were infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus developed antibodies and were protected from illness when exposed to the virus a second time. It’s a small study, but it offers a glimmer of hope that once infected, there is immunity to re-infection. There are different types of immunity to infection As reassuring as that information is, it does not give us the full story. What happens in monkeys doesn’t necessarily translate to humans. We still don’t know whether humans can get infected with the virus a second time. One thing we do know is that if someone recovers from the illness, their body has developed an immune response, because their body defeated the virus - at least for that first round. We can test people for antibodies to demonstrate this. The big unknown, though, is how long will that immunity last – days, weeks, months? Unfortunately, it is too early to tell. Some viruses, like measles or hepatitis A give us so called “sterile immunity,” which usually lasts one’s whole life. Once people are infected and recover, most people won’t get sick again, even if they get exposed again. A virus like influenza presents a completely different challenge – not only can we get infected again, we can get sick again the next time we are exposed to a different strain of influenza – sometimes even the same strain, sometimes even in the same year.  Even if a Covid-19 vaccine, like the one being tested here, ends up working, it's possible that ... [+] people will have to be vaccinated frequently, as they are for the flu. Why you need a flu vaccine every year Imagine what would happen if you started out with a big lump of blue clay and divided it in half. Then each time you divided the remaining pieces in half again, the clay began to change color ever so slightly. Over thousands of divisions, the clay may longer be blue - it has become red clay.  Similarly, influenza virus is very sloppy when it reproduces. As it churns out copies of its genetic material, it makes lots of errors. Over time, hundreds of errors become thousands, and then millions. Those errors add up. Each set of offspring is ever so slightly different. Those genetic changes lead to slight alternations in the influenza protein that binds to and infects human cells leading to “antigenic drift.” That means they gradually change enough from one flu season to the next that you no longer have sterile immunity. You can actually get sick again. This is one of the reasons you need to get a flu vaccine every year. It is a lot easier to develop a vaccine if a virus is not changing constantly.  Without a vaccine, the next season, you might get mildly ill. Two seasons from now, the virus might have morphed enough to make you even more ill. It all depends on how much “drift” occurs. Then, every decade or so, there is a major change to one of the influenza proteins, called an “antigenic shift.” At that point, we might see a flu pandemic, because the new strain is vastly different from any recent strains and few people have any immunity to it. That happened in 1918, 1957, 1968, and 2009. During those years, you really wanted to get vaccinated, because many people around the world died from influenza.  So, whether someone has long lasting immunity to prevent a repeat SARS-CoV-2 infection may ultimately depend more on what the virus does over the next year than our underlying immunity. If the virus mutates a lot, like influenza viruses, it could change enough, to make it hard for our body’s immune system to recognize it – and we’ll get sick again.  The good news, is that the SARS-CoV-2 virus appears to make fewer errors when it reproduces than influenza viruses. Perhaps this will allow us to maintain our immunity for longer. Even that may be good enough to make the disease less severe on a second exposure.  Only time will tell, but this also has implications for the effectiveness of vaccines. It is a lot easier to develop a vaccine if a virus is not changing constantly – like trying to hit a moving target. Let’s hope that is the case. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusGroup of office workers As we head in to summer, which typically brings with it a lower incidence of respiratory illnesses, many folks have their eyes on the fall. In particular, will schools open? And if they do, how will they possibly monitor over 1.5 billion children worldwide for Covid-19? Testing facilities have increased capability, and, despite the frustration that many of the tests may be inaccurate, improvements in testing for acute illness as well as for antibodies demonstrating history and recovery from Covid-19 continue.  But even with increased testing accessibility and accuracy, the challenge remains: how does one quickly identify, isolate, and trace acute illness when dealing with a large population such as a school, with up to several thousand students that are in relatively close contact on a daily basis? Add in the thousands of families they go home to, who also go out into the workplace with thousands of other people each day. The population expands outside of the classroom faster than any pop quiz on exponents a math teacher can give.  Schools in Germany began re-opening in April 2020. While there was no standardized testing mechanism, some schools received donations so that students and staff could be tested for coronavirus twice per week. Aside from concerns of false positives and unnecessary anxiety due to false positive cases being unnecessarily isolated, this is quite costly. School girl in medical mask does homework. Schools in South Korea opened and closed again within weeks, as a surge, albeit a relatively small one, in the country’s coronavirus cases led to schools again being shuttered soon after opening their doors. When schools are open, students wear masks, exercise strict physical distancing, and many classrooms and eating facilities are equipped with plexiglass barriers on desks. South Korea has instituted one of the largest mass covid-19 testing and contact tracing strategies of any population in the world, but was not planning on daily or weekly testing of students heading back to school.  SEOUL, May 20, 2020 -- Senior students get body temperature measured at Kyungbok High School in ... [+] Seoul, South Korea, May 20, 2020. According to a phased school reopening plan of South Korea's Ministry of Education, high school seniors become the first batch to return to school on May 20. (Photo by Lee Sang-ho/Xinhua via Getty) (Xinhua/ via Getty Images) As far as safety measures taken in getting kids safely back to school in person, several factors must be considered. The first is screening. Anyone who has entered a place of business such as a medical office has likely already experienced Covid-19 screening. This typically includes a few basic questions, including:   If all of your answers are “no,” you then get your temperature checked with a contact-free infrared thermometer, held about two inches from your forehead. If your temperature is under 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit, you’re good to go. With your mask on, of course. You passed the screen. Many schools across the world, whether they’ve already opened or are planning on opening, are instituting this basic screening protocol every day for every student, faculty, and staff member who enters campus. It’s cheap and it’s fast. But the reality is, a student or staff could be Covid-19-positive and still fly through these tests without a hitch. We already know that there are millions of asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic individuals, with no known history of exposure, symptoms, or fever. This is why testing, not just screening, is so important.  True, tests are not 100% accurate, and you can have a negative Covid-19 test for up to 14 days after Covid-19 exposure, even if you will eventually test positive. But frequent large scale testing will likely catch cases significantly more so than symptom and temperature screening.  Shot of a student getting his temperature taken with an infrared thermometer by a healthcare worker ... [+] during an outbreak If testing were simple, accurate, affordable, and portable (meaning that it could be self-administered at home with high accuracy, no discomfort, and at low cost), and done daily on every individual, the spread of this disease could be halted dramatically. But this is not an option right now, and may not be for the foreseeable future. Even if accuracy were not an issue, costs of frequent testing are prohibitive. And if done correctly, it’s pretty uncomfortable. Pooled testing may enable substantial cost savings in the setting of more frequent testing of a large population. The concept of pooled testing as a means to track infectious diseases within populations is not new, but is something that is currently being considered to better monitor large groups, such as student populations, as they head back out of remote learning and back to the classroom. The way pooled testing works is as follows: Say for example you take swab samples from five people, and put their swabs into one test, and the test comes back positive. You do not know who was positive, but you know that at least one person is. After this, you sample each person individually to determine whether one, two, three, four, or five of the people tested in the “pool” have Covid-19. If, on the other hand, you swab five people and place their swabs into one test and the test comes back as negative, you know that all are negative, and individual tests need not be performed.  A recent paper released by the USC Schaeffer Center for Health Policy & Economics, entitled “Getting Americans Back to Work (And School) With Pooled Testing” approaches this issue as a potentially cost-effective means of tracking coronavirus cases and preventing ensuing outbreaks. Darius Lakdawalla, PhD, and colleagues sought to identify how many individual samples would need to be pooled into one test in order to determine the highest yield based on the size of a given population as well as the prevalence of coronavirus infections in that particular population. In other words, the lower the overall prevalence of Covid-19 in a community, the more individual samples can be pooled together into one test.  The paper provides detailed calculations on how to determine ideal numbers of individual swabs per test, with larger numbers of swabs per test leading to higher and higher cost savings. A simplified model they describe is as follows: If a population has a 5% prevalence of Covid-19, and you have 100 individuals in a group (of students or employees), you divide that group into 20 groups of 5 individuals each. You would expect to find 5 positive results in a group of 100 (5 out of 100 is 5%). It is therefore likely that 5 of the pooled groups would come up positive (1 individual in 5 of the 20 groups). You would then test each individual in those 5 pooled groups to determine who was, indeed, positive for Covid-19. In total, instead of 100 tests, you would be administering 45 tests (20 pooled tests and then 25 individual tests of the pooled positive groups). You would be doing less than half the number of tests had you tested all of the 100 people individually. Cost savings could be substantial.  Novel coronavirus 2019 nCoV RT-PCR diagnostics kit. Reagents, primers and control samples to detect ... [+] presence of 2019-nCoV or covid19 virus. In vitro diagnostic test based on real-time PCR. Privacy concerns are of course a factor, but Dr. Lakdawalla notes that “pooled tests will not be subject to CLIA certification requirements...If a pooled test is positive, each member is then tested individually, and each individual receives their own test result [privately].” CLIA, or Clinical Laboratories Improvement Amendments, regulates all laboratory testing in humans. Because the positive test result is not linked to an individual person, there is no privacy breach.  He notes that sensitivity of pooled testing may be a concern, but also comments “Failure to test any asymptomatic people will detect zero percent of true positives that are asymptomatic.” Even if accuracy is not 100%, you would still be identifying asymptomatic individuals potentially infecting others with coronavirus. Issues such as sample collection (young children especially will be quite reluctant to tolerate undergoing nasopharyngeal swabs on a regular basis) as well as methods of entering pooled samples to a given laboratory are also of concern, but this is an issue with individual testing as well. Ideally, if saliva sampling becomes more accurate, this would be a much more favorable method in the student population. As yet, there is no “gold standard” method of identifying, isolating, and tracing cases of Covid-19. As the case numbers continue to rise in many states and countries around the world at the same time that businesses and schools are opening, creative methods of prevention of spread are being considered. As co-author of the paper Dana Goldman, PhD notes, “The U.S. was unprepared for this epidemic, and catching up will require innovative ideas. The economic crisis only increases the urgency. Batch testing is a novel strategy until individual testing is feasible and affordable.” Group of teenagers wearing face masks. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusMore insurers are expected to sell individual coverage under the Affordable Care Act known as ... [+] Obamacare in 2021 due to high unemployment in the Covid-19 pandemic.  Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans dominate the enrollment of individual Americans in health plans purchased on exchanges under the Affordable Care Act, but that could change given the pandemic and historic unemployment.  Nearly half, or 47%, of all marketplace enrollment also known as Obamacare in 2018 came via plans owned, operated or affiliated with Blue Cross Blue Shield companies, according to a new analysis by the Urban Institute. But consumers and Blue Cross plans can expect more competition in the next two years as bigger carriers like UnitedHealth Group’s UnitedHealthcare health insurance unit look to re-enter some markets for 2021 and existing companies that sell individual coverage under the ACA like Centene are already planning on big increases in revenue and Obamacare enrollment for 2020.  “Blue Cross Blue Shield-affiliated insurers hold all or close to all of the enrollment in 11 states’ marketplaces,” the Urban Institute report said, citing Alaska, Alabama, Delaware, Illinois, Louisiana, North Carolina, North Dakota, New Hampshire, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Wyoming as markets dominated by the Blues brand.  Meanwhile, in nine other states (Arkansas, Florida, Hawaii, Kansas, Michigan, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, West Virginia), “Blue Cross Blue Shield plans have the majority of enrollment, though they face increasing competition from other insurer types, typically Medicaid insurers,” Urban Institute researchers. To be sure, large well-capitalized health insurers like Centene, Molina Healthcare and UnitedHealth Group’s UnitedHealthcare are already planning to see their business administering Medicaid health benefits grow as Americans lose their employer-based coverage and become eligible for the ACA’s individual coverage or Medicaid benefits for poor Americans.  As one example, Centene in April said it expects the rise in unemployment amid the spread of the coronavirus strain COVID-19 to boost Medicaid and Obamacare enrollment in the coming months and increase revenue by $4 billion in 2020. “The employer market is shrinking, and carriers will want to follow their members to the marketplace and Medicaid,” says Katherine Hempstead, senior policy adviser at the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, which funded the Urban Institute study.  “This suggests there will be more entry into an increasingly competitive marketplace,” Hempstead added. “Carriers may feel they will be most successful in markets where they are already participating in Medicaid, as suggested by (UnitedHealth Group’s) recent moves in Maryland and Washington. Those with little Medicaid footprint may find it harder to be competitive.” UnitedHealth Group is looking at re-entering markets to sell individual coverage under the Affordable Care Act after a several-year absence. UnitedHealth’s UnitedHealthcare business was among several big health insurers including Humana and Aetna that stopped selling individual coverage under the ACA known as Obamacare. Many of these insurers who left the individual business were unable to successfully manage the rising costs of uninsured Americans signing up for coverage. Today, UnitedHealthcare sells coverage on the ACA’s public exchanges in only three states: Massachusetts, New York and Nevada. But the insurer confirmed it has filed to re-enter ACA’s exchanges in Maryland and Washington states.  “As the exchanges have matured and stabilized, we intend to offer exchange plans in those states where we can provide an efficient network and competitive product capable of driving sustainable value for consumers and our state and federal partners,” a UnitedHealth Group spokesman said. “We believe an exchange product, where sustainable, can complement our existing portfolio of public and private options which are capable of providing universal coverage to all Americans.” Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusNEW YORK, NY - MAY 11 : After checking the food and essential items that were delivered to her, ... [+] Sevonna Brown of Black Women's Blueprint looks at her son, Panther Herd, 2, on May 11, 2020 in the Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood in the Brooklyn borough in New York City. Neighborhood mutual aid groups have been cropping up across New York City in an effort to address the economic impact of eight weeks of economic lockdown and the resulting loss of income. Mutual aid provides free food and essential items to communities most in need. Black Woman's Blueprint runs a van called Sistas Van that visits low-income communities of color. (Photo by Stephanie Keith/Getty Images) More reports of the unexpected inflammatory condition seen in a small number of children with the coronavirus infection are shedding light on common characteristics of the children. A new study from Paris found that black children appear disproportionately more likely to develop the symptoms than other children. These findings echo the pattern seen in adults where black patients tend to have more severe disease and a higher death rate from COVID-19 than white patients, largely due to health disparities from a history of racism.  News reports began appearing in early May about the condition, which has symptoms similar to what is seen with Kawasaki syndrome, whose symptoms include fever rash, swelling in the hands and feet, swollen lymph nodes in the neck, inflammation of the mouth, lips and throat. Without treatment—immunoglobulin through IV and aspirin—children can develop serious heart problems or aneurysms. The CDC has begun calling the new condition multi-system inflammatory syndrome in children associated with COVID-19.  The researchers reported the medical, laboratory and other characteristics of 21 children under 18 in Paris, France who had the Kawasaki-like inflammatory symptoms that doctors have recently identified in a small subset of children with COVID-19.  The average age of the children was 8 years old, but more than half of them (57%) had African ancestry. Less than a quarter of the children were overweight, so the researchers concluded that children’s weight does not appear to affect their outcomes from the coronavirus infection.   Most of the children admitted to the hospital (81%) needed intensive care, and all of them had gastrointestinal problems soon after first getting sick. More than half of them (57%) had Kawasaki disease shock syndrome, a condition where children’s systolic blood pressure was 20% lower than average. A majority of the children (76%) also had inflammation of the heart.  All but two of the children had positive COVID-19 tests. They all received the standard treatment for Kawasaki disease—immunoglobulin through an IV—and just under half of them (48%) received corticosteroids. All of the children were recovered and ultimately discharged home.  The researchers noted that COVID-19 does appear to cause the Kawasaki symptoms given the proportion of positive test results and the uptick in these cases since the pandemic hit France.  Yet only one of the children had active symptoms of COVID-19—and most of them had positive antibody tests. This finding suggests that the children are developed Kawasaki disease due to an immune reaction that resulted from fighting the virus. Many of the COVID-19 deaths in adults occur due to a cytokine storm, a severe overreaction of one part of the immune system as it tries to stave off the virus. It’s possible that a similar mechanism in children who have the coronavirus infection is leading to these Kawasaki-like symptoms, the authors speculated.  “An association between Kawasaki disease and viral respiratory infections has been suspected, especially rhinovirus and enterovirus, and various viral agents, including human coronaviruses,” the authors wrote. But the research literature does not include any comparisons between children with Kawasaki syndrome who do versus don’t have a respiratory viral infection.  It’s also unclear why a higher proportion of black children developed this post-COVID-19 condition than non-black children.The hospital where the patients were admitted is the primary hospital for all children with COVID-19 in the Paris area, so it’s unlikely to be affected by different neighborhood demographics. The authors speculate that it could be “an effect of either social and living conditions or genetic susceptibility.”  Yet Kawasaki condition isn’t commonly reported in sub-Saharan Africa, which casts the genetic component in doubt. It might be more common than realized but not diagnosed, or it might be more connected to children’s living conditions. In the US, black children already suffer greater rates of obesity, asthma, and diabetes due to systemic social factors resulting from the history of racism in the US.  Previous studies specifically of Kawasaki syndrome in the US—unrelated to COVID-19—have found it occurs 2.5 times more often in children of Asian descent than in white children, and 1.5 times more often in black children. Yet the disease is reported less often in Asian countries than in Western countries.  If it does turn out to have a genetic component, the authors note that supply shortages of immunoglobulin could occur in African countries dealing with COVID-19 if they start seeing more of these cases in children. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusDirector of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Anthony Fauci speaks during ... [+] the daily briefing on the novel coronavirus, which causes COVID-19, in the Brady Briefing Room of the White House on April 22, 2020, in Washington, DC. (Photo by MANDEL NGAN / AFP) (Photo by MANDEL NGAN/AFP via Getty Images) Dr. Anthony Fauci said the Phase 3 trial of Moderna’s experimental COVID-19 vaccine will begin in July and include study of 30,000 patients who will be as young as 18 and include elderly Americans as well.  In an interview Tuesday with the editor of JAMA, Fauci said the trial will include primarily U.S. sites, but also include international sites enrolling 30,000 individuals in a “randomized placebo” controlled trial of Moderna’s vaccine against the Coronavirus strain Covid-19. Moderna’s vaccine candidate is considered in the lead among several efforts by drug and vaccine makers in the battle against the deadly virus. A phase 3 trial is considered the final stage before potential approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, which would make it available for patients across the country. Moderna last week said it began enrolling 600 healthy participants in a phase 2 clinical trial testing mRNA-1273, the company’s vaccine against the virus that causes Covid-19.  But Fauci confirmed Tuesday the work to begin a much larger phase 3 trial are well underway and will begin early next month.  “We are preparing the sites for the phase 3 study,” Fauci, who is the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told Dr. Howard Bauchner, editor of JAMA during the interview, which was live Tuesday afternoon. “The real business end of this all is the phase three trial that starts in the first week in July.” Fauci said those enrolled in the trial will primarily be between the ages of 18 and 55 but there also be elderly Americans including those who are at risk for serious illness if they become infected with Covid-19. “We and the companies and the federal government, predominantly, is doing this at risk,” Fauci said, referring to the government’s agreement to fund production of dosages whether they end up working or not.  “We are going to start manufacturing doses of the vaccines way before we even know the vaccine works,” Fauci said of the manufacturing process. “We may know whether it’s efficacious by November or December. By that time, we hopefully would have close to 100 million (doses).” By early 2021, a “couple hundred million” more dosages will be available, Fauci said. The manufacturing is “going to be done as we are testing the vaccine.” Though Moderna’s vaccine candidate appears to be in the lead, Fauci was optimistic several other companies including AstraZeneca were developing potentially successful vaccines. “There’s an array of at least four and possibly five trials that I am aware of and directly or indirectly involved in,” Fauci said. Watch the full video below: Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusShares of Tiffany & Co. plunged on Tuesday after a report that its blockbuster $16.2 billion takeover by luxury goods giant LVMH, which would have been the biggest luxury brand deal ever, is now looking less likely to go through. Trading was briefly halted as the jeweler's stock plunged.  LVMH’s board called a meeting in Paris specifically to discuss the takeover, with management expressing concerns about a deteriorating situation in the U.S. market, fashion trade publication WWD first reported. The luxury goods giant is apparently reconsidering its $16.2 billion buyout of Tiffany amid the economic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic and the social unrest caused by widespread protests over the killing of George Floyd. LVMH is also reportedly concerned about Tiffany’s ability to repay all of its debt obligations after a takeover gets completed; the deal had originally been expected to close in mid-2020. No firm decision was made at Tuesday’s meeting, but board members made clear that the acquisition should be reconsidered, sources told WWD. Tiffany shares plunged on the news, down by 11% at one point, with trading briefly halted at 3:22 p.m. EST, before ending the day down 9%. At the luxury jeweler’s annual shareholder meeting on Monday, Tiffany notably didn’t specifically mention any challenges related to the coronavirus, the widespread protests across the country or the LVMH takeover. LVMH originally reached a deal to buy Tiffany & Co. in November 2019. The agreed upon purchase price was for $135 per share ($16.2 billion in cash). At the time, many analysts credited LVMH’s billionaire owner, Bernard Arnault, for his savvy dealmaking: The deal was heralded as strengthening LVMH’s presence in North America and building on its foundation in the jewelry market.  As the coronavirus pandemic caused widespread business closures, global mergers and acquisitions were largely put on pause. Many companies were forced to abandon takeover deals altogether, as they struggled to stay afloat and pay workers. Xerox, for instance, walked away from its $35 billion bid for rival printing company HP. The M&A pipeline has slowed as companies struggled to do business amid a lack of debt financing and restricted face-to-face contact for business deals. A good amount of remaining M&A activity, however, will likely be dominated by rescue deals and restructurings, as companies struggle to cope with the negative economic impacts from coronavirus.  Tiffany shares are still up 30% in the last twelve months, in large part buoyed by the prospect of a takeover by LVMH. If the massive deal does fall through, however, investors will likely reassess—especially given the challenging economic backdrop for retailers today. M&A Activity Plunges, It Could Get Much Worse As Coronavirus Hits Markets And Prevents Face-To-Face Meetings (Forbes) Louis Vuitton Owner LVMH Buys Tiffany For $16.2 Billion (Forbes) Mass Protests Across The U.S. Have No Impact On Stocks, What Gives? (Forbes) Stocks Turn Positive After Trump Keeps Phase One China Trade Deal Intact (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusThe market finished higher on Tuesday, with stocks continuing to rally on optimism about a reopening of the economy despite widespread civil unrest across the country over the killing of George Floyd. Protesters march across the Brooklyn Bridge as part of a rally calling for justice over the death of ... [+] George Floyd. The Dow Jones Industrial Average was up 1.1%, over 250 points, on Tuesday, while the S&P 500 rose 0.8% and the tech-heavy Nasdaq gained 0.6%. Stocks posted a second straight day of gains, despite widespread civil unrest across the country stemming from the death of George Floyd. The market has largely looked past the protests and riots taking place in many big cities, instead moving higher on optimism about reopening of the economy. Investors don’t see the mass protests as a threat to either corporate earnings or an economic recovery, at least not yet: The S&P 500 is up 2.5% since the unrest began on May 26. Stocks that would benefit from a reopening jumped on Tuesday, including airlines, cruise operators and casinos. Some retailers and banks also posted strong gains, while tech shares largely declined. If protests continue for longer than expected, which could postpone the reopening of the economy and hurt consumer confidence, that could have adverse effects on markets, experts say.  “Good news on vaccines helped stocks in May, but U.S.-China relations and civil unrest could steal the spotlight in June,” according to a recent note from Lori Calvasina, chief U.S. equity strategist for RBC Capital Markets. “The S&P 500 remains highly news flow driven.” “As painful as this is right now, it hasn’t gotten to the point where it changes the market’s outlook for a recovery—it’s that simple,” says Mark Freeman, chief investment officer at Socorro Asset Management. “The market isn’t looking at 2020, but instead to 2021 and beyond that.” Stocks are rallying—even after several days of escalating protests across the country—because the market is blind to social justice, CNBC anchor Jim Cramer said on Monday. “The market has no conscience,” he said. “Investors are simply trying to make money.” Rising U.S.-China tensions are another source of worry for investors, with the phase one trade deal potentially at stake. President Trump on Friday announced that he would revoke Hong Kong’s favorable trade status and sanction certain Chinese officials. Trump’s announcement came in response to Beijing’s new national security bill for Hong Kong, which reduced the city’s autonomy from mainland China. The market is higher so far in June, following back-to-back monthly gains. The Dow rose nearly 100 points on Monday, while the S&P 500 gained 0.3%. Both indexes rose more than 4% in May, after rallying more than 11% in April. The S&P is now up 40% from its coronavirus crisis-level low on March 23. Mass Protests Across The U.S. Have No Impact On Stocks, What Gives? (Forbes) Stocks Turn Positive After Trump Keeps Phase One China Trade Deal Intact (Forbes) Trump Announces New Sanctions On Chinese Officials, But Won’t Scrap Phase One Trade Deal (Forbes) Dow Closes Above 25,000 For First Time Since March (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusDespite escalating protests in cities across the country over the killing of George Floyd, stocks have continued to rally—showing a sharp disconnect between markets and the economy—as investors look past the civic unrest and bet on a successful economic reopening from coronavirus shutdowns. Investors don’t see protests as a threat to either company earnings or an economic recovery—at ... [+] least, not yet.  The stock market is moving higher on optimism about reopening the economy in spite of a perfect storm of bleak developments, including the global coronavirus pandemic, record unemployment numbers and often violent upheaval over racial inequality.  Amid escalating protests, the S&P 500 is still up over 1% so far this week—and up almost 3% since the unrest began on May 26. The market’s subdued reaction to widespread protests over the death of George Floyd is “consistent with the very sharp disconnect between markets and the economy,” Mohamed El-Erian, chief economic adviser for Allianz, told the Financial Times. A crucial factor lifting stocks in 2020 is the unprecedented intervention of the Federal Reserve to support the economy: The Central Bank has injected nearly $3 trillion into financial markets since the end of February. The Fed has enacted a slew of emergency initiatives including rate cuts, lending programs and credit facilities that are giving investors reassurance the Central Bank will step in to save the financial system if needed.  For instance, the Fed began buying up short-term corporate debt and municipal bonds for the first time ever, promised to buy an unlimited amount of government debt for the duration of the coronavirus crisis and is also launching a Main Street lending program for small- and medium-size businesses. The Fed’s actions have “without question” helped prop up the economy, says Mark Freeman, chief investment officer at Socorro Asset Management. The combination of proactive monetary policy with historic government stimulus efforts has been an “exceptionally powerful force in driving the market.” Historically, the market tends to look past most civil unrest, with many analysts pointing to precedents like President John F. Kennedy’s 1963 assassination, the 1965 civil rights march in Selma, the 1967 Vietnam War protests, the 1968 assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and the 1992 riots sparked by the police beating of Rodney King. In each of those years, the S&P 500 still posted annual gains ranging from 4% to 20%. “As painful as this is right now, it hasn’t gotten to the point where it changes the market’s outlook for a recovery—it’s that simple,” says Freeman. The protests are “not viewed as significant from an earnings standpoint, and that’s ultimately what the market comes back to” time and time again. The only way to justify current price levels, he adds, is that “the market isn’t looking at 2020, but instead ahead to 2021 and beyond that.” The market has pushed through turmoil in recent decades as well, Nicholas Colas, cofounder of DataTrek Research, noted in a report. Stocks still posted gains in 1999, after President Bill Clinton was impeached, and in 2011 during the Occupy Wall Street protests. “What matters to markets right now is how/when the U.S. economy restarts from Covid Crisis shutdowns,” Colas argues. “If protests or political spillover start to hurt consumer confidence, that would spell lower stock prices.” If protests continue for longer than expected and cause more economic damage in cities, that could pose a threat to the market’s recent rally, investors say. Not only that, consumer confidence (a key driver of stock market performance) could be pressured by continued civil unrest, warned RBC Capital Markets. Some analysts are also worried about President Trump’s warning that he would send in the military to help quell protests, while others fear that large groups of protesters could lead to a second wave of coronavirus infections. “Not only does the violence and damage to property hinder the reopening of the economy, but it surely also creates a hotbed for renewed infection,” Robert Carnell, head of Asia-Pacific research at ING, told the Times. Stocks are rallying—even after several days of escalating protests across the country—because the market is blind to social justice, CNBC anchor Jim Cramer said on Monday. “The market has no conscience,” he added. “Investors are simply trying to make money.” That’s just the nature of the stock market, Quincy Krosby, chief market strategist at Prudential Financial, similarly told CNBC. “The market always seems heartless,” she said, adding, “the algorithms almost certainly have no shred of empathy.” Stocks Rally, Dow Up 100 Points Despite Civil Unrest (Forbes) Stocks Turn Positive After Trump Keeps Phase One China Trade Deal Intact (Forbes) Right-Wing Conspiracists Pull From Old Playbook: Blame George Soros For Riots (Forbes) Mayor Walks Back Statement Saying Every Person Arrested In Minneapolis Protests Was From Out Of State (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusTechnicians and scientists check out one of the Webb telescope's first two flight mirrors in the ... [+] clean room at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md. A slowdown in integration and testing caused by the global pandemic is expected to lead to a delayed launch for NASA’s long-awaited James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), the space agency said today.  The most ambitious and complex space science telescope ever constructed, “Webb” will study the solar system, directly image exoplanets, photograph the first galaxies, and explore the mysteries of the origins of the Universe.  Still officially scheduled to launch from French Guiana during March 2021, the $10 billion JWST is currently in a cleanroom at Northrop Grumman in Redondo Beach, California.  Tuesday, March 30, 2021 had been the official target date for launch from French Guiana. However, in the wake of doubts about a March 2021 launch even before the coronavirus slowdown, the pandemic has caused delays in on-site work on the telescope’s integration and testing, including a reduction in shifts.  It now seems that the March 2021 launch date will be delayed.  “Yes, we are expecting a delay, but we’re working through the schedule now,” said Dr. Jonathan Gardner, Deputy Senior Project Scientist for JWST at the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) in Greenbelt, Maryland. “The integration and test activity slowed down so that means we’ve slowed down our progress towards the launch date, which is still officially March 2021, but we are expecting an impact.”  After successfully assembling the entire observatory, technicians and engineers moved on to fully ... [+] deploy and tension all five layers of its tennis court sized sunshield, which is designed to keep its optics and sensors in the shade and away from interference.  Covid-19 caused work on the flight hardware at Northrop Grumman to change from twelve 10-hour shifts to five eight-hour shifts, so there was a considerable slowdown, said Gardner, but he added: “some integration and test work has continued throughout the whole period.” He also confirmed that in the last few days things have begun to return to normal.  Gardner was answering a question I put to him today during a webinar entitled “Status of the JWST project and science operations” at the entirely virtual 236th Meeting of the American Astronomical Society.  “NASA is working through the process of determining what the schedule will be as we start to ramp back up on the integration and testing activity,” he continued. “We’ll take a long hard look at that and there will be an announcement when we’re done with that process.” It comes a day after this announcement on the website of the Space Telescope Science Institute (STScI)—the science operations center for the JWST—in which it further delayed the deadline for science proposals for the observatory’s first phase.  Astronomers have to get their proposals for “telescope time” in to observatories many months or years beforehand, and for JWST the competition is intense. These so-called JWST Cycle 1 GO/AR proposals comprise 6,000 hours of observation time on the JWST.  Originally due on May 1, 2020, STSci is now “exploring options for a proposal deadline in the fall.” Astronomers will know the new deadline at least 12 weeks in advance, said the STSci.  NASA is expected to review the JWST mission schedule—possibly including issuing a new proposed launch date—in mid-to-late-July 2020.  For NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope to fit into an Ariane V rocket for launch, it must fold up. ... [+] This graphic shows how Webb fits into the rocket fairing with little room to spare. Gardner also reported that the JWST had recently been stowed in its launch configuration. Once that’s finished it has to go through vibration and acoustic chambers—to simulate a launch—before being fully tested afterwards for breakages. Then it will be folded back up and sent to Arianespace’s ELA-3 launch complex at the European Spaceport/Guiana Space Centre in French Guiana. Pre-launch preparations there are expected to take three months.  An Ariane 5 carrying two telecommunications satellites, Intelsat 39, built by Space Systems/Loral, ... [+] and EDRS-C, built by OHB System, lifts off from its launchpad in Kourou, at the European Space Center in French Guiana, on August 6, 2019. (Photo by jody amiet / AFP) (Photo by JODY AMIET/AFP via Getty Images) After launch on an Ariane 5 rocket—the European Space Agency’s (ESA) contribution to the launch—there’s a one month-long  journey to the L2 Lagrange point over 1,000,000 kilometers from Earth, a month of period of cooling, and a four-month lining-up process before “first light.” Then, at last, the science can begin. However, there’s no chance of a fix if anything goes wrong Unlike the Hubble Space Telescope, which was fixed by NASA astronauts in 1993, the Webb must work flawlessly first time.  Webb is a joint venture between NASA, ESA, the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) and the STScI. It’s named after James E. Webb, NASA’s administrator during a portion of the Apollo era.  Wishing you clear skies and wide eyes.  Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusMore than a dozen Covid-19 vaccines are in development, with many of them already being tested in humans and many more to begin human trials soon. But what do we actually know about these potential vaccines and why might we be wary of them? Wary, of course, does not mean we stop testing them, but it does mean we must be careful, to fully understand what they do, what they don't do, and what harm they might cause to otherwise healthy adults and children. First, what don’t we know?  We do not know if they are safe. No human safety data is available to the public as far as I am aware, though some companies have issued press releases claiming safety without releasing the data. This is a concern as we are contemplating eventually giving vaccines to two to three billion people or more. One adverse reaction will result in many millions either injured or killed.  We don’t know if they will protect anyone from infection. Yes, they raise antibodies in experimental animals but it is still unclear whether the animals are protected. Data from studies with a very limited number of non-human primates (monkeys) is available for one type of vaccine (an adenovirus vector that carries the spike protein gene of SARS-CoV-2). Vaccination failed to protect any of the monkeys from infection of the nasal but did lower the amount of virus as virus-associated damage to the lung. Similar results were found for experimental SARS and MERS vaccines. Extrapolation of the degree protection of the lung from monkey to human is difficult as SARS-CoV-2 does not cause serious disease in these animals. This picture taken on May 23, 2020 shows laboratory technicians preparing for a demonstration of a ... [+] COVID-19 novel coronavirus vaccine candidate ready for trial on monkeys at the National Primate Research Center of Thailand at Chulalongkorn University in Saraburi. (Photo by Mladen ANTONOV / AFP) (Photo by MLADEN ANTONOV/AFP via Getty Images) The failure to protect animals from nasal infection raises the possibility that vaccines will offer only partial protection, that is, they may reduce lung disease but not infection via the nasal mucosa, the primary route through which the virus enters the human body. Will such partial protection prevent SARS-CoV-2 disease? The experience with SARS-CoV-2 in children offers some insight. Most children infected by SARS-CoV-2 exhibit mild symptoms. Some may have a fever and cold-like symptoms. Few experience lung disease. Childhood resistance is likely the consequence of more active immune defenses, as compared to those 25 and older, and of a much lower concentration of the ACE-2 virus receptor in the lungs of children as compared to adults. Recent measures showed an increase in the density of ACE-2 on type II lung pneumocystis with age. That means very little virus is found in children’s lungs, similar to what was seen in the vaccinated monkeys. We now know the absence of lung disease in children does not mean that all are spared the life-threatening consequences of SARS-CoV-2 infection. A new syndrome, Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome-Children (MIS-C), is now recognized to be a late consequence of SARS-CoV-2 in children ages zero to twenty. MIS-C is characterized by generalized inflammation of the vascular system, inflammation of the heart (myocarditis)and aneurysms (ballooning of the vessels). Clotting abnormalities, often present in severely ill Covid-19 adults, may also occur among children. Children teach us that partially effective vaccines which spare the lung may not spare vaccinated adults (or children) from illness and death. This is all the more reason to proceed cautiously with Covid-19 vaccines. The rush to approval may endanger many more lives than does the disease itself. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusDr. Mark Smolinski, President of Ending Pandemics, which co-creates tools for combating pandemic threats, discussed how you can help prevent future waves of Covid-19 infection by keeping track of your comings and goings. A key aspect of preventing future waves of Covid-19 infections is contact tracing. Let’s face it. The moment a person discovers that they have tested positive for Covid-19, they will begin to mentally recreate the past few weeks thinking, “Who’s been near me?” Most will be trying to figure out how they got infected, and some will be worried about whom they may have recently exposed. Enter the public health warrior workforce known as contact tracers. In any outbreak of an infectious disease, the strategy behind contact tracing is to track down every person a confirmed case has been in contact with over a recent period of time. The time period can range from days to weeks based on factors including modes of transmission, incubation period, and infectivity. For each new or suspected case identified through contact tracing, the process starts all over again.  Early disease outbreak investigations use contact tracing to uncover the index case (first case) to help discover how the outbreak originally occurred. When successful, this can dramatically advance the science of public health and infectious diseases. Contact tracing alerts persons who had recent contact with the identified case that they may be at risk of infection. Of course, this makes it imperative that contact tracing happens in unison with readily available, rapid testing to identify active infections.  Contact tracing apps or even just the notes feature on your phone can be useful to contain Covid-19 ... [+] outbreaks in the event you are exposed to the virus. Once the curve of new cases has been bent and local outbreaks contained, the scale and execution of contact tracing for Covid-19 to prevent future waves will be unlike anything the world has ever seen.  Testing and contact tracing that enables immediate isolation of persons testing positive for Covid-19, or quarantine of those with recent exposure to an active case, is how lives will be saved and further disease spread stopped. Every single person in America (or anywhere) can assist in making contact tracing an order of magnitude more efficient, timely, and cost effective by doing one simple thing: recording a daily log of their contacts. People can easily record their daily contacts in a simple logbook, in the notes app on their phone, on their favorite social media site, or on their calendars; it really doesn’t matter. What does matter is that they do it every day, and keep the notes on at least a three-week rolling basis. This way, when a contact tracer reaches out as part of an investigation, the person being asked to recall their contacts and locations will have the information immediately on hand. This will save hours of work for the contact tracer and valuable time for the person being interviewed. Each of us has the opportunity to do our part as the world ramps up for a contact tracing effort that will be one for the history books.  A daily reminder integrated into systems already in use by huge segments of the population to record “whom did I come in contact with today?” would be a game changer in contact tracing. Individuals may decide to record additional details such as the time of the encounter, whether they were social distancing or whether each person was wearing a mask. This is all icing on the cake and will surely impress any contact tracer. More important, it will help ensure that no one at potential risk remains unaware or uninformed. We must not waver in our commitment to do all we can to stop this novel virus from becoming another endemic infectious disease on this planet. We have one shot at stopping this pandemic.  Each of us has the opportunity to do our part as the world ramps up for a contact tracing effort that will be one for the history books. Let’s relegate Covid-19 to this same destiny. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusHumana’s Partners in Primary Care unit will open 20 new senior-focused primary care centers over the ... [+] next year in Las Vegas, Louisiana and Houston. Signage is displayed on the exterior of the Humana Inc. office building in Louisville, Kentucky, U.S., on Saturday, Nov. 26, 2016. Photo: Luke Sharrett/Bloomberg Humana’s Partners in Primary Care unit will open 20 new senior-focused primary care centers over the next year in the new markets of Las Vegas and Louisiana plus a major expansion in Houston. It’s the first wave of a three-year expansion of the geographic footprint for Humana’s Partners in Primary Care since the health insurer and private equity giant Welsh, Carson, Anderson & Stowe earlier this year announced a $600 million joint venture to develop primary care centers to treat seniors insured by Medicare Advantage plans. The effort includes plans for eight primary care centers in Las Vegas and two in the Shreveport-Bossier City area of Louisiana. Both are new markets for the venture while Humana plans to “triple its Houston footprint with 10 additional centers,” the insurer announced Tuesday. Humana Partners in Primary Care already operates 48 care centers located in Kansas, Missouri, North Carolina, South Carolina, Texas, and Florida that treat about 35,000 seniors enrolled in multiple Medicare Advantage plans.  The clinics will be managed by Humana’s Partners in Primary Care subsidiary, which makes sure seniors enrolled in Medicare Advantage plans are getting quality low-cost medical treatment upfront in an outpatient clinic.  Humana’s Partners in Primary Care Centers include physicians, nurse practitioners, “nurse care coaches,” clinical pharmacists, behavioral health specialists and social workers. The centers tend to be located in “underserved areas,” Humana said. “We’re thrilled to see the communities we serve continue to embrace our dedicated approach to senior-focused health care, and we’re excited to bring our comprehensive, personalized primary care to more seniors,” Renee Buckingham, president of Humana’s care delivery organization said in a statement accompanying the announcement. It’s the latest effort of health insurance companies to capture more of the Medicare premium dollar given the federal government has increased what it pays health plans to cover more benefits under the Medicare Advantage program.  Insurers like Humana, the Aetna unit of CVS Health, UnitedHealth Group and Cigna sell Medicare Advantage plans that contract with the federal government to provide the same benefits as traditional fee-for-service Medicare plus extras that include more primary care benefits and – under new rules – supplemental benefits that include everything from ride-sharing services to food delivery and access to social services. Humana has more than 4 million Medicare Advantage enrollees in its individual and group plans. Earlier this year, Welsh Carson, a private equity firm known for its investments in healthcare and technology and Humana said they are making “an initial commitment of approximately $600 million to the joint venture.” Welsh Carson is the majority owner of the new company and Humana holds a “a small” undisclosed minority stake, the companies disclosed in an announcement in February Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusChina delayed the release of crucial information about the novel coronavirus for days in January, a critical juncture at which the now global virus could have been contained and much to the frustration of desperate WHO officials, according to an exclusive report by the Associated Press. A photo taken on March 11, 2020 shows World Health Organization (WHO) Director-General Tedros ... [+] Adhanom Ghebreyesus attending a press briefing on COVID-19 at the WHO headquarters in Geneva.  China was initially praised by the World Health Organization for its speedy response to the coronavirus. But a new report by the AP reveals a different reality behind the scenes: government officials sat on key data about the genome of the virus for more than a week. At least three domestic labs had decoded the vital information used to better understand the virus’ structure, but tight controls on the information stopped it from being released in a timely manner. Desperate for more information, but wary of angering officials in China, the WHO focused on publicly praising Chinese authorities in a bid to pull more information out of the government, AP reports, citing recordings of internal U.N. meetings.  China also delayed giving the WHO comprehensive information about coronavirus the spread of the illness, and patients, according to the AP. That information is vital in determining just how quickly the virus was spreading. AP’s latest report comes after the publication in April discovered that Chinese officials waited six days to warn the public of a potential coronavirus outbreak. The information highlights the diplomatic challenges that the WHO, with limited enforcement powers, was up against in finding out the scale of the crisis in the early stages. China first told the WHO about the virus on December 31. The organization does not have enforcement powers, but relies on its 194 member states to cooperate, so that it can feed relevant information about potential public health issues throughout the network. Adam Kamradt-Scott of the University of Sydney told the AP that WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus defense of China was a “cautionary tale.” He said: “It’s definitely damaged WHO’s credibility. Did he go too far? I think the evidence on that is clear…it has led to so many questions about the relationship between China and WHO.” China has come under fire for its early response to the outbreak that has, to date, infected more than 6.2 million people and killed 375,000 people right across the world. Several countries, including Australia and the U.S., have called for an investigation into the origins of the virus, something which the WHO says will go ahead in the aftermath of the pandemic. One of China’s chief critics is Trump, who has used the issue to renew his spat with the world’s second biggest economy, claiming that the WHO is “China-centric” in its response to the virus, and has even gone as far as to blame China for trying to scupper his reelection bid. China has hit back, calling the U.S. a “habitual quitter” and accusing Trump of trying to cover up his failures in dealing with the epidemic in the U.S., the worst-hit country. After weeks of threats, Trump on Friday announced the U.S. would halt U.S. funding to the WHO and cut its membership. The U.S. is the WHO’s biggest sponsor, contributing around 15% of the organization’s annual budget. ﻿China Reportedly Took 6 Days To Warn Public Of Possible Coronavirus Outbreak (Forbes) Trump: ‘China Wants Me To Lose Reelection’ As President Attacks Beijing’s Handling Of Coronavirus (Forbes) Trump Refers To The Coronavirus As A ‘Chinese Virus,’ While China Promotes U.S. Conspiracy (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusHas the Covid-19 coronavirus really lost potency in Italy. Pictured here are people wearing ... [+] protective masks while they visit the Coliseum in Rome, after it was closed for three months (Photo by Antonio Masiello/Getty Images) There is a claim from a doctor in Italy that the Covid-19 coronavirus may be losing potency in Italy. But as most horror movies have probably taught you, don’t make any assumptions that a threat has subsided until you are really, positively, absolutely sure that it has. This Reuters video covers this claim by Dr. Alberto Zangrillo, who is head of the San Raffaele Hospital in Milan, Italy: As a Reuters report indicated, Zangrillo said that "in reality, the virus clinically no longer exists in Italy," and that "the swabs that were performed over the last 10 days showed a viral load in quantitative terms that was absolutely infinitesimal compared to the ones carried out a month or two months ago." Hmm, “clinically no longer exists,” is a pretty bold claim. Whenever you claim that something no longer exists whether it’s body odor, a killer in a horror movie, or a virus, you have got to be sure, really sure. Did Zangrillo check everyone in Italy for symptoms or the virus to confirm this statement? That would have required a lot of swabs.  The responses from the WHO’s experts to Zangrillo’s comments were akin to saying “what?” Just listen to what Mike Ryan, MD, MPH, Executive Director of the World Health Organization's (WHO’s) Health Emergencies Programme said in a press conference today:  As you can see, Ryan warned that “we need to be exceptionally careful that we are not creating a sense that all of a sudden the virus has decided to be less pathogenic. That is not the case at all.” He emphasized that the Covid-19 coronavirus is still a “killer virus.”  As Kate Kelland and Emilio Parodi reported for Reuters, WHO Technical Lead and epidemiologist Maria Van Kerkhove further affirmed the following about the sever acute respiratory syndrome coroonavirus 2 (SARS-CoV2), “In terms of transmissibility, that has not changed, in terms of severity, that has not changed.” World Health Organization (WHO) Technical Lead Maria Van Kerkhove said that the transmissibility and ... [+] severity of the Covid-19 coronavirus has not changed. (Photo by FABRICE COFFRINI/AFP via Getty Images) Viruses like the Covid-19 coronavirus aren’t like Viagra. They don’t just automatically lose potency over time. Yes, there is the possibility that less dangerous versions of the virus could emerge and eventually become more prevalent than the initial version. There is also the “uh-oh” opposite possibility that more dangerous versions may emerge. Both of these possibilities don’t tend to happen overnight, though.  Moreover, the amount of virus found on testing swabs is not necessarily a measure of the potency of a virus. It is simply a measure of what’s in the sample that you got from sticking a cotton swab up a person’s nose or to the back of his or her throat. If you really want to check whether the circulating virus has fundamentally changed, you’ve got to back it up with other types of studies such as determining whether the genetic make-up of the virus and the clinical outcomes of infected patients with similar risk factors have really changed.  Could moving closer to the Summer potentially lead to decreased virus activity? Sure, if transmission of the Covid-19 coronavirus shows the same type of seasonal fluctuation as the flu virus does. I covered this possibility previously for Forbes. However, it’s still not clear whether this will indeed be the case. After all, comparing the SARS-CoV2 and the flu virus would be like comparing apples and oranges, really bad apples with stinky oranges.   The Colosseum is illuminated in the colors of the Italian flag to honor the victims of the ... [+] Coronavirus pandemic, during phase two of the COVID-19 lockdown exit plan on June 1, 2020 in Rome, Italy. The Archaeological Park of the Colosseum is reopening its doors to the public after the lockdown due to the Coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic in agreement with the ASL Roma 1 which will provide a technical-scientific support for the next two years. (Photo by Antonio Masiello/Getty Images) Nonetheless, before making any bold statements about the virus losing potency, as they say with science and whisky, you’ve got to have enough proof. That type of proof would only come after extensive testing and surveillance has been done over time and over many locations. Testing in one hospital or even several hospitals over a ten day period is not going to tell you the whole story. That would be like going to a Pizza Hut and using your visit there to make conclusions about pizza in general. Remember not all pizza has cheese stuffed into its crust.  Similarly, the amount of virus that’s been found on testing swabs (which is the viral load that Zangrillo was referring to) from patients in a hospital or even a group of hospitals does not necessarily represent what is happening throughout the country. It only represents what may be occurring among those swabs from those patients who happen to have been at those hospitals at those times. That’s a lot of those. Plus, Zangrillo hasn’t yet offered any concrete data that can be peer-reviewed by other scientists to back up his claim.  Instead, you’ve got to get a broad enough sample over an extended period of time to really understand what’s happening across the country and make sure that it’s not just a momentary dip. You can’t just look at what’s under your nose or up your patients’ noses. You have to look at many other hospitals and clinics. Furthermore, an extended period of time means more than 10 days, which is still less than what may be the two- to 14-day incubation period for the virus. For example, what if the virus is currently spreading in locations where testing is not occurring? What if the virus is more prevalent among disadvantaged or more socially isolated people who may not have ready access to health care and thus won’t necessarily be seen by doctors?  Keep in mind that Italy did shut things down for a while with aggressive social distancing measures. So all of those efforts could have decreased transmission of the virus for at least a bit. Will the re-opening of society in Italy lead to a bad sequel to what was a bad first installment, sort of like the movie Grown Ups 2 after the first Grown Ups movie? Could the sequel come in the Fall? It’s still too early to tell. The situation in Italy does bear watching. More concrete and peer-reviewed scientific evidence is needed before concluding anything new about the potency of the virus. Even if some changes were to happen in Italy, that wouldn’t necessarily mean that the same will eventually apply elsewhere. What happens in Italy could just stay in Italy. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusTopline: In a time of national unrest, outrage and chaos, here’s what CEOs of major public companies—who are disproportionately white and male (there are only four black male and zero black female Fortune 500 CEOs and not all have issued statements)—say to their employees and to the public: Jamie Dimon, CEO of JPMorgan Chase & Co., speaks at the Economic Club of Washington, September 12, ... [+] 2016, in Washington, D.C.  Kenneth Frazier, CEO of Merck on CNBC What the African American community sees in that videotape is that this African American man, who could be me or any other African American man, is being treated as less than human. Even though we don’t have laws that separate people on the basis of race anymore, we still have customs, we still have beliefs, we still have policies and practices that lead to inequities.  Jide Zeitlin, CEO of Tapestry on LinkedIn Dear Tapestry, I sat down several times to write this letter, but stopped each time. My eyes welling up with tears. This is personal. Over this weekend, over this last week, over a lifetime punctuated by sweltering summers of discontent.   I think back to my early 20s. Having finished my final exams at business school, I boarded a flight to apartheid South Africa. This was three years before Nelson Mandela was released from prison. I went to join with a labor research group, hoping to bring my business training to the work of labor unions. I thought I could help them carve out a larger share of the economic pie for disenfranchised African workers, largely miners. A week after leaving Harvard’s beautifully manicured campus, I found myself in a church in Khayelitsha, a black township on the outskirts of Cape Town, where most homes were flimsy sheets of plastic stretched across stray pipes and driftwood. What began as a political gathering quickly changed when the church was surrounded by armored vehicles, manned by teenage conscripts who in Afrikaans ordered us to break it up. The orders, over bullhorns, turned into tear gas and eventually rubber bullets. The lessons learned that summer have remained with me for a lifetime.  This weekend I received reports that listed stores across the United States. Our stores, damaged by protesters. Bellevue. Charleston. New York City. San Francisco. Scottsdale. Washington D.C. . . . My first thought was to our people. Thankfully all of our teams are safe. I then thought about those that had smashed our windows and taken handbags, and shoes, and dresses. What was going through their minds as they acted? Has our society truly left them with little to lose and few other ways to force the rest of us to come to the negotiating table? We can replace our windows and handbags, but we cannot bring back George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery, Breonna Taylor, Eric Garner, Trayvon Martin, Emmett Till, and too many others. Each of these black lives matter. I have traveled to Minneapolis for decades and think of it as an outpost of progressivism. Minneapolis is not Alabama or Mississippi. Neither is birdwatching in Central Park. The fact that Minnesota and New York are part of a recurring American narrative underlines the systemic causes of this discontent. The coronavirus pandemic is a contributing factor, but it is not the cause. It has placed a light on differences in health that likely are tied to economic inequality and social insecurity.  This weekend, I reread Martin Luther King Jr.’s “Letter from a Birmingham Jail.” Written in April 1963 it is as vibrant and relevant as if it had been written today. Almost 60 years have passed, yet America is still struggling to solve a 400-year-old problem. We cannot leave this task to others. Some of you, especially those sitting outside the United States, may ask, “what does this have to do with me?”  Everything. In King’s words, “Whatever affects one directly, affects all indirectly.” Asians cannot be discriminated against because of coronavirus. Neither can Africans in China. There are numerous examples why what is playing out on the streets of America is in fact universal. Our three brands—Coach, Kate Spade, Stuart Weitzman—were each founded in New York City. They were formed in part by this city’s diversity. By the creativity that is sparked by deliberate and random intertwining of divergent people and ideas. Emboldened by the role that positive tension plays in driving growth. We understand that we are better together when different life experiences and perspectives allow us to develop ideas and products that none of us could have come up with on our own. What I’ve heard very clearly from so many of you is the visceral importance of inclusion to you.  The belief that inclusion makes you better by allowing you to fully show up at work as yourself. And that inclusion makes us better as we tap into a greater depth of your experience and perspectives.   At a moment such as this, it is important to understand our roots and nurture our aspirations. Over this past week, leaders across our organization came together to think through how we can contribute to change. We are working through a plan that we look forward to sharing with you. We want to convene a number of social justice, legal, and corporate entities to formulate a longer-term plan for addressing systemic inequality. Inequality in health, economic opportunity, public safety, and other sectors. We hope to join with government, but events of this past week make it clear that we cannot wait. As brands whose core values are powerfully informed by the creative tension that cannot exist without diversity and inclusion, we cannot succeed if the ideal that is America does not succeed, including in different and diverse ways globally. We cannot attract and engage talented colleagues. We cannot design beautiful and functional products. We cannot authentically engage with consumers around the world.   With love, Jide P.S. I leave you with words written by James Baldwin: “Color is not a human or a personal reality; it is  political reality… at the center of this dreadful storm, this vast confusion, stand the black people of this nation, who must now share the fate of a nation that has never accepted them, to which they were brought in chains. Well, if this is so, one has no choice but to do all in one’s power to change that fate, and at no matter what risk… But in our time, as in every time, the impossible is the least that one can demand—and one is, after all, emboldened by the spectacle of human history in general, and American [black] history in particular, for it testifies to nothing less than the perpetual achievement of the impossible.”  Marvin Ellison, CEO of Lowes on Twitter My wife & I feel tremendous sadness as our hearts & prayers are with the families of George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery, Breonna Taylor & all communities ripped apart by violence. As the father of a young black male, I can only imagine their pain & emptiness. Sharing my company message.  Sonia Syngal, CEO of Gap via LinkedIn I am at a loss right now. What happened to George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery, Christian Cooper and the countless other African Americans who’ve been targeted because of their race is beyond devastating. It’s almost paralyzing.   The troubling pattern of increased xenophobia, homophobia and anti-Asian attacks spurred by hate and fueled by the coronavirus pandemic is something that goes against everything we stand for.   How can we be here . . . in a world where this kind of brutality can still happen? We have a responsibility to speak up and say this is wrong. To be a force for good in the communities where we live and work.   Today I happen to be in Washington, D.C., about to walk over to the White House to represent Gap Inc. alongside CEOs from Microsoft, Kroger and other companies invited to speak with the President and members of his administration about safely reopening the economy. I’ll have the chance to share our story: how our teams across Gap Inc. are helping set the gold standard for Safe Shopping in retail, getting our associates back to work and welcoming back our customers. I have the honor of representing our values by being the only woman and among the only minorities at the table. It feels especially relevant on a day like today.     Our brands will always be a welcoming and safe place in our local communities, open to all. We must stand up in order to create a world where we all belong. And we must have the kind of workplace where we talk about what is happening, to support each other through this time, with care and empathy for the emotions we are all going through.         Next week we will hold a virtual candle vigil, as we honor those who we’ve lost and the voices that have not been heard. I commit to sharing my voice in conversations about these very hard things, and ask that you do as well.                 —Sonia      Jamie Dimon, CEO of JPMorgan Chase via LinkedIn The impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic continue to reverberate within our neighborhoods, workplaces and homes and throughout our economy. In my annual letter to shareholders last month, we described the actions our firm is taking to support our employees, customers and communities. Things are changing quickly, so I wanted to update you on our recent efforts. I also want to share how we are thinking about and preparing for not only the safe reopening of our economy, but also laying the foundation for an inclusive recovery that unlocks economic opportunity for more people. From the outset, our priority has been to continue to provide uninterrupted service to our clients and customers, while supporting and providing a safe work environment for our employees and helping those communities hit hard by the Covid-19 pandemic. Responding to the needs of our customers and clients:  To help customers who have told us they are struggling financially, we have made it easy to enroll in a payment assistance program. To date, we have provided assistance to over 1.5 million customer accounts, including delaying payments and refunding fees across our business banking, home lending, credit card, deposit and auto lease and loan accounts. And we are quickly and prudently putting our capital and liquidity to work to help our clients—large and small—weather the crisis, pay their workers and bills, and provide the essential goods and services on which we all depend. Included in this are hundreds of thousands of homeowners we’ve helped by delaying their mortgage payments for at least three months. They won't be charged a late fee or penalty during this time. We are also available to discuss extensions for many customers who need more time to recover, and upon request and if eligible, we can add the option to move missed payments to the end of their mortgage term. In March and April, we approved more than $45 billion in new credit for our clients impacted by Covid-19. This included more than $6 billion to hospitals and healthcare companies, educational institutions, nonprofits and state and local governments. For example, we worked with NewYork-Presbyterian Health System—which has seen a significant increase in overnight patients as a result of Covid-19—to increase their line of credit so they could acquire vital medical supplies and equipment and bring on additional staff. We’ve also assisted our corporate clients in raising capital, including many in industries that have been hard hit by the pandemic, from healthcare to travel and transportation. Year to date, we’ve helped clients raise $664 billion in investment grade financing, and also provided $104 billion of high yield financing. Additionally, during the first 60 days of the crisis, we extended $950 million in new loans for our small business clients, such as Kids Klub Child Development Centers, which offer preschool, daycare and after school programming. The Los Angeles-based company was in the middle of constructing a new location in Seattle when the crisis hit. We worked with them to accelerate access to critically needed funds to finish construction and continue paying their 200 employees while they closed down and revamped their centers to provide care for children of essential workers. We've also worked to help as many of our customers as possible receive loans through the SBA's Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). For example, we helped the Jupiter Hotel in Portland, Oregon maintain its workforce as they converted 81 rooms into a shelter for homeless individuals with underlying health conditions or respiratory symptoms but who have not tested positive for Covid-19. We also helped the South Florida Cancer Association keep drivers on their payroll who transport underprivileged people to their radiation and chemotherapy treatments. Since the beginning of PPP, we funded a total of more than $30 billion to over 250,000 businesses, helping to support more than 3 million employees. The average loan amount was roughly $122,000 and half of those loans went to companies with fewer than 5 employees.  Helping the most vulnerable in our communities  We are using data-driven solutions to help some of the hardest hit communities get through the pandemic—and to help them recover when it’s over. So far, this includes a $250 million global business and philanthropic commitment to support vulnerable and underrepresented communities, existing nonprofit partners and underserved small businesses. We know that many small businesses are at risk of being locked out of the resources they desperately need to stay afloat—that’s why $200 million of our commitment is to help underserved small businesses and nonprofits access low-cost capital through community partners. For example, this includes $50 million to Grow America Fund, a Community Development Financial Institution, so they can help small businesses in underserved communities cover expenses such as rent and employee salaries.  We are also providing $50 million in philanthropic support to nonprofits working to help communities and people hit hardest by this public health crisis. For example, we provided support to enable the Healthcare Advancement Program (H-CAP) to implement new training programs focused on crisis care and infectious disease preparedness. Our firm has partnered with H-CAP over the last several years to train workers for jobs in the healthcare sector, and now these new training programs will prepare workers in New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago, Philadelphia and other cities across the U.S. to fill the shortage of clinical care professionals needed to address the Covid-19 pandemic. And we’re also finding other ways we can help in our communities. For example, we are collaborating with Marriott and others to provide up to $10 million worth of hotel stays for healthcare professionals fighting Covid-19 in the United States. The initiative is providing free rooms to first responders in locations such as New York City, New Orleans, Chicago and Detroit.  Supporting our employees as we move toward re-opening our economy  Our employees’ safety and wellbeing is a top priority, and we’ve taken extensive steps to support them during the crisis, including extra time off for all and expanding access to medical resources, internally and externally. As we continue to address the immediate health and humanitarian impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic, the public and private sectors are developing longer-term plans to re-open our economy. Protecting people’s safety is important, which is why we must look to public health officials to guide the timing and sequencing for lifting restrictions. Securing the proper amount of equipment, testing and monitoring, hospital capacity and other tools and processes in place will be essential in giving people confidence they can safely return to work, school and other public spaces. As we develop our strategy for returning more employees to working on-site, the two principal considerations driving our approach are using the latest data and information to do it at the right time—which may differ by region, state and country—and prioritizing the health and safety of our employees. We are working to identify what changes may be needed to achieve this objective, including reviewing our current office configurations and protocols. We are also coordinating with and seeking guidance from government entities and health authorities.  Rebuilding a more inclusive economy In the midst of today’s uncertainties and the acute impacts—with unemployment high and little economic activity—it’s hard to plan for the future. Yet to lay the foundation for the kind of recovery we need, it is critical we do so. It is my fervent hope that we use this crisis as a catalyst to rebuild an economy that creates and sustains opportunity for dramatically more people, especially those who have been left behind for too long. The last few months have laid bare the reality that, even before the pandemic hit, far too many people were living on the edge. Unfortunately, low-income communities and people of color are being hit the hardest, exacerbating the health and economic inequities that were already unacceptably pronounced before the virus took over. An inclusive economy—in which there is widespread access to opportunity—is a stronger, more resilient economy. This crisis must serve as a wake-up call and a call to action for business and government to think, act and invest for the common good and confront the structural obstacles that have inhibited inclusive economic growth for years. From the re-opening of small businesses to the rehiring of workers, let’s leverage this moment to think creatively about how we can mobilize to address so many issues that inhibit the creation of an inclusive economy and fray our social fabric. We look forward to sharing more ideas soon for how to do this. By doing the right thing during times of crisis, we can emerge stronger and more cohesive in its wake. Finally, we are proud that our firm has been well equipped to quickly step up and provide significant resources and support because we entered this crisis in a position of strength. This is a direct result of the actions and investments we’ve made over many years to build a strong, resilient company. We believe it’s our responsibility to be there for the people who rely on us in times like this. This is precisely why we work so hard to be that kind of company.  Tim Cook, CEO of Apple to employees via MacRumors Team, Right now, there is a pain deeply etched in the soul of our nation and in the hearts of millions. To stand together, we must stand up for one another, and recognize the fear, hurt, and outrage rightly provoked by the senseless killing of George Floyd and a much longer history of racism. That painful past is still present today—not only in the form of violence, but in the everyday experience of deeply rooted discrimination. We see it in our criminal justice system, in the disproportionate toll of disease on Black and Brown communities, in the inequalities in neighborhood services and the educations our children receive. While our laws have changed, the reality is that their protections are still not universally applied. We’ve seen progress since the America I grew up in, but it is similarly true that communities of color continue to endure discrimination and trauma. I have heard from so many of you that you feel afraid—afraid in your communities, afraid in your daily lives, and, most cruelly of all, afraid in your own skin. We can have no society worth celebrating unless we can guarantee freedom from fear for every person who gives this country their love, labor and life. At Apple, our mission has and always will be to create technology that empowers people to change the world for the better. We’ve always drawn strength from our diversity, welcomed people from every walk of life to our stores around the world, and strove to build an Apple that is inclusive of everyone. But together, we must do more. Today, Apple is making donations to a number of groups, including the Equal Justice Initiative, a nonprofit committed to challenging racial injustice, ending mass incarceration, and protecting the human rights of the most vulnerable people in American society. For the month of June, and in honor of the Juneteenth holiday, we’ll also be matching two-for-one all employee donations via Benevity. To create change, we have to reexamine our own views and actions in light of a pain that is deeply felt but too often ignored. Issues of human dignity will not abide standing on the sidelines. To our colleagues in the Black community—we see you. You matter, your lives matter, and you are valued here at Apple. For all of our colleagues hurting right now, please know that you are not alone, and that we have resources to support you. It’s more important than ever to talk to one another, and to find healing in our common humanity. We also have free resources that can help, including our Employee Assistance Program and mental health resources you can learn about on the People site. This is a moment when many people may want nothing more than a return to normalcy, or to a status quo that is only comfortable if we avert our gaze from injustice. As difficult as it may be to admit, that desire is itself a sign of privilege. George Floyd’s death is shocking and tragic proof that we must aim far higher than a “normal” future, and build one that lives up to the highest ideals of equality and justice. In the words of Martin Luther King Jr., “Every society has its protectors of status quo and its fraternities of the indifferent who are notorious for sleeping through revolutions. Today, our very survival depends on our ability to stay awake, to adjust to new ideas, to remain vigilant and to face the challenge of change.” With every breath we take, we must commit to being that change, and to creating a better, more just world for everyone. Tim  Satya Nadella, CEO of Microsoft to employees via LinkedIn Thanks, everyone, for joining today. I want to start by talking about an issue that is important to all of us and is impacting and hurting many amongst us, very directly, and very severely. I also know that the everyday racism, bias and hatred in the news today is not new, and it's far too often the experience and reality in daily lives, particularly for the Black and African American community. I was reading, just the other day, Ernest Owens' very powerful and moving op-ed in the New York Times, and this is even before all that unfolded in Minneapolis, and it sort of hits home how many feel about their daily lived experience, and we're not insulated from this. This is not something that you can just leave behind when you log into work. The weight can be enormous, and so the question, of course, is what can we do, what should we do? My feeling is that we can start by checking in with each other, ask all colleagues how they're doing and what they need, have empathy for what others are feeling. We talk about Model, Coach, Care for our managers, but it's actually a good framework for how we can, each of us, be there for each other, and for our communities. We can model that behavior we need to see, coach others on how they can be better allies, and care for each other in times of crisis. I know it’s not enough to just have empathy for those impacted, for the communities who are experiencing this hate, firsthand, who are scared for their safety, and for their loved ones. Our identity, our very existence is rooted in empowering everyone on the planet. So, therefore, it’s incumbent upon us to use our platforms, our resources, to drive that systemic change, right? That’s the real challenge here. It’s not just any one incident, but it’s all the things that have led to the incident that absolutely need to change. We can’t do it alone. I'm grounded in that, I realize that, but together I think we can, and we will drive change. We need to recognize that we are better, smarter and stronger when we consider the voices, the actions of all communities, and you have my assurance that Microsoft will continue to advocate to have all those voices heard and respected. That's why we're doing what we're doing with the Criminal Justice Reform Initiative, investing in partnerships and programs, working to drive reforms, focusing on policing. My ask to each of you is to come together. Ask a colleague how they are doing today. Give each other grace as they're navigating unseen circumstances. Have empathy for those who are scared and uncertain, and join me and everyone on the senior leadership team, in advocating for change in our company, in our communities, and in society at large.  Brian Cornell, Target CEO on the company’s website We are a community in pain. That pain is not unique to the Twin Cities—it extends across America. The murder of George Floyd has unleashed the pent-up pain of years, as have the killings of Ahmaud Arbery and Breonna Taylor. We say their names and hold a too-long list of others in our hearts. As a Target team, we’ve huddled, we’ve consoled, we’ve witnessed horrific scenes similar to what’s playing out now and wept that not enough is changing. And as a team we’ve vowed to face pain with purpose.      Every day, our team wakes up ready to help all families—and on the hardest days we cling even more dearly to that purpose. As I write this, our merchant and distribution teams are preparing truckloads of first aid equipment and medicine, bottled water, baby formula, diapers and other essentials, to help ensure that no one within the areas of heaviest damage and demonstration is cut off from needed supplies. Our store and HR teams are working with all of our displaced team members, including the more than 200 team members from our Lake Street store in Minneapolis. We will make sure they have their full pay and benefits in the coming weeks, as well as access to other resources and opportunities within Target. We’ll continue to invest in this vibrant crossroads of the Seward, Longfellow, Phillips and Powderhorn communities, preserving jobs and economic opportunity by rebuilding and bringing back the store that has served as a community resource since 1976. In any of our other locations that are damaged or at risk, the safety and well-being of our team, guests and the surrounding community will continue to be our paramount priority. It’s hard to see now, but the day will come for healing—and our team will join our hearts, hands and resources in that journey. Even now, Target leaders are assembling community members, partners and local officials to help identify what more we can do together and what resources are required to help families, starting right here in Minnesota. Since we opened our doors, Target has operated with love and opportunity for all. And in that spirit, we commit to contributing to a city and community that will turn the pain we’re all experiencing into better days for everyone.  Doug McMillion, CEO of Walmart on LinkedIn Many of you are paying attention to what took place earlier this week in Minneapolis and New York. These events are heartbreaking. There are too many of them and each one is unacceptable. Walmart is an inclusive company. That is fundamental to our values and our culture. We remain committed to those principles. At a time when our response to the Covid-19 crisis has brought out the best in us, what took place earlier this week is further proof we must remain vigilant in standing together against racism and discrimination. Doing so is not only at the heart of the values of our company, it’s at the core of the most basic principles of human rights, dignity and justice. As we continue to monitor the situations unfolding across Minneapolis, we will keep our focus on prioritizing the safety of our associates and customers. What our country experienced this week yet again reminds us of the need for us to support each other and to come together. Until we, as a nation, confront and address these hard realities, we will never achieve the best of what we can be.  Larry Fink, BlackRock CEO on LinkedIn Dear Colleagues, The past few weeks have been deeply painful for the black community. I am appalled—as is anyone who cares about diversity, fairness and justice—by the events of the last few weeks involving racial injustice in the U.S. The murders of Ahmaud Arbery and George Floyd, and the incident in Central Park, show how much work we have to do to build a stronger, more equal, and safer society.  Many of us are struggling with these events. For our employees suffering pain from these tragedies, I want you to know that that the firm’s leadership stands with you, and we are listening. We will do everything we can to support you and give you the space to express your feelings and concerns. In recent days, BlackRock’s Black Professionals Network has led a series of powerful sharing sessions where employees have discussed these incidents. Now we must broaden the discussion. I ask that all of us across the firm reflect on and engage in dialogue on these issues.  We have watched for months as the tragedy of Covid-19 has disproportionately hurt communities of color, as they have suffered more Covid cases and endured a greater share of the economic hardship than the rest of the population. Now, that pain has been compounded by these new incidents of racial injustice. No organization is immune from the challenges posed by racial bias. As a firm committed to racial equality, we must also consider where racial disparity exists in our own organizations and not tolerate our shortcomings. We can only heal these wounds—building a more diverse and inclusive firm and contributing to a more just society— if we talk to each other and cultivate honest, open relationships and friendships. Going forward, we will continue to develop resources to help you engage in productive conversation and to take meaningful action, and you’ll be hearing more this coming week. I recognize this process isn’t easy—I know it’s not easy for me. But it’s essential.  Importantly, we have to make this a sustained effort. I am writing to you today because recent events have forced us to reflect on the severity of these issues, but these events are symptoms of a deep and longstanding problem in our society and must be addressed on both a personal and systemic level. This situation also underscores the critical importance of diversity and inclusion within BlackRock and society at large. We will continue to push forward in our efforts as a leadership team to build a more inclusive and diverse firm. I often talk about taking emotional ownership—taking responsibility for the success of BlackRock and its clients. It also means that we are responsible for each other. Now is the time to embrace that responsibility. Please take an active role in that effort. We all must work together to build a more fair and just society—that is part of BlackRock’s purpose.  David Solomon, CEO of Goldman Sachs on LinkedIn I continue to grieve for the lives of George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery, Breonna Taylor and countless other victims of racism. I understand the outrage that followed these senseless acts and fully support the right and need to peacefully protest. However, the violence we’ve seen in some cities over the past two nights has no place in our society and threatens to undermine the message of harmony and reconciliation that we need today more than ever. Here is a transcription of a voice message I sent to our Goldman Sachs people Thursday night: I continue to hope that you and your families are faring well during these extraordinary times. I remain so grateful for what you’re all doing to collectively help Goldman Sachs navigate through this global pandemic. Without question, living in various states of quarantine takes a toll on all of us in different ways and I know it’s not easy for any of us. We have—appropriately—been highly focused on how we manage work, how we take care of family and our responsibilities at home; how we juggle new ways to interact in this complicated setting, and how we operate our lives within the necessary government and health guidelines. As we all have our heads down, focusing on the immediate needs surrounding us, I encourage you to “look up,” to take into account what’s happening around us. My concern arises from what I am seeing and reading about in terms of the many who are struggling to manage their daily lives during the strain of the pandemic. But, it also stems from my concern about the recent deeply disturbing acts of hatred, racism and discrimination, and the broader implications of that. I am disturbed by the increasing anti-Asian sentiment around the world as it relates to the coronavirus pandemic. And I am horrified by continued attacks against the black community, highlighted most recently in the U.S. with the deaths of Ahmaud Arbery and George Floyd, and with what Christian Cooper experienced in Central Park in New York City this past Monday. I want to remind each of you that as a community – there is no place at Goldman Sachs for racism or discrimination against any group in any form. I know that acts of inhumanity—against any person or group—have a profound impact on our people; how that manifests in each person is unique and personal to them. I also know that this is not a time to be silent. I know it in my gut—and I know it from many of you who have reached out—the many of you for whom these types of words and deeds are particularly and personally painful. So I am asking all of you—even with everything you are going through and everything you are doing—to “look up” and acknowledge what is happening around us. I want you to check in with each other, and be willing to have conversations that may take us outside of our comfort zone. We will not let this pandemic erode our culture of openness and respect. To guard against that, we must continue to be aware of what is happening, speak out against injustices and be willing to talk candidly in an environment of honest dialogue. Importantly, our ability to excel as a globally interconnected work force must be buttressed by a collective sense of purpose and our shared values as a community. For my part, I continue to stand with all of you in supporting our broad Covid-19 relief efforts which are helping to improve the lives of so many around the world.  Brian Moynihan, CEO of Bank of America to employees via CNBC:  “I am always struck at how committed we are to our fellow teammates, to helping one another and to living our values. Core to this is how we ensure our teammates can bring our whole selves to work and be successful. In doing that, we all benefit and our company is stronger. This is how we deliver our purpose and drive responsible growth. We share a deep sense of pain and loss from what we are seeing and experiencing right now in many of our local communities. Ahmaud Arbery, George Floyd, Breonna Taylor and other fellow citizens have died in deeply tragic circumstances. Many of you have shared with me your own expressions of anguish and anger about what has happened and how it is playing out across the country. I have listened and learned from all of you, from our communities and, for the last ten years, from my colleagues on the board of the National Museum of African American History and Culture. All of these engagements have helped me better understand how these tragedies affect communities of color, and the historical roots of those feelings. Of course, all of this is happening during, and being exacerbated by, a global health crisis that is affecting us all in very personal ways. The data also shows the greater impact it is having for our communities of color. The sense of isolation and perhaps even helplessness as we live through this pandemic are contributing to the tragedy we are seeing unfold before us in so many cities. Many of us are asking, what we can do now? First, I join our teammates in praying for those who have been taken from us too soon, and for their families and loved ones. Second, we can and will build on what our company is already doing. We have already stepped up to do even more during this crisis to serve our clients and support our communities and teammates. This includes our ongoing work to help drive diversity and inclusion, racial equality, economic opportunity and upward mobility, and to deliver on our purpose. One vital activity has been the thousands of courageous conversations we have held with civil rights, social justice and inclusion leaders—in dialogue with our employees, Board of Directors, clients and community partners. Another vital activity is the investments we make in communities for education, housing, healthcare and food security. It is clear we need to substantially increase these efforts, and we will soon share our plans to do so. Third, we will continue to focus on your safety and well-being. Please use the company’s resources to support you and your family, as shown below. These include our Employee Networks and broad-based Diversity & Inclusion efforts, which continue to be a strong source of support for employees. Finally, as the backdrop for all of this, we reaffirm our values. We will not tolerate racism in any form. The racial injustice we see today, which many of you and your families experience all too often, is unacceptable to all of us. I thank teammates for the thoughtful notes shared with me and with my team, and for your leadership. We will take care of each other and we will work to make a difference.”  Evan Spiegel, CEO of Snap (as excepted by the Information)  Economic inequality in America has reached levels unseen for nearly a century, people of color cannot visit a grocery store or go for a jog without fear of being murdered without consequence, and put simply, the American experiment is failing . . . We must begin a process to ensure that America’s black community is heard throughout the country, investigate the criminal justice system for bias and prejudice, strengthen the Department of Justice Civil Rights Division, and take action on recommendations for reconciliation and reparations made by the Commission. Eric Yuan, CEO of Zoom to employees via Linkedin “It’s time for corporations to say enough is enough; this is unacceptable,” said Martin Luther King III on CNN on Monday afternoon.  As protests against racial inequity occur in every state in America, corporate leaders announced donations to help support the cause: Facebook pledged $10 million to organizations campaign for racial justice, though CEO Mark Zuckerberg has come under public scrutiny by senior employees for not removing Trump’s post about “shooting” protesters. Meanwhile, chipmaker Intel and beauty company Glossier are both donating $1 million to Black Lives Matter and related organizations.  Lawmakers Push Legislation In Response To George Floyd Protests (Forbes) Trump Tells Governors To 'Dominate' Protesters, 'Put Them In Jail For 10 Years' (Forbes) Biden Lead Grows 5 Points Amid George Floyd Protests, Most Americans Think Trump Is Racist, Poll Finds (Forbes) Corporate Donations Tracker: Here Are The Companies Giving Millions To Anti-Racism Efforts (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusAs we spend more time on screens, more people are experiencing digital eye strain. Do you find yourself rubbing your eyes more than normal? Any new headaches, neck pain or back pain? Are you spending a lot more time with screens than normal? You could be experiencing “computer vision syndrome,” also commonly known as digital eye strain. “Our eyes were not designed to use computers especially for long periods of time, and as a result, many people who spend long hours reading or working on a computer experience eye discomfort and vision problems,” said said Barbara L. Horn, O.D., President of the American Optometric Association. “Focusing on tiny type for hours on end can cause eye strain, fatigue and headaches. Staring at screens for long periods can also leave eyes parched, red and gritty-feeling,” Horn added. The condition is characterized by a wide range of symptoms and seems to be more prevalent at the moment, as people spend more time on screens while working from home, for entertainment and for staying in touch with friends and family. “Its common even in a non-Covid times, but for the last 6-8 weeks this seems to be incredibly common,” said Scott Drexler, O.D., Assistant Professor of Opthalmology at the University of Pittsburgh’s School of Medicine. “We have been doing telehealth appointments and the most common complaints we’ve been having are related to blurry vision and headaches,” Drexler added. Limiting screen time is definitely the best thing to help if achievable, but especially for people working from home, doing this to reduce symptoms may not be practical at the moment. But if screen time reduction is not possible, the ‘20-20-20’ rule is worth trying. “What we are picking up on virtual visits is that people have to work, its not an option to not use screens as much right now. Try to take a break every 20 mins and look at object 20 feet away for 20 seconds. This releases muscles, straightens posture and reminds people to blink,” said Drexler. Dry eyes are frequently a result of not blinking enough and perhaps surprisingly, we blink approximately 50% less when staring at screens, just 5-7 times a minute compared to 12-14 times per minute when not looking at screens. There are also several other steps individuals can take to prevent or reduce the effect of digital eye strain. “Prevention or reduction of the vision problems associated with digital eye strain involves taking steps to control lighting and glare on the device screen, establishing proper working distances and posture for screen viewing, and assuring that even minor vision problems are properly corrected,” said Horn. One of the easiest of these to address is the brightness and background lighting in rooms where screens are being used.  “Controlling brightness and contrast is really important and having the room lights down or off isn’t great. What you want to do is match your screen brightness to ambient lighting. Screen in bright room? You need a brighter screen. Dim screens should match ambient lighting,” said Drexler. Although some people previously working from home have begun to return to work as various lockdowns and restrictions are lifted, many will continue to work from home and live with increased hours at their screens and probable run-ins with digital eye strain. The good news is that most of these symptoms, although uncomfortable, are not expected to cause any permanent effect on vision for most people, but they may persist if no changes are made. “Some individuals may experience continued reduced visual abilities, such as blurred distance vision, even after stopping work at a computer. If nothing is done to address the cause of the problem, the symptoms will continue to recur and perhaps worsen with future digital screen use,” said Horn. It isn’t just adults who experience digital eye strain either and there are concerns about the eye health of younger people who may be spending more time indoors than normal. “For kids having them do a lot more schooling at home and times on screens comes with an extra concern. When their eyes get tired, adults will get up and walk away and take a break, but kids won’t do that, we need to help them regulate and take breaks to make sure they are okay. Kids will just push through and end up with a headache and irritable,” said Drexler. So what should you do if you are concerned about your eye health? Horn urges people to make an appointment with their local doctor of optometry. Optometry offices previously reduced their in-person services due to the pandemic, but many have now started to re-open. “States are beginning to reopen health care access and eye doctors across the country are starting to safely provide comprehensive eye health examinations once again. Patients looking to schedule their annual eye examinations or other services should contact their local doctor of optometry, who may be employing in-person and/or telehealth protocols to provide eye health and vision care,” said Horn. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusStates are approaching reopening in different ways.  Most of the decision-making regarding when and how businesses should reopen is left to the states. To help you quickly and easily find what you need to know, here’s a state-by-state guide to what types of businesses and gatherings are open and which are still closed, as of June 1.  Alabama    Alaska    Arizona    Arkansas   California   Colorado    Connecticut   Delaware   District of Columbia    Florida   Georgia    Hawaii     Idaho   Illinois    Indiana   Iowa    Kansas   Kentucky   Louisiana   Maine    Maryland    Massachusetts     Michigan     Minnesota   Mississippi     Missouri     Montana     Nebraska    Nevada    New Hampshire   New Jersey     New Mexico   New York      North Carolina      North Dakota      Ohio      Oklahoma     Oregon      Pennsylvania      Rhode Island     South Carolina     South Dakota     Tennessee     Texas     Utah     Vermont    Virginia    Washington    West Virginia    Wisconsin    Wyoming    Full coverage and live updates on the Coronavirus Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusPedestrians wearing protective masks in a New York subway station. How can companies best support the masses of people still working remotely? And what strategies and technologies will be needed to bring employees back to offices and factories safely? Those questions are top of mind for CIOs playing a crucial frontline role in companies’ responses to the Covid-19 pandemic.  To address them, Forbes recently brought together three top tech leaders for a video discussion: Atish Banerjea, the CIO of Facebook, who leads the social media giant’s enterprise-engineering team; Kim Anstett, the chief technology officer of information-management-and-storage company Iron Mountain; and Nikolaj Sjoqvist, the chief digital officer of Waste Management, which handles everything from the collection and disposal of waste to recycling and the generation of renewable energy. A key theme that emerges from the video, which is embedded just below, is the pressing need for further innovations to help remote workers feel more intimately connected to businesses. The recording took place a few days before Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg announced he anticipates half of the company’s workforce will be working from home by 2030. Banerjea’s team has already developed online knowledge libraries to make it easier for new employees working remotely to tap information that would otherwise be hard to access. It’s also exploring ways to make remote video-conferencing experiences far more immersive. The executives have also been collaborating with colleagues in HR to create more effective means of checking in on remote staff. Anstett’s team at Iron Mountain has used an agile development strategy to build an HR dashboard to monitor things such as employee sentiment and where Covid-19 is impacting demand for workers’ time. The project, which would normally have taken months to complete, was finished in a matter of weeks. In terms of managing a progressive return to corporate buildings, employee safety is the top priority. Waste Management’s Sjoqvist says his team is working closely with the company’s facilities unit to ensure social distancing requirements can be implemented effectively. Like Iron Mountain and Facebook, the company is also looking at ways in which technology can be used to help keep workers safe inside buildings, such as deploying cameras in conference rooms specifically to monitor the number of people gathering in them. A fourth theme that resonates is the importance of dealing with the risk of burnout at a time when the business landscape is changing dramatically. The leaders say it’s more important than ever to be clear about priorities, to communicate more frequently with staff and to look for virtual opportunities to enjoy downtime together. One of the few silver linings of the current situation is that attendance at events such as happy hours and baby showers has become easier because people no longer have to factor commutes into a decision of whether or not to attend gatherings that have gone virtual. As Facebook’s Banerjea puts it in the video: “Distance has brought us closer.” Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusThe extra $600 in weekly unemployment benefits from the federal government expires in July. ... [+] Apartment industry experts fear rent payments will plunge as a result.  As rent comes due in June, the third month since the onset of the pandemic, and as Congress mulls additional aid to inject into the coronavirus-battered U.S. economy, politicians and apartment industry experts are increasingly fixating on the $600 a week in supplemental unemployment benefits.  Established through the CARES Act in March, the $600-a-week payment complements state unemployment benefits, which usually amount to a half of the wages jobless workers had been earning. The money, a means to maintain the income of the typical unemployed American, is set to expire at the end of July.  A working paper released by the Becker Friedman Institute for Economics at the University of Chicago states that with the additional $600 a week, two-thirds of eligible workers receive benefits that surpass their prior earnings. Meanwhile, one-fifth of unemployed Americans can collect benefits that are at least double their lost income, according to the paper’s authors Peter Ganong, Pascal Noel and Joseph S. Vavra.  Because of that, as the economy slowly reopens, businesses across the country have reported that some furloughed employees are reluctant to return to their jobs that pay less than unemployment benefits.  Yet, the supplemental benefit of $600 a week appears to keep renters afloat. According to the Urban Institute, the total unemployment benefit – both state money and the federal $600 – is at least as large as the median monthly household income in most states.  “And the median renter has enough residual income after paying rent to meet other household expenses,” write Urban Institute’s Mary K. Cunningham, Laurie Goodman and Jung Hyun Choi.  “The enhanced unemployment benefits are very important to people, especially those that are in lower paying jobs,” says Bob Pinnegar, president and CEO of the National Apartment Association. “They're really helping them to make ends meet and to be able to put food on the table, to pay their utilities and to pay their rent. The challenge is going to be going forward.” Willy Walker, chairman and CEO of commercial real estate finance company Walker & Dunlop, echoes Pinnegar’s assertion, saying that the extra $600 in unemployment payments is “an incredibly important policy measure.”  Walker says, “If the economy is not back up and adding jobs at a pretty significant pace by July, then the $600-a-week supplemental payment from the federal government must stay in place beyond July.” Thus far, the House of Representatives has approved a $3 trillion stimulus package – the so called HEROES Act – that extends the $600-a-week supplement until next year. Senate Republicans, however, have vowed not to pass the HEROES Act, at least not in its current form, which some have dubbed a Democratic wish list.  Some Republicans want to do away with the extra $600 in order to incentivize Americans to return back to their jobs. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell told the House GOP minority that the monies “will not be in the next bill,” Politico reported.  Nonetheless, it is yet to be seen how many of those going back to work – especially in the hospitality and restaurant industries that rely on tips – would earn the same wages they did before the coronavirus pandemic.  “With over [40] million people now unemployed, the real question is, are these people going back to work,” says Elizabeth Francisco, president of property management software firm ResMan. “Another secondary question is, when and if they do go back to work, are they going to be at the same salary level to meet their financial obligations such as rent.” Republican Senator Rob Portman, of Ohio, and Representative Kevin Brady (R-Texas), are proposing $450 a week for laid-off Americans who return to their jobs, a “back to work” bonus. Another idea, propagated by Representative Don Beyer (D-Virginia), is to gradually slash the $600 weekly payment until it reaches $300 by the end of 2020.  These proposals may do little, though, for workers who are being furloughed or laid off as the economic effects of the pandemic linger and start to infiltrate white-collar industries that have thus far been somewhat insulated. Just last week, IBM, Marcus & Millichap and American Airlines, among other high-profile companies, announced planned reductions in their workforce.   “[Congress] could come up with some type of rental voucher program that helps people pay their rent,” says Walker.  The HEROES Act includes a rental assistance program that would only cover low-income tenants. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusOne of the few certainties coming out of the COVID-19 shutdown is that it will have a lasting impact on how people work going forward. Employees will have to adjust to a new set of realities in the workplace, and HR professionals will not only have their work cut out for them, but will find that many aspects of the work have changed. If ever you needed a test case for how organizations would fare if most of their employees—especially office workers—worked from home, this was it. It’s clear to me that the work-from-home model, which many companies had previously viewed with suspicion, has been legitimized. Employees have been asking for workplace flexibility for years now, and despite the circumstances forcing our hand, we now have it. The question is – will it last? And how exactly will this global pandemic impact the future of work?  I recently caught up (remotely, of course) with Dan Schawbel,  best-selling author, future of work expert and managing partner of Workplace Intelligence, to explore these questions and more. Here is what we discussed:  Remote Work Will Remain Mainstream As noted, the pandemic has caused more organizations to acknowledge that a large portion of their workforces can function just fine outside of traditional offices. Close to 75% of the 317 CFOs surveyed by Gartner said they will shift at least 5% of their company’s employees to a remote working model. I personally think that may be an underestimation. Companies as disparate as Nationwide Insurance, the 95-year-old financial services giant, and Twitter, a bellwether of the internet economy, have said they will make remote working a much bigger piece of their businesses going forward. We tend to forget that many years ago, families were the center of society. With remote work becoming a more permanent fixture in our future, I believe – and hope – we will be forced back to that structure, with a heightened focus on our families first and everything else falling into place around them.    A Surprising Generational Divide Other reverberations of the pandemic are more subtle. For example, Schawbel noted that surprisingly, younger workers appear to have more problems with working from home than their elders.  “It’s the reverse of what you might think,” Schawbel said. You would think that tech-savvy 20- and 30-year-olds would find remote work less challenging than baby boomer colleagues, who tend to be less familiar with the latest devices and apps. But a recent study indicates the opposite.  For example, 60% of all respondents said they feel less informed about what’s going on at their companies since the lockdown. But the younger cohort feels this more acutely: 74% of Gen Z workers feel less informed compared to 53% of older Gen X colleagues and 50% of still-older baby boomers.   Too Much of a Good Thing While remote working lets many employees set their own schedules, the irony is many of them increasingly feel they are expected to be available around the clock. The fact that so many people have been laid off or furloughed across industries due to the pandemic heightens the anxiety of those still employed, who worry they may be next. “Not having your phone is the new vacation – people are working more hours without additional compensation and with all the tech at their disposal, they are always on call,” Schawbel said. That means nights, weekends, and even vacations (when they become a thing again). The price of this pressure to be available is burnout.  Videoconferencing keeps colleagues in touch but even these great tools have a dark side. “There is such a thing as ‘Zoom fatigue,’” Schawbel noted. Anyone who has sat through a multi-party Zoom, FaceTime, or Skype call knows the jarring dynamic of people talking over each other, being overstimulated by non-verbal communication, forgetting to mute themselves during private moments, and overall confusion. The perks of a relaxed dress code aside, this is not a Zen-like experience. This glut of digital communication, combined with the social and physical isolation imposed by the pandemic, is sparking more need for actual human connection.  This is one area where tech can play a positive role. We know that Artificial intelligence (AI) properly applied can take low-level but time-intensive tasks (i.e. data entry, image sorting, transcriptions) off workers’ plates.  But typically we talk about this in the context of giving employees more time for high-value jobs, like analyzing data provided by the models. Going forward, Schawbel thinks HR should push the notion of devoting more of that newly emancipated time towards leisure activities – exercise, hobbies, and other things that can help relieve employee stress.  The evolving role of HR Pros HR is more valuable now than ever before. In this environment, HR plays an essential role in driving the success of new workforce structures, keeping employees regularly informed, and managing large swathes of layoffs or furloughs. For example, HR has had to figure out how company rules and standards meant for office workers apply (or don’t) to people working from home.  “The old notion that HR is the last to get hired and first to get fired is gone,” Schawbel said. When the crisis subsides, HR professionals will need to bring employees back on board, and adjust job descriptions to reflect new realities brought on by the pandemic. And as more people work remotely post-pandemic, HR will need to focus on flexibility benefits and employee assistance programs (EAPs). This goes beyond work-from-home privileges, and puts a heightened focus on things like flex-time schedules, child care benefits, and mental health support.   We bear in mind that, given the anxiety the virus has caused for nearly everyone – especially those who have lost family or friends – the impact will not disappear with the availability of a vaccine.  HR will be called upon to not just ramp up new hiring, but devise ways to help employees cope with the aftermath of the pandemic. Many employees will suffer post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), so the importance of EAPs will soar. I agree with Schawbel that developing and administering mental health benefits will become a bigger part of HR’s role, especially in the wake of the pandemic.   Far from becoming an afterthought in a post-COVID-19 world, HR will have a greater role than ever in helping companies manage new realities. With increased remote work, new ideals of work-life balance, the integration of AI, and the psychological impacts of monumental disruption on the home front, the future of work will look far different than what we’re used to. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusBOSTON, MA - APRIL 14: Boston EMS remove an elderly patient from Sherrill House, a nursing home in ... [+] Jamaica Plain (Photo by David L. Ryan/The Boston Globe via Getty Images) We are beginning to learn which nursing homes are most likely to be hit with Covid-19.  And while studies are preliminary and based on very limited data, they tell a troubling story: Location and the race of residents matter a lot. But they also tell a surprising story: Quality (at least as measured by Medicare),   the share of Medicaid residents, and a facility’s business model tell us little about whether a facility is likely to have an outbreak.  First, the not-surprising news: Facilities are most likely to be hit with Covid-19 if they are located in communities where the disease is widespread. Separate research by David Grabowski at Harvard Medical School and Vince Mor at Brown University found close connections between the location of facilities and their experience with Covid-19. Here is a nice summary from Provider magazine. Location, location, location In short, larger nursing homes in communities with lots of cases were more likely to have an outbreak. The reason: There were more opportunities for someone to bring in the disease and spread it throughout the facility. This could be a staffer, new resident, or—in the days before facilities were closed to outsiders— a visitor. “It’s about where you are and not who you are,” says Grabowski.   Mor calls it “a function of traffic…If you’re in an environment where there are a lot of people in the community who have Covid, the patients in the building are more likely to have Covid….If you are a larger facility…there is more traffic… and more likelihood that someone will be coming in from the outside with Covid.” One interesting question about this location, location, location story: What will happen as outbreaks of Covid-19 migrate away from big cities like New York and Chicago and into more rural states with fewer big cities? For example, Mississippi, Alabama, Virginia, Minnesota, North Carolina, and West Virginia all saw their cases increase by 15 percent of more over the past week.  Will nursing home cases migrate with the virus, or will the relatively small absolute numbers of outside cases protect facility residents? David thinks nursing home cases will move with the disease. When communities where aides live have outbreaks, those aides (often with no symptoms) inevitably will bring Covid-19 into the facilities where they work. At least they will until there is sufficient and rapid testing and necessary personal protective equipment.  No meaningful relationships Now, the more surprising news: Another study by Tamara Konetzka of the University of Chicago looked at other potential links between key characteristics of nursing homes and Covid-19 cases and deaths. Here is what she found: There is “no meaningful relationship” between nursing home quality (as measured by Medicare’s Nursing Home Compare tool) and Covid-19 cases or deaths. There is no real difference between for-profit facilities and not-for-profits, and only a “weak relationship” between the number of Medicaid residents in a facility and the number of cases.  In some states, such as Illinois, higher rated facilities were slightly less likely to have Covid-19 cases. But in states such as New Jersey, they were marginally more likely to have cases. Tamara’s work on quality also makes me wonder: Is this a Covid-19 story or a Nursing Home Compare story? Is part of the problem that Medicare is measuring the wrong things when it rates nursing home quality? Is it missing key factors that affect the well-being and safety of residents?  I raised this issue in a blog six years ago, and many of Medicare Compare’s problems persist. Race matters But Tamara found one “strong and consistent” relationship: Nursing homes with larger percentages of white residents were far less likely to have Covid-19 cases or deaths than facilities with more non-white residents. The difference is striking: Facilities with the largest number of non-white residents were twice as likely to have either Covid-19 cases or deaths. In part, she may be seeing the same phenomenon as Mor and Grabowski. In big cities with many of the early Covid-19 cases, black And Hispanic residents suffered outsized numbers of cases and deaths.  And, as Tamara notes, people tend to stay in nursing homes that are located in their own communities—the same neighborhoods where staff may live, and where Covid-19 was widespread. Add it up, and you get nursing homes in African-American neighborhoods with substantial Covid-19 cases. There is much we still don’t know about Covid-19 and nursing homes. And the data may change as the disease moves away from cities like New York. But we are getting some important early clues about why many older adults are dying in some nursing homes and not in others. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusWomen are experiencing more anxiety symptoms during the pandemic. Women generally suffer from anxiety more than men, but the current pandemic may be exacerbating this difference. New research suggests that women are particularly anxious during the present shutdown. Here’s why women report more anxiety now and before the pandemic, and what they can do to help reduce their anxiety.  According to a survey conducted by LeanIn.org and Survey Monkey in April, a quarter of women said they are experiencing severe anxiety with physical symptoms like a racing heartbeat, while only 11% of men report these symptoms. More than half (52%) of women reported sleep issues, while only about a third (32%) of men were having difficulty nodding off and staying asleep.  The Double Double Shift In an op-ed discussing the survey results, LeanIn.org cofounders Sheryl Sandberg and Rachel Thomas suggest that women’s additional workload is to blame for the added stress and worry. “Before the coronavirus crisis hit in the U.S., many women already worked a ‘double shift,’ doing their jobs, then returning to a home where they were responsible for the majority of childcare and domestic work. Now, homeschooling kids and caring for sick or elderly relatives during the pandemic is creating a ‘double double shift.’ It’s pushing women to the breaking point.” Dr. Melisa Robichaud, psychologist, author of several books on anxiety and worry and cofounder of the Vancouver Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Centre concurs. “I would agree that this is a significant additional stressor at this time, and I have absolutely seen this with my own clients. Whoever is taking on the lion's share of childcare at home is likely to be experiencing markedly greater anxiety and stress. Although I would say that this task is likely being taken on by women more frequently at this time, you will find similar levels of stress and anxiety among men who are either taking care of child-rearing at home or who are equal contributors,” she says. The LeanIn survey indicates that since the shutdown, women are spending about one hour more than men on child care. Specifically, women who were employed full-time and had partners reported spending about 5.7 hours per day on childcare, whereas men in the same situation reported spending 4.6 hours. The survey did not address the time spent caring for sick or elderly relatives.  Although the “double double shift” is likely contributing to women’s anxiety, women have always been more likely than men to experience anxiety symptoms.  Specifically, researchers have found that women are 1.5-2 times as likely to develop anxiety disorders in their lifetime and also to have experienced anxiety disorders in the last year. Intolerance Of Uncertainty, Worry And Anxiety To understand these gender differences in anxiety and worry, it’s important to understand a trigger, intolerance of uncertainty. Robichaud says that worry is often merely an attempt to reduce uncertainty by trying to plan and prepare for every potential scenario in an uncertain situation. Some of us, however, tolerate uncertainty better than others. We all have different levels of uncertainty that we can tolerate, and when we cross our tolerance threshold, it triggers worry and anxiety.   “This pandemic is pretty much defined by uncertainty, as none of us know what will happen, and when or if things will return to normal. Since we are all swimming in oceans of uncertainty right now, even people who are lower in intolerance of uncertainty are more worried and anxious overall, since most everyone's tolerance threshold has been reached,” she says. Since women experience more anxiety, it would be natural to assume women also have a lower tolerance for uncertainty. But Robichaud says this isn’t the case, and that there are no gender differences in tolerance for uncertainty. Then, why are women reporting more anxiety than their male counterparts? One possible explanation is that it may seem unmanly to report worry or anxiety symptoms, so men may be less likely to report anxiety even if they experience it. In addition, men and women may also have different coping strategies. For example, Robichaud says that there may be a greater tendency for men to express their distress through externalizing, active behaviors including exercise and sports, drug and alcohol abuse or acting out behavior. She describes,“women are socialized to identify and express emotions to a greater extent than men from a young age, such that they are more likely to be in touch with, and to experience, worry and anxiety to a greater extent than men.” Robichaud doesn’t believe that women are more worried than men about contracting coronavirus. “Women do report worrying more about health than men. However, I wouldn't say that this means that they generally fear disease more than men, and in the case of an objective stressor or threat, which is what coronavirus is, there really isn't a gender difference. Clinically, I can say that I am not seeing women being more fearful of developing coronavirus than men,” she says. In sum, women’s additional anxiety relative to men may be partially attributable to the additional time caring for kids, but is also likely related to gender differences in who is likely to report anxiety, and how men and women deal with their anxiety. Relieving Anxiety If you’re feeling overburdened or anxious, Robichaud recommends establishing some structure and routine within your day. “Deciding to get up, shower, and get dressed at around the same time each day gives us a sense of control in our day in a time when so much feels uncontrollable. Feeling that you are controlling the parts of your life that you can control can be a helpful tool in managing anxiety,” she says. Self-care is also critical and is often neglected when we’re busy and stressed. Robichaud says that self-care is “basically any activity that you find pleasant or relaxing, and it can mean very different things for different people.” Some find running a great release, while others get more benefits from reading a book or watching a movie. Finally, it’s important to stop seeking out the latest news on coronavirus. With respect to health worries and anxiety, Robichaud describes that most people cope by trying to obtain certainty about their fears. “Although this can sometimes reduce people's anxieties in the moment, it will increase anxiety over the long-term, as it keeps your worries about your health at the front of your mind.”  Concerning Covid-19, she says, “No matter how much information you seek, you won't know for certain whether you or a loved one will get sick. All that you will succeed in doing is making yourself more anxious, and ensuring that it is the only thing that will be on your mind.” She recommends picking one or two times a day to check a reputable source for news, and leave it at that. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusDr. Barry Bloom, who has fought infectious diseases around the world, discusses the impacts - both direct and indirect - that the Covid-19 pandemic will have on children around the world if timely interventions aren’t made. Though children are at a lower risk for severe Covid-19 cases, they face a number of indirect ... [+] impacts from the pandemic. One of the most hopeful aspects of the Covid-19 pandemic has been that children have mostly been spared the most serious outcomes of the disease.  In terms of hospitalized cases and deaths, children and teenagers under 20 years-old represent fewer than 2% of cases.  We now know that children are infected in households at the same rate as adults and it has been somewhat of a mystery why they appear to be resistant to the serious consequences of Sars-CoV-2 infection.    That’s changed recently, as a new life-threatening syndrome, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIC-C), has emerged in a small number of children. Its precise cause is unclear, but most children with this syndrome have evidence of Covid-19 infection or known infected household contacts.  Over 170 cases of MIC-C have been reported in New York and likely a few hundreds of cases will be found elsewhere in the US and abroad.  It is a very serious condition involving potential damage to heart, lungs, kidneys and ultimately general organ failure.   The good news is that the number of identified cases in children is still comparatively small and the vast majority have responded well to intensive medical treatment.  The bad news is that MIS-C is a frightening and life-threatening syndrome that has the potential to affect more children as schools are opened and they resume constant contacts.  This means the syndrome needs to be a significant concern for families unless their cities and towns have bent the epidemic curve of Covid-19 to the extent that the number of new Covid-19 cases is small and local public health officials are able to trace and interrupt chains of transmission. MIC-C represents only a very small part of the threat of Covid-19 to children, however. The major impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on children globally is the collapse of childhood immunization programs.  80 million children are projected by the WHO to be at risk for all the major vaccine preventable diseases — polio, measles, typhoid, yellow fever, cholera, rotavirus, HPV, meningitis A and rubella, because of disruptions caused by the pandemic.   The Covid-19 pandemic is disrupting childhood immunization programs around the globe.  At its meeting last month in Geneva, the Director-General of WHO reported that the pandemic has interrupted the childhood immunization programs it runs in conjunction with Gavi and UNICEF in at least 129 countries n. At least 24 million people in Gavi-supported lower-income countries are at risk of missing vaccines due to postponed campaigns.   Measles and polio vaccination campaigns have been particularly curtailed, with measles campaigns suspended in 27 countries and polio campaigns put on hold in 38 countries. The reasons for suspending immunization programs have been to protect both healthcare workers and patients, as well as interruptions in critical vaccine supply chains.   We know there is no more cost-effective medical intervention to prevent death and disease than vaccines.  Yet, after years of efforts to increase rates of immunization of children in all countries of the world, permitting the reemergence of the major childhood infectious diseases will be a tragedy with long lasting consequences. Without major national and international commitments to curtail the impact of Covid-19 on children’s health, millions of lives will be compromised or lost.  There is yet another unrecognized consequence of the Covid-19 pandemic on children. At the beginning of this year, 820 million people in the world were food insecure, including 200 million undernourished, stunted or wasting children.  In the U.S., 30 million children and 31% of households are food insecure.  Because of Covid-19, the World Food Program projects those numbers are likely to more than double over the next year.   Lockdowns, food export restrictions, and social distancing measures have decreased incomes and purchasing power, reduced the food supply, and restricted transportation and distribution. In this way, Covid-19 will only add to the tragic numbers of unnecessary deaths and disabilities among children.   Without major national and international commitments to curtail the impact of Covid-19 on children’s health, millions of lives will be compromised or lost. It is neither reassuring nor truthful to say that the Covid-19 pandemic is sparing the lives of children. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusStarbucks is one of a handful of restaurant chains that have recently bolstered their mental health ... [+] benefits.  There are a number of factors at play that could position some restaurant chains more favorably than others in a post-pandemic world. No doubt, those with a strong off-premise presence will keep their momentum.  Those with strong liquidity will have an advantage over those that have taken on significant debt to weather the storm. Those that prioritized safety and benevolence and made sure their customers were taken care of will win over diners. And then there are those that have beefed up their employee benefits to include a focus on mental health.  The coronavirus has exacerbated an already fragile mental health synopsis in the U.S. Add in nationwide protests over the death of George Floyd, and we find ourselves on the verge of a health crisis. As the Washington Post reported recently, this crisis is driven by a “historic wave” of depression, substance abuse, post-traumatic stress disorder and suicide.  This is particularly gutting news for the restaurant industry, which has long grappled with this issue. According to Mental Health America, the food and beverage industry is among the top three “unhealthiest” workplace industries, as judged according to workplace environment, stress and employee engagement. Recognizing this fragility, more restaurant chains, from Papa John’s to McDonald’s, are adding programs and benefits that specifically address mental health.  Chipotle started providing access to mental healthcare–including in-person, phone or virtual visits with a licensed counselor–for its more than 80,000 employees this year with an objective of “minimizing the effect of mental health in the workplace.”   In a recent interview, Laurie Schalow, Chipotle’s chief corporate reputation officer, said employees were asking for mental health resources and by offering them, the company is better positioned moving forward.  “We are hitting [mental health benefits] very hard right now, whether they address stress or pressure or drugs or alcohol, and we offer those benefits not just for employees but also for their families,” she said.  Starbucks 
  
  SBUX 
  is also a bit of a pioneer here, providing employees and family members free access to 20 sessions a year with a mental health therapist or coach through Lyra Health. Starbucks also offers free access to meditation app Headspace. Like Chipotle, the company added these benefits because its employees were asking for them. To ramp up this initiative, the company hosted 12,000 store leaders in Chicago in September for a session on mental and emotional wellbeing. “There, we committed to take a stand and break the stigma around mental health and provide even more partners and their families with the support they need. Starbucks has a long history of providing innovative benefits for our partners based on their feedback. With 1 in 5 adults experiencing some form of mental illness each year, we knew we could do much more, and we sought out partner input about what benefits would be most useful. We want to ensure every partner in every store feels supported and knows how and where to seek help for themselves and others,” said Ron Crawford, vice president of Global Benefits.  So far, about 5,000 employees have participated in the company’s Mental Health Matters online forum and more than 68,000 employees are using the Headspace app. Crawford wouldn’t disclose if usage has increased during the COVID-19 crisis, but added that Starbucks will “remain committed to partners’ mental health and wellbeing at this time and beyond.” Though the company is an industry leader in this area, Crawford said more work needs to be done. Starting this summer, Starbucks will launch dedicated training for all U.S. and Canada store managers in partnership with the National Council for Behavioral Health, inspired by Mental Health First Aid. The training will provide guidance and skills needed for store managers to provide initial resources that can support partners who may be experiencing a mental health issue, substance use problem or crisis.  Noodles 
  
  NDLS 
  & Company has also added a number of benefits to assist its employees during the COVID-19 crisis through its Life@Noodles program, which already included perks like InstaPay and adoption assistance. According to Sue Petersen, vice president of Human Resource, all Noodles team members and their families are eligible to contact UnitedHealthcare’s emotional support line to speak to a trained mental health specialist at no cost, whether enrolled in Noodles’ medical plan or not. Emotional support from trained mental health specialists is available 24 hours/7 days a week, along with referrals to community resources.  Noodles also created a Career Counseling Hotline from scratch that is unique to the company, according to Petersen, as it is staffed by employees and available for all team members looking for assistance.  “While these are temporary offerings for team members and their families to provide additional emotional and financial support during COVID-19, Noodles is also actively working on permanent mental health services for all team members,” Petersen said.  Even industry giant McDonald’s is turning its attention to mental health, a potential game changer for the industry considering its scale. During a recent media call about the chain’s “Thank You Meals” promotion, Atlanta-based Owner/Operator Vicki Chancellor briefly touched on the company’s new mental health resources for employees. Included among them, a 24/7 Blue Cross Blue Shield nurses hotline and emotional support counseling sessions for employees and their families. According to a McDonald’s spokesperson, these benefits were inspired by franchisees. We will continue to see these types of benefits added across the industry, and long after the emotional toll of the pandemic has eased a bit. At the other side of this crisis, restaurants will be fighting for labor. As the Wall Street Journal recently reported, for example, McDonald’s has 100,000 less employees since the crisis began. Despite historically high unemployment numbers, workers may be reluctant to return to the job because they’re afraid of getting sick, or because they’re collecting more in unemployment.  Restaurants will be faced with a bit of a paradox, however. Adding such benefits comes at a cost and most operators have already shifted to deep cost cutting in an effort to weather this unprecedented storm.  However, according to a report from the National Alliance of Healthcare Purchaser Coalitions, more mental healthcare coverage could yield a financial return of $4 for every $1 spent. Then, of course, there’s a significant opportunity to reduce turnover–a major cost burden for restaurant operators. According to Schalow, Chipotle’s turnover numbers are going down because of its added benefits, which will position the chain well when it’s back to business as usual.   “I think we’ll have a better selection in the marketplace when more people are available and more openings are there,” Schalow said. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusThe fixed dose combination lopinavir/ritonavir is being investigated as a potential treatment for ... [+] Covid-19. (AP Photo/Charles Rex Arbogast) When President Trump announced in May he was taking the anti-malarial hydroxychloroquine, presumably as a prophylactic, his doctor had prescribed the drug off-label.  Thus far, for Covid-19 the three most promising drugs have been a repurposing of the investigational antiviral remdesivir, and off-label uses of the HIV combination product lopinavir/ritonavir and the anti-malarial hydroxychloroquine. Remdesivir is the furthest along, as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has granted it emergency use authorization. It is still, however, an investigational drug and not currently approved for any indication in the U.S. Last month, remdesivir was approved in Japan for critically ill Covid-19 patients. Several other drugs are being investigated for off-label uses, including the anti-parasitic ivermectin, currently indicated for a number of neglected tropical diseases. It appears that ivermectin inhibits the replication of SARS-CoV-2 in vitro. And, the immune modulators tocilizumab and sarilumab, indicated for rheumatoid arthritis, are being probed for use against Covid-19.  “Off-label” simply implies the drug is being used in a way not specified in the FDA-approved packaging label, or insert. Here, off-label use of an FDA-approved drug includes prescribing a drug for a disease or condition it is not approved for, administering a drug in a different route or formulation, and prescribing a drug at a different dose than it’s approved for.  As a legal clinical practice, off-label prescribing is common. In the U.S., more than 20% of outpatient prescriptions are for off-label uses.  Off-label prescribing has typically been most prevalent for rare diseases and cancers, where treatment alternatives are often limited. A 2008 study found that 80% of oncologists had prescribed drugs off-label at one time or other. Cancer drugs are often prescribed off-label when they’re approved for a certain type of cancer in a particular organ but could potentially target tumors in other organs.  The Covid-19 crisis appears to have spawned renewed interest in repurposing of drugs. Scientists are canvassing extensive libraries of existing drug compounds in search of potential Covid-19 treatments. To guide off-label use development billions of dollars are being invested to analyze vast numbers of anonymized patient records. Culling the data may yield clues as to which patients may benefit from existing drugs. Prior to the Covid-19 pandemic there have been numerous examples of success stories in off-label use prescribing, across dozens of therapeutic categories; some fabled, others less well-known.  Several of the more celebrated off-label uses include minoxidil and bupropion. Minoxidil was originally developed as a anti-hypertensive but is now better known as a hair regrowth product for male pattern baldness. Bupropion was launched as an anti-depressant, but has also been used as a smoking cessation agent. Beta-blockers, initially approved for high blood pressure, became widely prescribed by doctors to treat heart failure. Over time, a number of beta-blockers obtained supplemental indications to treat heart failure. Furthermore, beta blockers have been used as a remedy for migraines. Bevacizumab is indicated for a number of cancers, but is also used off-label for wet age-related macular degeneration. A renowned study showed how a low dose of bevacizumab was considered functionally equivalent to a ranibizumab injection, yet up to 20 times cheaper. The anti-anxiety drug lorazepam is used off-label as an anti-nausea drug. And, the older generation tricyclic antidepressants have been used for chronic pain for quite some time.  Off-label uses and other repurposing efforts don’t come without health risks as the discussion surrounding Trump’s hydroxychloroquine revealed. France is now banning the use of hydroxychloroquine. And, the World Health Organization is temporarily halting its clinical trials of hydroxychloroquine over safety concerns. The possible health dangers also entail legal risks as off-label drug use usually doesn’t reflect “standard of care” treatment. Additionally, a major hurdle is getting insurers to reimburse for off-label uses. Payers limit coverage to what they determine to be medically accepted indications. For example, payers may require that a beneficiary obtain prior authorization before a prescription can be filled, or even that a different drug before the prescribed drug will be covered. These restrictions are often used to screen for the off-label use of a drug. In the commercial sector, but also Medicaid, there is considerable variation in reimbursement standards for off-label uses. Medicare Part D, on the other hand, has perhaps the clearest directives. Part D plans cover drugs prescribed for off-label use provided they are identified as safe and effective for that use in one of several officially recognized drug compendia. These are comprehensive listings of drugs with information on dosage, formulation, and different forms of usage.  Ultimately, off-label use prescribing is an individualized decision between doctors and patients in which risks and benefits are weighed to reach a shared, informed treatment choice. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusThe U.S. has shipped 2 million doses of antimalarial drug hydroxychloroquine to Brazil in efforts to help the world’s second worst-affected country combat coronavirus, and as the nations begin joint research on whether the drug is an effective treatment against the virus. WASHINGTON, DC - MAY 30: U.S. President Donald Trump  The White House said on Sunday that the drug will be used to help protect medical workers in Brazil against the virus, as well as to treat people who become infected.The U.S. is also donating 1,000 ventilators. The drug has been touted by Trump, and last month the President revealed he was taking the drug prophylactically. There is little to no existing evidence that the antimalarial drug is an effective treatment for COVID-19. France banned its prescription except in clinical trials, while the US Food and Drug Administration has warned that its use to treat COVID-19 can cause heart arrhythmia. The biggest observational analysis so far of the drug’s effect on coronavirus patients last month revealed that the drug, when used in COVID-19 patients, can increase the risk of death and abnormal heart rhythms. But that data was analysed from hospital records and was not a laboratory study. The results were published in medical journal The Lancet in May, but has since been disputed by more than 100 scientists who questioned the data. Several clinical trials are underway worldwide to test whether antimalarial drugs like hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine can help combat coronavirus, while some researchers are also working to determine whether the drug can shield health workers from the infection. Brazil now has at least 514,000 confirmed coronavirus cases, while nearly 30,000 people have died, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. Coronavirus infections in Brazil have skyrocketed, with the South American country now the second worst-hit nation in the world after the U.S. Over the weekend, Brazil surpassed France to record the fourth-highest death toll in the world. Right-wing President Jair Bolsonaro has downplayed how serious the virus is, and has previously slammed social distancing measures as “poison” and urged citizens to return to work. Hydroxychloroquine is used to treat malaria, as well as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis. Without any approved treatment for coronavirus, some doctors around the world have turned to hydroxychloroquine and antimalarial drugs to treat patients, after limited laboratory studies found the drug might block coronavirus from entering cells. Trump-Endorsed Hydroxychloroquine Linked To Higher Risk Of Death In Coronavirus Patients, Medical Analysis Finds (Forbes) France Says No To Hydroxychloroquine Prescription After Lancet Study (Forbes) Scientists Question Validity of Major Hydroxychloroquine Study (New York Times) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusGetty Virtually every company is focused on figuring out just when and how to return to “the workplace” amid this novel coronavirus pandemic. While many have decided to continue working from home for an extended time (through 2020 or possibly permanently), most are grappling with the question of what a return to work will look like in this new era. While the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U. S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and individuals states have all issued general guidance for returning safely, there is no one-size fits all solution and most companies are left to patchwork a specific plan to suit their individual business needs and organizational culture.  Specializing in training managers, executives and teams in skills that are essential in times of uncertainty, LifeLabs Learning has witnessed the struggle that many business leaders have been facing as they try to develop a practical plan for their reentry amid the pandemic. “We sat in on many discussions of senior leaders trying to create return to workplace scenarios and noticed how the conversation quickly degraded,” explains Co-CEO LeeAnn Renninger. To address this need Renninger and her team at LifeLabs Learning developed a document outlining “8 conversation buckets” to help teams navigate these critical discussions. Equipped with feedback from 400+ human resources executives, LifeLabs Learning rolled out a Return to Work Discussion Guide that includes eight common focus areas for business leaders to consider as they make those critical decisions about how to return to work and what the new workplace will look like. Recognizing the fluidity of these unchartered waters and rapidly changing public health/economic considerations, they have posted the discussion guide as a living document intended to be updated as needed.  Here’s an overview of the recommended focus areas and a sampling of associated guide questions. Return to Work Planning: The 8 Conversation Buckets 1.    Who will return, when? - What are our decision making criteria? - How will we assess employee sentiment? - Do we plan differently for employees with underlying conditions? - What legal considerations should we consider? 2. Screening and tracking protocols - Should we conduct temperature checks? If so, who should do them and what will be the protocol? - Should we permit self-reporting of health status/symptoms? - How do we track and report potential exposures? - How do we respond if someone tests positive? 3. Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) - Will masks be mandatory? Should we provide them? - What other PPE might be required?  - What are the consequences for not wearing PPE? - Do badges, access cards or other security protocols need to change when employee faces are covered? 4. Workspace modification - How will the physical workspace need to be modified to adhere to social distancing guidance? - Will we need to add partitions to conform with public health guidelines? - Are employees permitted to use (or visit) others’ work stations? - Should we close all common areas? Make hallways one way?  - Should we put tape on the floor to encourage appropriate distance? - What new signage is required to support new policies? 5. Cleaning and disinfecting protocols - Should we institute disinfection strategies to receive packages? - What needs to be disinfected? Who will do it and how often? - How do we procure necessary cleaning supplies? Businesses are faced with making hard decisions as they design their return to work plan and define ... [+] new company policies amid the novel coronavirus pandemic. 6. Meetings / crowd control planning - How many people are allowed in the office at one time? - Do we limit meeting size? - Should we institute staggered shifts? 7. Education, communication, and enforcement - How will employees know what it will look like when they return? - How will we educate employees on the new protocols and processes? - How do we track compliance? 8. Integration and employee support - How does the onboarding experience change? - How do we support parents if schools/day cares are not open? - What will the interim travel policy be? - What changes might be appropriate for our vacation, sick policies?  - Should we change our KPIs/goals given business impacts? (Note: Questions above are excerpted from the full discussion guide. Specific question wording has been modified in some cases.) Obviously, the guide isn’t exhaustive and there’s no perfect set of questions, but the concept of developing a well coordinated guide (to be amended as needed) is a smart one. Certainly, the big issues like considering workspace reconfiguration or building entry protocols are obvious ones that will receive much attention, but as is often the case, the devil is in the details. The beauty of using this type of guide is that it encourages the group to also reach consensus on the more granular details (like considering the process for securing cleaning supplies long term, determining clear processes for turning someone away with an elevated temperature or tracking who has been onsite for future potential contact tracing needs).  It’s also critically important that organizations ensure that their return to work plan (and discussions) are customized to their particular reality (while also adhering to broader regulations and public health standards). Factors like company size, geographic location, business model, product/service type, organizational culture, etc. can make a huge difference in terms of what might work best for a particular return to work plan. What works well for a Nebraska based business to business start up company with 200 employees might be a complete disaster for a New York City based Fortune 100 business to consumer type company.  Another key issue for business leaders to digest and analyze are the actual costs (whether time, money or other resources) associated with new policies or procedures. For example, if the organization plans to institute a strict cleaning schedule for its offices (and thinks this may be important to encourage staff to return), they must consider the amount of lead time they may need to institute this (particularly if vendors in this space are scarce) in addition to considering the hard costs. Similarly, discussions around PPE, reconfiguring workspaces and instituting health dependent check in procedures should certainly include clear assessments of associated costs, vendor selection processes, staffing requirements, etc. to support those decisions.  Unfortunately, for many companies the stakes couldn’t be higher as they contemplate how and when to return to work. Those who get it right will likely lead their organizations into a new and different reality that works for their business needs and employee community. But those who get it wrong could easily face disastrous consequences. While these decisions should be well informed by considerations of all stakeholders (e.g. employees, leadership, suppliers, partners, customers, local authorities, etc.), eliciting honest employee feedback will be critical. “Employees will continue to crave flexibility with some still preferring to work on-site now or when re-entry is possible,” insists David Grossman, CEO of Chicago-based leadership and communications consultancy, The Grossman Group. “Employers will need to navigate the competing and evolving needs of their teams, and know that more flexibility will ultimately add value to the employee experience, build engagement and bring results in the post-pandemic world.” While there’s no exhaustive checklist to ensure a perfect plan, using this type guide is a great way to encourage productive conversation. Indeed, in this unique situation the quality of these discussions matter as they must be both deep and broad to effect a plan that works for all. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusPublic health experts advise preventive measures are still needed to reduce Covid-19 transmission. Stay-at-home orders in response to the coronavirus pandemic helped to slow down the spread of the disease, but also disrupted a lot of daily life. While everyone is eager to get back to “normal,” public health experts advise preventive measures are still needed to continue to reduce Covid-19 transmission. To help you navigate a reopening America, we consulted public health experts to answer common questions. Should I just never leave my house?  Not at all. Reopening doesn’t have to be a tradeoff between a total lockdown to protect public health or unleashing the virus on society to boost the economy, says Crystal Watson, senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security and co-author of a reopening guide for governors. There is a “middle ground,” she says, of “trying to be protective of public health, but allowing our economy to get back to work.” Preventive measures, such as social distancing, wearing masks, and handwashing still remain some of the most important tools to slow the spread of Covid-19. I feel fine, so why do I have to keep taking precautions?  It’s important to take precautions because there has been widespread transmission of Covid-19 from people who may not know they have the virus but still spread it to others. By taking preventive measures, you are helping to reduce transmission of the virus both for your own personal health and the greater community. “There's tremendous power in prevention, but it's often not respected. Because when prevention works, absolutely nothing happens and things are very boring,” says Dr. Howard Koh, professor at the Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health and the former assistant secretary for health in the Obama administration.  Do I really need to keep social distancing? Yes. Social distancing is one of the most effective interventions to reduce transmission of the virus. In the beginning, every person infected with coronavirus was infecting, on average, another two to three people. This led to the exponential growth in cases, Watson says, and adds that “what we want to do is try to bring that number below one.” When people are spread farther apart, it is harder to transmit the airborne droplets that carry the virus from person-to-person.  Do I need to wear a mask? When you’re going to be in close proximity to other people, yes. A cloth mask helps protect other people “who might be on the receiving end of droplets that are infected,” says Koh. This is another instance of a preventive measure that helps reduce asymptomatic transmission. If people who are infected with Covid-19 wear a mask, it helps block how far the airborne droplets can spread.  Can I touch my face?  You should wash your hands or use hand sanitizer before touching your face. “If you touch a contaminated surface, it’s not like this thing is going to jump off the surface into your face,” says Dr. Mark Kortepeter, professor of epidemiology at the University of Nebraska Medical Center and author of Inside the Hot Zone. “You’re the one who actually is directly implanting that organism from the surface using your hands to your eyes, nose or mouth.”  How many people can I hang out with at one time? It depends, but, in general, the smaller the group, the better for everyone. There are varying federal and state guidance when it comes to social gatherings. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends a 10-person limit in the first phase of reopening, while some states say there doesn’t need to be a limit on gatherings if people are social distancing. There is no “hard and fast” number, says Watson, but large groups should definitely be avoided. “The bigger the gathering, the more risk there is,” she says.  Who is most at risk?  Being over the age of 65 and having certain diseases, such as diabetes, obesity and asthma, put people at increased risk for more severe cases of Covid-19, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Where you live can also be an important factor, as people in nursing homes and other long-term care facilities, prisons and homeless shelters are also at increased risk. Data also show that communities of color can be disproportionately affected by higher rates of illness. That said, there are many cases of severe Covid-19 among people who don’t fall into any of these groups, so your best bet is still to take measures to avoid infection. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusVirginia Beach reopened on May 22.  TOPLINE Yes you can go to the beach—as long as everyone practices social distancing. But remember to check the most recent updates from local and state officials regarding when beaches are open and what activities are permitted.        Surfing is a sport where people “naturally social distance,” says Jim Hennessy, owner of Heritage Surf in Ocean City, New Jersey, which was only recently allowed to reopen and is limited to curbside pickup. That makes surfing an ideal beach activity. “In general, surfers don't really like to sit too close to each other. Because we're kind of all competing for waves,” he says. The shop sells clothing and gear, but is also involved in safety and training programs for surfers of all ages.   If the beach parking lot is overflowing, turn around. If you can’t find a safe spot to lay out your towel 6 feet away from other beachgoers, hit the beach another day. “What I worry about is if you go to a crowded beach and you're not able to maintain that social distancing, especially if you're sitting in a large group of people for an extended period of time,” says Watson. “That's when it becomes dangerous.”  You can still enjoy the beach in many of the ways you normally would, as long as you pay attention to the crowd size and keep at a distance. This could also be an opportunity to try something new — grab a boogie board and if that goes well, try surfing.   Visiting Parks And Recreational Facilities (Centers For Disease Control and Prevention) 7 Ways To Be Safe On Beaches During The Covid-19 Coronavirus Pandemic (Forbes) Can COVID-19 Coronavirus Live In Water? What About Drinking Water And Swimming (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusThe basics are key: Wear a mask and stay six feet from other people. TOPLINE Many retailers are operating at partial capacity, which means there should be room to keep your distance from other shoppers. But remember to limit what you touch and pick up.         Dave Gilboa, cofounder and co-CEO of Warby Parker, still wants people to be able to try on eyeglasses on in-store, but now they’ll have to put up with some supervision. Only two to three customers are allowed in its smallest stores, and they will be escorted by an employee who will sanitize each pair of eyeglasses before and after each wear. There’s a new protocol for eye exams, too. Instead of filling out a paper intake form, customers can fill it out on their phones. Employees will be able to take eye measurements via an iPad or iPhone, without needing to touch the customer’s face. “The intent is both to prevent as much transmission of the disease as possible, but also to make customers and employees feel as safe as possible and let them know we have thought about every piece of the process,” says Gilboa.  Don’t enter a busy store where there doesn’t appear to be any effort to limit the number of people inside. It could be operating in violation of capacity limits set by local and state officials.  Now is a good time to take advantage of customer-friendly policies, like curbside pickup and extended return periods. The sales aren’t bad, either.  Operation Open Doors Checklist (National Retail Federation) Coronavirus Shifts Shopper Expectations As More Stores Reopen In The U.S. (Forbes) Bowling Valets And Socially Distant Laser Tag: Main Event Arcades Reopen With New Rules (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusCouples are turning to micro-weddings and minimonies during the pandemic.  TOPLINE The coronavirus pandemic may undo the way we tie the knot for years to come, giving rise to micro-weddings, “minimonies” and postponements. All event organizers should monitor state and local guidelines and guests should stay 6 feet apart.         Elopements never go out of style. “Many couples are opting for A Little White Chapel’s famous drive-thru wedding tunnel, because they needn’t even leave their car to get hitched,” says Charolette Richards, the self-described “Wedding Queen of the West” and owner of the iconic Las Vegas drive-thru tunnel of love. “Many arrive on horseback or motorcycles, incorporating the couple’s favorite pastimes. It’s also outdoors which allows for more space between guests.” Richards has officiated thousands of weddings over the past 50 years.   When choosing a venue, make sure there is enough space for guests to socially distance, says Adette Contreras, cofounder of Tinsel Experiential Design. If it does not have the layout to accommodate six feet of separation between people, find another space (or trim the guest list further).   Contreras highlights another advantage of hosting an intimate event: “Smaller gatherings can be more intimate and provide opportunities for meaningful conversations with family and friends.”  “Don’t let the pandemic steal your joy!” says Story. “You never know, your Covid-era wedding may be more perfect and magical than you ever dreamed. Keeping your wedding small may turn out to be exactly what you wanted after all.”  What To Do If You Have To Cancel Your Wedding (Forbes) Social Distancing 101 For COVID-19 Coronavirus: Here Are The Dos And Don’ts (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusPlexiglass barriers can help reduce transmission of Covid-19. TOPLINE Many employers should adopt a “hybrid” model of office work, with some employees in the office and others working remotely. Clearly communicate phased reopening plans with employees, especially new office protocols, such as testing and wearing masks.        Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg recently announced sweeping changes to its remote work policies, such as allowing employees to request the option of permanently working from home and “aggressively” increasing the hiring of remote employees to diversify its workforce. “For the last 10 or 11 weeks, we've had 95 percent or more of our population working remotely and what we’ve found is that we’re still able to get a lot of work done,” says Lori Goler, Facebook’s Vice President of People. The new emphasis on remote hiring will allow Facebook to expand its talent pool geographically. “It really creates a lot of opportunity across the United States. So now you don't have to live in one of the locations [where we have offices] which means that people don't have to get up and leave their communities,” Goler says.  When the social media giant starts to reopen offices as permitted by state and local officials, they expect to operate at no more than 25 percent capacity in the near-term while proper safety measures are put in place.  “We decided that we would take a more conservative approach, both in terms of leaving the offices and in terms of returning to the offices,” Goler says.   Be alert for working conditions (or fellow employees) that are not complying with safety guidelines. Offices are full of high-touch surfaces—door handles, light switches, appliances—so check what the new cleaning and disinfection protocols are in your office. Stay away from crowded conference rooms or other commons areas where people are unable to socially distance.   While working remotely is a big change for many people, it also allows for much greater geographic diversity in hiring and access to a whole new pipeline of talented recruits. Plus, many companies will likely take a hybrid approach of having some people work remotely and others in a physical office. “Every company will have to do what’s right for their company and situation but what we found is that it’s actually worked out really well for us,” says Goler of Facebook. “And we’re pretty excited and optimistic about the future.”   Work From Home For Rest Of Year? Some Tech Companies Say “Yes” (Forbes) Here’s What The Post-Coronavirus Office May Look Like (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusAs restaurants reopen, wait staff should remain masked and eating outdoors helps reduce risk. TOPLINE Most restaurants and bars are operating at partial capacity, which means there should be enough space to spread out from fellow patrons in dining rooms. Outdoor seating options are considered safest.         Take your time to implement new policies, advises Grant Pinkerton, a pitmaster who was named to the Forbes 30 Under 30 food and drink list in 2018. Restaurants in Texas started reopening on May 1, but he waited a few extra weeks to make sure his staff members in Houston were ready. “We weren’t going to do anything we didn’t feel comfortable with,” Pinkerton says. He decided to keep booths closed while focusing on curbside sales and outdoor seating, and has since welcomed regulars back inside at 50 percent occupancy. A second location in San Antonio, which is still under construction, will be ready to open its doors in early fall. “We've had eight weeks to perfect our online ordering and work out all the kinks,” he adds. “Now I know when we go there, it's going to be a lot smoother for us.”   Don’t go into a restaurant where the waitstaff aren’t wearing masks. And if the bar is crowded and people can’t stand six feet apart, it’s not worth the risk.   You can invest in some BYO utensils, so you don’t have to use the ones at the restaurant and don’t contribute to plastic waste when ordering take-out at home.   Covid-19 Reopening Guidance The Restaurant Industry (National Restaurant Association) Operational Toolkit for Businesses Considering Reopening or Expanding Operations in COVID-19 (Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security) From contactless delivery to integrity seals, here’s how to make sure your takeout order is safe (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusExpert advice for behaving responsibly during the next phase of the pandemic.  As America emerges from its coronavirus lockdown, safety is crucial: as of late May, over 1.8 million Americans have tested positive for Covid-19. More than 100,000 have died. But the great reopening is confusing: there’s a patchwork of evolving rules as states, counties and even cities take different approaches. In addition to being inconsistent, guidance can also be frustratingly vague, leaving both business owners and customers at a loss about how to behave.  Searching for clarity, Forbes spoke to public health experts, industry associations and entrepreneurs from across the country about best practices. From those conversations, we’ve put together sector-by-sector guides for consumers and businesses alike, with more to follow in the upcoming weeks. Reported by Brianne Garrett, Chelsey Zhu, Chloe Sorvino, Lauren Debter, Maneet Ahuja and Tanya Klich. Edited by Alex Knapp and Katie Jennings.     Public health experts, industry groups and entrepreneurs discuss the best way to safely reopen businesses, events and more.  Getty Images NOAM GALAI / GETTY IMAGES Al Seib/L.A. Times/Getty Images Getty Images Franckreporter/Getty Images Evelyn Hockstein/Getty Images ANNETTE HOLLOWAY / ICON SPORTSWIRE / GETTY IMAGES The Zeiss planetarium projects the start onto the dome of the planetarium in Berlin, Germany, 26 ... [+] March 2014. It was opened in 1987 and will be renovated starting in April at a cost of 12.8 million euros. It will be closed for a year. When it opened it was the biggest and most modern planetarium in Europe. Photo: Maurizio Gambarini/dpa | usage worldwide (Photo by Maurizio Gambarini/picture alliance via Getty Images) As we enter the summer months, most parents will be looking for ways to keep kids entertained and educated after an unusual school year. Heck, most adults will be looking for ways to stay entertained too since summer vacations may or may not be happening. That’s where the internet can help! There are a number of science museums, observatories, and even NASA facilities, that offer online resources to help keep us all busy while staying home. Read on to learn about each and choose one to try this week. It might not be as fun as visiting in person, but it will do until these facilities re-open for visitors again. Outside the Adler Planetarium in Chicago, illinois Google Arts & Culture has put together an incredible interactive site that allows visitors to explore Chicago’s Adler Planetarium from anywhere in the world. From online exhibits and photo galleries to a point-of-view Google ‘Street’ view that allows you to ‘walk’ through different parts of the Planetarium, this is a great opportunity for space enthusiasts to explore the historic 90-year old building and all of the modern artifacts and exhibits. While you can’t explore the whole museum or enter the planetarium for a show, take a ‘walk’-through of the Mission Moon exhibit and gaze in awe at the Apollo 13 command module, nicknamed Odyssey. After exploring the Adler Planetarium online, you could end by watching Apollo 13! Click here to explore the Adler Planetarium on Google Arts & Culture ATACAMA, CHILE - JULY 10: Radio telescope antennas at the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter ... [+] Array (ALMA) are seen afar, on July 10, 2013 at the Chajnantor Plateau, Chile. The Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA), is currently the largest radio telescope in the world. It is located in the Atacama Desert in Chile, where its antennas sit at 5000 m.a.s.l. on the Chajnantor Plateau. Its construction is the result of an international effort and association between Europe (ESO), North America (NRAO) and East Asia (NAOJ), in collaboration with the Republic of Chile, to build the observatory of the Dark Universe. (Photo by Ronald Patrick/Getty Images) The Atacama desert in northern Chile is one of the best places on earth for observational astronomy. Low humidity, high altitude, and minimal light pollution come together to create a pristine stargazing spot – and professional astronomers take full advantage of that at ALMA.  If you take the ALMA virtual tour online, you’ll explore the facility through a series of 360-degree photos. From the antenna array (which does the observational work for astronomers doing research at ALMA) to the administrative spaces, this gives you a peek behind the scenes at how much technology it takes to discover and study astronomical wonders like a ‘baby planet’ or Comet 2I/Borisov. Click here to start the ALMA virtual tour. CHANTILLY, VIRGINIA - AUGUST 20: The Space Shuttle Discovery is the back drop as U.S. Vice President ... [+] Mike Pence chairs the 6th meeting of the National Space Council on "Leading the Next Frontier" at the National Air and Space Museum, Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center, August 20, 2019 in Chantilly, Virginia. Originally established in 1958, this is the 6th meeting of the newly reestablished council in 20 years. (Photo by Mark Wilson/Getty Images) Thanks again to Google Arts & Culture, both locations of the National Air and Space Museum are available online for anyone around the world to explore. You can tour the National Mall Building in Washington D.C., which includes an exhibit dedicated to astronaut Sally Ride, halls and exhibits of space science artifacts from different eras, and a great up-close view of the LM-2 Lunar Module in the Boeing Milestones of Flight Hall. At the virtual Udvar-Hazy Center, you can explore the James S. McDonnell Space Hanger which includes a prized space vehicle on display: the Space Shuttle Discovery. On your virtual ‘walk,’ you can go all the way around Discovery – but don’t forget to use your mouse to look up and around at all of the other space vehicles and scale rocket replicas. Click here to explore the National Air and Space Museum online. The NASA Globe and sign at Langley Research Center. You might recognize NASA Langley Research Center as the facility where Hidden Figures like Katherine Johnson worked during their careers helping NASA reach space. Langley is not one of more popular NASA facilities for visitors; crowds usually gather for in-person tours of Kennedy in Florida, Johnson in Texas, JPL in California, and even Goddard in Maryland.  But since in-person tours at those facilities aren’t an option right now anyway, why not take a virtual tour of this one? You can learn about Building 2103 (the Katherine G. Johnson Computational Research Facility), ‘step into’ the subsonic wind tunnel, and ‘explore’ the Flight Research Hangar. Some places on the virtual tour are places you couldn’t even visit in-person if you wanted to! Click here to start the virtual tour of NASA Langley. NASA’s Orion spacecraft–the crew module and European-built service module—is being lifted into a ... [+] thermal cage and readied for its move on Tuesday into the vacuum chamber at NASA’s Plum Brook Station for testing. Glenn Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio is another NASA facility that is overlooked for a visit except by the most space devoted. They too offer a virtual tour though, giving you a look in some of the labs and testing facilities that help NASA ensure spacecraft – like the Orion spacecraft pictured above – are ready to take astronauts to the Moon and beyond. Virtual tour spots include two wind tunnels – one that’s for low-speed testing and another that’s for supersonic testing –, a ballistics impact lab (to ensure spacecraft can handle micrometeorites and other space debris), the Zero Gravity facility where NASA studies microgravity, and the propulsion systems laboratory. Click here to choose a virtual tour at NASA Glenn. PALOMAR MOUNTAIN, CA - OCTOBER 2008: On Palomar Mountain in California lies the Hale Telescope, ... [+] that has been in use for 60 years. Now added to the telescope is a optics laser that shoots 56 miles upward to help Hale produce sharper and detailed views of galaxies and quasars. (Photo by Joe McNally/Getty Images) One more space place you can take a virtual tour is Palomar Observatory, located high in the mountains outside of San Diego. Palomar is home to the Hale Telescope, a 200-inch telescope which was the largest in the world until 1975. On the virtual tour, you can explore the visitor center, inside the Hale dome, and inside the Oschin and Mayer domes – where two more of Palomar’s telescopes are housed. Click here to start the virtual tour at Palomar Observatory. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusA blurry photo showing a CNN headline (“Two Deadly Viruses Are Killing Americans: Covid-19 And Racism”) and posted to Twitter became the platform’s most-liked tweet this week according to data from social media tracking firm NewsWhip, as turbulent protests triggered by George Floyd’s death brought thousands of Americans to the street, while the coronavirus pandemic is ongoing and unemployment reaches record levels. Smoke rises around a Minneapolis protester during a Saturday demonstration to call for justice for ... [+] George Floyd. “What a headline,” wrote Twitter user @1kingmyles about the CNN chyron, which was displayed during CNN Tonight’s May 27 broadcast. As of Sunday afternoon, the tweet had generated nearly 3 million likes and had been shared over 870,000 times.  In the video clip, Lemon discusses the deaths of Floyd and Ahmaud Arbery, along with the viral video of Amy Cooper calling the cops on a black man in Central Park, saying that longstanding racism, along with Covid-19, are infecting America.  Over 1.7 million Americans have been infected with Covid-19, while over 103,000 have died—but Centers for Disease Control data suggests black people are more likely to be hospitalized with coronavirus, while Wired reports that economic inequality, lack of access to quality healthcare, food deserts and other structural inequities contribute to black people being disproportionately impacted by the pandemic. According to data from the Washington Post on shootings in the U.S. by race, black people account for less than 13% of the overall population, but are shot and killed at a rate far higher than white people.  NewsWhip’s Twitter engagement data comes from its database of influential users, which tracks around 350,000 accounts.   Black people are killed in police shootings at a higher rate per million. "There are two major crises in this country tonight. Two deadly viruses killing Americans. COVID-19, Racism-20. Now we all know that racism is not new this year, but the latest racially-charged incident is from just last night,” said Lemon, referencing the video of a police officer kneeling on Floyd’s neck. "Racism is infecting this country, continues to infect this country. Just as surely as COVID-19. And we don't only see it in encounters between African Americans and the police. It even infects a simple walk in the park." 16.7%. That’s the black unemployment rate during the pandemic, according to data from the Department of Labor. The Hispanic rate stands at 18.9%, and according to Guardian, unemployment among blacks and Hispanics is typically double the white unemployment rate. Economists cited by the Washington Post said that the two groups tend to be concentrated in industries impacted by the pandemic, with jobs that can’t be done from home.  George Floyd’s death stoked nationwide outrage during a time in which people have largely been sheltering in place and unable to live their normal lives due to the pandemic. Historic unemployment and a desire among a significant number of Americans to end police killings of black people have seemingly created a powder keg. Protests are entering their sixth day, and in preceding nights have been volatile and marked by buildings set on fire, looting and violent altercations between protesters and police. President Trump has largely remained silent, and done little to call for calm or unity. He has, however, described protesters as “THUGS” and recommended additional law enforcement presence. As America Burned, President Trump Largely Stayed Silent (Forbes) This is how economic pain is distributed in America (Washington Post) Covid-19 Is Killing Black People Unequally—Don't Be Surprised (Wired) U.S. Police Shootings: Blacks Disproportionately Affected (Statista) Wave Of George Floyd Protests Continues Into Sixth Day (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusBRAZIL - 2020/04/05: In this photo illustration the Youtube logo seen displayed on a smartphone with ... [+] a computer model of the COVID-19 coronavirus in the background. (Photo Illustration by Rafael Henrique/SOPA Images/LightRocket via Getty Images) The conspiracy theory video Plandemic turned the whirlwind of misinformation circulating about the coronavirus into a EF5 tornado of falsehoods, conspiracies and overall dangerous public health information a few weeks ago. But more than a month before Plandemic, and even before the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the public health emergency a pandemic, videos with false or misleading information were racking up tens of millions of views on YouTube, according to two recent studies. Since then, the proliferation of videos with false, misleading or harmful information about the COVID-19 pandemic has only intensified, despite various social media companies’ attempts to rein them in.  These research findings aren’t surprising — misinformation flourished on YouTube during the H1N1, Ebola and Zika epidemics as well, and anyone who has spent time looking at health videos on YouTube has undoubtedly come across conspiracies and other whoppers. But the findings also reveal missed opportunities for government, university and other public health agencies to communicate accurate, helpful information on a popular platform where millions of people seek health information.  The first study, published in Global Public Health, found a lower percentage of misleading videos—about 1 in 11 videos — than the second one, but it also assessed videos in the earliest days of the coronavirus’s spread, up until the day after it was declared a pandemic. The second study, in BMJ Global Health, found that more than a quarter of videos the researchers assessed gave non-factual information. And even then, their study ended in mid-March.  Most Videos Before Pandemic Declaration Had Accurate Information  In the earlier study, researchers searched YouTube with the keyword “coronavirus” and combed through the 113 videos related to COVID-19 with the most views from the first one, on January 21, through March 12, the day after the WHO declared COVID-19 a pandemic. They began with the 150 English-language videos with the highest view count and excluded duplicates, music videos and videos without audio. To be one of the 70% of videos they found to be “useful,” the video needed to include scientifically correct information on any part of COVID-19, including how it spreads, symptoms, testing, treatment or outcomes. The 9% of videos considered “misleading” had a least one scientifically unproven statement. The other 21% of videos were neither useful nor misleading.  Despite the majority of useful videos, only 12% of all the videos were considered comprehensive by addressing most key aspects of the disease (and one of them was misleading). Most concerning was that just one video came from the WHO (considered “useful”), and none came from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The two leading health organizations on the planet were all but absent from YouTube views on the biggest public health emergency of the century. With that big a missed opportunity, it’s not that surprising that later conspiracy videos filled the gap.  “Academic medical hospitals and centers should recognize YouTube as an important platform to convey accurate medical information, particularly during epidemics and pandemics,” the authors wrote. “If these credible organizations fail to utilize multimedia platforms for information delivery, independent users may potentially take advantage of these platforms to conduct their own agenda, potentially affecting public knowledge of COVID-19 and worsening public anxiety during this pandemic.” See Exhibit A: Plandemic. More Than 1 in 4 Later Videos Had False Information The second study looked for the most popular videos on a single day, March 21, by which time most states had just recently issued shelter in place guidelines or similar restrictions. The researchers similarly searched for the most viewed English-language videos about the pandemic: the top 75 videos using the keyword “coronavirus” and the top 75 using “COVID-19.” After excluding duplicates, non-audio-visual or live videos, and those unrelated to COVID-19 or over an hour long, they identified 69 videos with more than 257 million total views.  The researchers used a pre-defined rubric for assessing the accuracy of information in the videos, with videos receiving one point for scientifically correct information on each of the following: COVID-19 symptoms, how it’s transmitted, prevention strategies, potential treatments and its epidemiology, or which populations it affects and how it moves through those populations.   More than one in four videos, 27.5%, contained false information, and those videos had more than 62 million combined views. They also made up about a quarter of all viewership and came from entertainment news, network news, internet news and independent consumers.  An example of the incorrect information included in these videos were claims that the coronavirus “only affects immunocompromised, cancer patients and older people”—in reality, it can and has killed people of all ages. Other videos made false claims about stronger strains in other countries, encouraged irresponsible hoarding behavior or incorrect health advice, contained racist or discriminatory statements, or promoted conspiracy theories, such as the world being controlled by a cult.  “While the power of social media lies in the sheer volume and diversity of information being generated and spread, it has significant potential for harm,” the authors wrote. “The proliferation and spread of misinformation can exacerbate racism and fear and result in unconstructive and dangerous behavior.”  Although government and professional videos had the most accurate and thorough information, they made up only 11% of the videos, and only 1 in 10 viewers saw these videos. Again, the authors pointed out this missed opportunity: “YouTube is a powerful, untapped educational tool that should be better mobilized by health professional to control information and influence public behavior.”  The author recommended that public health institutions use the same strategies that make other videos successful, such as incorporating emotion or humor into their videos or partnering with celebrities.  Getting Most News From Video or TV Is a Poor News Diet  These studies are aimed at other researchers and at public health agencies, but their findings have important implications for everyday people seeking accurate information during the pandemic. YouTube is not an ideal source for information. If you are going to seek information there, make sure it comes from institutions who are relying on scientifically accurate sources. It’s worth pointing out that 24% — about one in four — of the misleading videos came from network news stations. TV news is also often an unreliable source for news. Getting most of your news from television is like getting most of your calories from sugar: a little bit in moderation is fine, but too much is unhealthy and harmful.  Think of your news diet like an actual diet: you need variety and you need meat or some other kind of protein. If you want to get information from network news—no matter what channel it is— and blogs and partisan sites, that’s fine, but if you overdo it without reading articles from reputable, credible publications, it’s like eating ice cream, donuts and chips for breakfast, lunch and dinner.  Your understanding of the world will be as unhealthy and warped as your body would be if you exclusively ate junk food and nothing else. Considering that the information in question right now is about a life-threatening disease in a global pandemic, that kind of unhealthy news diet could literally be deadly to you and people you care about.   Here are the protein and vegetables of news: city and national newspapers, public radio and established online publications. It’s understandable that some people may not want to read their news or might not be able to, due to a disability, poor literacy or another reason. But all these publications also have excellent podcasts that provide similarly accurate information. Some have videos as well, though they may not be on YouTube. No doubt the amount of inaccurate, misleading and conspiracy-promoting videos on YouTube and other social media sites have increased since these studies were published. The only way to deprive them of oxygen is to deprive them of views. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusMelvin Carter, the mayor of Saint Paul, Minnesota, on Saturday said he was wrong when he declared that “every person” arrested in violent Minneapolis protests was from out of state. Saint Paul Mayor Melvin Carter gave an update on the names of the police officer-involved in the ... [+] shooting of William "Billy" Hughes Tuesday August 7, 2018 in St. Paul, MN. Carter said he was given inaccurate information during a police briefing, which he repeated at a Saturday morning press conference, according to CBS reporter David Begnaud. The reversal came after a local news outlet KARE 11 examined data from the Hennepin County Jail’s roster and found nearly all the people arrested actually live in Minneapolis or the surrounding metro area. Carter and other local officials earlier that day sought to paint the chaos in the city as driven by outsiders: “I want to be very, very clear: The people that are doing this are not Minneapolis residents,” Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey added. “They are coming in largely from outside of the city, from outside of the region, to prey on everything we have built over the last several decades.” At the earlier press conference, Department of Public Safety Commissioner John Harrington confirmed evidence of white supremacist groups trying to incite violence; Many posted messages online that encouraged people to go loot in Minneapolis and cause mayhem. Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz, who also announced that he would fully mobilize the Minnesota national guard for the first time in 164 years, called the unrest “an organized attempt to destabilize civil society with no regard for civil life or property.” The dynamic has changed over the last couple days, Walz, Carter and Frey said. Protests gradually shifted from being peaceful on Tuesday, but as more people came from outside of the city, they’ve turned increasingly violent in recent days. “Our great cities of Minneapolis and Saint Paul are under assault by people who do not share our values, who do not value life and the work that went into this, and certainly who are not here to honor George Floyd,” Walz said. “So if you are on the streets tonight, it is very clear: You are not with us.” “This is no longer about protesting… This is about violence and we need to make sure that it stops,” Frey said. “We’re in the middle of a pandemic right now.” The protection of citizens and property is the top priority, Walz and Frey confirmed on Saturday. “That situation can be expected to deteriorate further with these people,” Walz said, adding that violent protestors are being fed professional tactics in urban warfare by outside groups. Trump Requests Military Help As Protests Escalate. Here’s What Happened Friday Night (Forbes) George Floyd’s Death Sparks Protests Across The U.S.: Georgia Governor Activates National Guard In Response To Protests In Atlanta (Forbes) Experts Fear Minneapolis Protests Will Trigger Spike In Coronavirus Cases (Forbes) Pentagon puts military police on alert to go to Minneapolis (Associated Press) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusAs Minnesota officials blamed violent protests on organized groups from out of state, far-right commentators on Twitter increasingly began blaming billionaire George Soros for playing a shadowy role behind the riots taking place in cities across the country—employing an old conspiracy theory based on false information and anti-semitic tropes. Right-wing conservatives claim Soros is to blame for the protests.  Minnesota Governor Tim Walz, along with Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey, Saint Paul Mayor Melvin Carter and Minnesota Attorney General Keith Ellison, confirmed Saturday that outside forces had infiltrated the protests in order to cause mayhem.  State authorities said they were monitoring alleged criminals online, including posts from suspected white supremacist groups trying to incite violence by promoting looting and mayhem in Minneapolis. But many right-wing conservatives have begun to resurrect an old conspiracy theory about billionaire George Soros—who is a major donor to liberal and progressive causes—to make unsubstantiated claims that he is the mastermind behind organizing protests and riots. Soros has poured billions into his philanthropic Open Society Foundations, which funds projects around the world to advance democracy and also domestically funds politically charged organizations ranging from Planned Parenthood to Black Lives Matter, which are often involved in grassroots protests. Right-wing personality Bill Mitchell, for example, called the protestors “antifa and Soros rent-a-thugs,” urging authorities to “PLEASE just arrest George Soros,” and also claiming that the riots are “100% orchestrated by the DNC.” Former game-show host Chuck Woolery, a frequent conservative commentator on social media, sent out a flurry of unsubstantiated tweets saying George Soros was the source of the civic unrest and had funded “violent anarchy against American cities.” Controversial political activist Candace Owens, an African-American pro-Trump commentator who has spoken out against the Black Lives Matter movement, linked the unrest to anti-facist protestors, citing no evidence: “As he did with Antifa, Democrat George Soros has these thugs on payroll.” DeAnna Lorraine, a Republican former Congressional candidate who ran against Nancy Pelosi, also targeted Soros by name, calling him an “evil tyrant,” and darkly claiming “this is a Takeover. We are being invaded from within.” “The people that are doing this are not Minneapolis residents,” Minneapolis Mayor Frey said of the protests on Saturday. “They are coming in largely from outside of the city, from outside of the region.” Saint Paul Mayor Carter also confirmed that every person arrested in his city last night was from out of state: “We don’t know these folks.” Even President Trump, while not naming Soros, blamed the protests on “ANTIFA and the Radical Left.” Attorney General William Barr, in a statement, similarly condemned “far left extremist groups using Antifa-like tactics” for the civil unrest. He added that government authorities, including the Department of Justice and FBI, will aid local efforts to investigate the out-of-state protestors. Soros, a billionaire whose fortune Forbes estimates at $8.3 billion, has regularly been portrayed as a vast left-wing conspiracy unto himself, with many far-right conservatives often blaming him for liberal protests, like unrest in Ferguson, Missouri; violence in Charlottesville, Virginia; and the national anthem protests in the NFL. An uncountable number of conspiracy theorists target Soros because of his backing of liberal causes and Democratic super PACs, not to mention for his Open Society Foundation, which has spent billions supporting democracy and human rights in 120 countries around the world. Many far-right commentators and outlets, like Breitbart, regularly portray Soros as a “globalist.” As The Atlantic describes it, "globalist," is, "an anti-Semitic slur, embraced in alt-right circles before spreading into  broader political discourse." And, quoting the Anti-Defamation League’s Jonathan Greenblatt, it refers to "Jewish people who are seen as having allegiances not to their countries of origin like the United States, but to some global conspiracy.” Trump even used the term to describe Soros in his last 2016 campaign ads, which many regarded as anti-semitic. Soros has long been a target: In 2018, a hand-delivered explosive device was found in his mailbox, though nobody was hurt.  Every Person Arrested In Saint Paul Last Night Was From Out Of State, Mayor Says (Forbes) Trump Requests Military Help As Protests Escalate. Here’s What Happened Friday Night (Forbes) George Floyd’s Death Sparks Protests Across The U.S.: Georgia Governor Activates National Guard In Response To Protests In Atlanta (Forbes) George Soros Has Enemies. He’s Fine With That. (New York Times) Full coverage and live updates on the Coronavirus A Chinese Covid-19 vaccine could be ready by the end of the year, a government body has announced as nations race to be the first to come up with a defense against the virus that has infected nearly 6 million people and wrecked the world economy. A Chinese-state controlled group announced the expect to distribute a Covid-19 vaccine by the end of ... [+] the year. A vaccine developed by two state-affiliated companies working in tandem has the potential to be ready by the tail end of 2020 or by early 2021, according to a social media post made Friday from the Chinese state-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission (SASAC). The two firms, the Wuhan Institute of Biological Products and the Beijing Institute of Biological Products, have embarked on Phase II testing for the vaccines and administered doses to more than 2,000 people during trials, according to Reuters. According to the SASAC, the Beijing Institute of Biological Products production line will be able to manufacture between 100 million and 120 million vaccine doses per year at full capacity.  There are five Chinese-developed immunizations being tested on humans, more than any other country in the world. China, where the Covid-19 virus is believed to have originated, has its health organizations, regulators, research groups and even smaller private companies teaming up and working overtime in a bid to come up with the world’s first effective Covid-19 vaccine. While Chinese President Xi Jinping has promised to share any successful vaccine with other nations, vaccine manufacturing in China has been marred by production quality issues and safety scandals in the past, according to Bloomberg. The Chinese expectation of a vaccine by the end of 2020 is aggressive compared to previous estimates that a vaccine could be a year away. But this week, Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said that a vaccine for Covid-19 could be ready as early as November as the FDA fast-tracks vaccine trials. The Department of Health and Human Services has already inked contracts to order $100 million worth of needles and syringes for a mass vaccination campaign. According to the World Health Organization, there were more than 100 potential Covid-19 vaccines in preclinical trials and 10 undergoing human trials this week.  The race for a vaccine heats up as tension between the U.S. and China escalates after nearly two years of trade spats. U.S. President Donald Trump attacked China this week, claiming they instigated “the Wuhan virus” and then covered it up. Trump said Friday he will end the U.S. relationship with the WHO, which he has accused of being under Chinese control and complicit in the coverup. He also announced he would implement new sanctions and visa restrictions for officials in China who had a role in Beijing’s new national security bill that critics say will reduce Hong Kong’s autonomy from the mainland. Chinese vaccine could be ready by year-end, government body says (Reuters) Chinese Covid-19 Vaccine Expected to Begin Mass Output This Year (Bloomberg) Fauci: ‘We Might Have A Vaccine By The End Of The Year’ (Forbes) Merck Jumps Into The Race For A Coronavirus Vaccine (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusGraffiti has never been so powerful—or urgent. And, in the case of the famed and elusive Banksy, noble. In the past months of the global coronavirus outbreak, local artists have used the walls and sidewalks of their cities and towns as canvases. As the shutdowns and shelter-in-place orders spread across Italy, Spain, Germany, the U.K., India and the U.S, the Krylon cans came out. Filled with technicolor Covid-19 balls and crowns and faces covered by PPE, these murals exhibit fear and fury, solidarity and hope—and nearly universal gratitude to health care workers.   The pandemic has robbed millions of their livelihoods and ability to touch and hug. But not the desire or defiance to hit the empty pavement to create outdoor art galleries. Here are the fresh arrivals to our streets, ready and waiting for the grand reopening.   Krill Kuikhmar/Getty Images  Andy Buchanan/Getty Images  Adam Berry/Getty Images   Chesnot/Getty Images  Chris Graythen/Getty Images  Sopa Images/Getty Images; Robin Utrecht / SOPA Images / LightRocket via Getty-Images; Victoria Jones – PA Images/Getty Images   Chris Graythen, Getty Images  Gabriel Bouys/Getty Images  SOPA Images/Getty Images   Yves Dean / Getty Images  Rob Kim/Getty Images  Indranil Mukherjee/Getty Images  SOPA Images/Getty Images; Anadolu Agency/Getty Images  Picture Alliance/Getty Images Berlin   Get Forbes' daily top headlines straight to your inbox for news on the world's most important entrepreneurs and superstars, expert career advice, and success secrets.Dr. Joshua Liao explains that under the pressure of time and uncertainty, people rarely act purely based on logic. Instead, humans tend to make choices in these situations using a set of mental shortcuts Getty Images  Most states have reached a pivotal moment, embarking on the path of returning their economies back to normal. Using a phased approach, officials have sanctioned the reopening of select business sectors and expressed their plans for other sectors to follow suit if infection rates remain flat or decline over time. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recently affirmed this approach by outlining detailed guidance about data criteria and thresholds for “opening America up again” in three phases.  Recovery requires reliable data and strong public health data surveillance. But human behavior is rarely dictated purely by data. Ultimately it will be the psychology behind Americans’ behaviors that dictates how the country rebounds.  Human behavior has already drastically impacted the healthcare industry. Fears of contracting the virus in medical facilities have plummeted the use of emergency rooms, hospitals and clinics. I cared for patients in Washington state, one of the early epicenters of the pandemic, where hallways were eerily empty in preparation for projected surges, and several patients admitted for non-Covid reasons requested early discharge to avoid exposure to the virus. For hospitals and practices, recovery from this situation is far from certain. Many are furloughing or laying off employees, while others may be beyond saving even with federal financial relief efforts. Behavioral dynamics are also at play on a larger scale. Widespread concerns about the virus may explain why residents in multiple states curtailed work, spending and travel far before their state officials issued formal stay-at-home orders. It is also why over half of Americans would still probably or definitely not engage in activities such as flying on planes or going to the movies, even if restrictions were lifted on the advice of public health officials.  That said, the psychology behind American behavior promises to be much more complex than just fear. People make decisions by weighing social and economic obligations, likely explaining why – in contrast to their unwillingness to engage leisure activities – Americans appear more willing to attend weddings and funerals if public health officials lift restrictions. Additionally, it is also likely why economic hardship has driven some to protest and defy stay-at-home orders, even if it is at the risk of personal and public health.  Though varied, these responses are not surprising to those of us who study human behavior. Under the pressure of time and uncertainty, people rarely act purely based on logic. Instead, humans tend to make choices in these situations using a set of mental shortcuts (called “heuristics” in behavioral and decision science) that are drawn from prior experiences. We use these cognitive strategies to quickly make decisions while minimizing stress. This cognitive approach usually works well for humans, particularly in uncertain situations: choosing whether to drive or take the train to a business conference; deciding whether or not to invest in a time-limited opportunity; or determining a fair salary for negotiating with a prospective employer. Individuals are now facing a new, uncertain situation: choosing activities in the gradual recovery from a global pandemic. Prior experience, memory and mental rules-of-thumb can help people make good decisions. But these tendencies can also work against us. News of a recent train wreck may cause a person to drive to the conference instead of train, despite the relative safety of trains and the known risks of car travel. Positive experiences investing in a particular sector may prompt a person to jump hastily into another seemingly similar, but riskier, investment. Anchoring too heavily on an initial salary target may undercut the productiveness of a negotiation and even harm a person’s job prospects.  And in a global pandemic, distorted perceptions about infection risks can lead Americans – leaders, business owners, employees, and the public alike – away from good decisions and behaviors. For leaders, that determines how they pace reopenings and communicate information to constituents. For business owners and employees, that determines how they about implement policies that preserve workplace productivity and safety. For all of us, that determines what activities that may result in under-engagement (e.g., avoidance even after restrictions are lifted) or over-engagement (e.g., premature rush to restricted activities).  It is no secret that humans can make poor decisions. But it is important to pay attention to the prevalent heuristics that cause us to do so – often in highly predictable ways. As states move to reopen, this recognition could mean the difference between a strategy that focuses on data (hoping that appropriate behavior follows), and one that anticipates and intervenes on faulty behavioral responses alongside data surveillance. What happens in the coming months and years may very well depend on which prevails. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusThe Supreme Court, in a 5-4 decision Friday night, rejected an emergency appeal from a California church that challenged state restrictions on attendance at services during the coronavirus pandemic, amid increasing pressure from religious institutions—and President Trump—to re-open. Chief Justice John Roberts cast the deciding vote in a rare late-night ruling. Chief Justice John Roberts sided with the court’s four other liberal justices to deny the request for intervention from the South Bay United Pentecostal Church in Chula Vista, California. The church had argued that the California Gov. Gavin Newsom’s new limits on in-person services—25% capacity or a maximum of 100 people—discriminate against religion, quoting President Trump’s statement last week that he would “override the governors” if they fail to lift restrictions.  Lower courts had also rejected the church’s challenge to public health orders, and Chief Justice Roberts similarly dismissed the notion of religious discrimination on Friday in a written opinion. The chief justice warned against “second-guessing” state officials and guidelines amid the pandemic, saying that they had leeway to impose restrictions and had not signaled out places of worship for unfair treatment. Liberal justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen G. Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan likewise voted to deny the request, though they did not join the statement from Roberts. The Supreme Court’s four conservative judges—Brett Kavanaugh, Clarence Thomas, Neil Gorsuch and Samual Alito Jr.—said they would have granted the church’s request on the basis that California’s restrictions violate the Constitution’s protection of religious freedom. “Although California’s guidelines place restrictions on places of worship, those restrictions appear consistent with the free exercise clause of the First Amendment,” Roberts said in his three-page written opinion. “Similar or more severe restrictions apply to comparable secular gatherings,” he pointed out. “And the Order exempts or treats more leniently only dissimilar activities, such as operating grocery stores, banks, and laundromats, in which people neither congregate in large groups nor remain in close proximity for extended periods.” “California’s latest safety guidelines discriminate against places of worship and in favor of comparable secular business,” Kavanaugh wrote in a dissent joined by Thomas and Gorsuch. The Supreme Court also turned down another request from several churches outside of Chicago. The separate Illinois case, which is regarded as less-controversial, was rejected without noted dissent.  The court’s ruling is its first attempt to balance the coronavirus crisis against the Constitution's protection of religious freedom. The Supreme Court has similarly ruled on other issues related to the pandemic, including on voting in Wisconsin and prisons in Texas and Ohio. Last week, President Trump urged governors across the country to immediately allow places of worship to reopen, calling them “essential services.” Trump Demands States Reopen Houses Of Worship, Claims Will Override Governors If They Don’t (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusAs Twitter has begun to fact-check and add warnings to inaccurate and inflammatory tweets by President Trump, Facebook is taking a hands-off approach, with CEO Mark Zuckerberg explaining Friday why the site didn’t flag or outright take down a threat from the president to have the military shoot “looters” amid the Minneapolis protests. Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg speaks about the new Facebook News feature at the Paley Center for ... [+] Media on October 25, 2019, in New York City.  In response to violent protests in Minneapolis over the killing of 46-year-old George Floyd, Trump posted an identical message on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram: "These THUGS are dishonoring the memory of George Floyd, and I won't let that happen. Just spoke to Governor Tim Walz and told him that the Military is with him all the way. Any difficulty and we will assume control but, when the looting starts, the shooting starts. Thank you!" Twitter put the statement behind a warning that it was “glorifying violence,” though it still made the message viewable. Facebook, which also owns Instagram, took no action, and late Friday Zuckerberg posted a statement explaining why: “Personally, I have a visceral negative reaction to this kind of divisive and inflammatory rhetoric,” but, he wrote, “I’m responsible for reacting not just in my personal capacity but as the leader of an institution committed to free expression.” While he previously said Facebook doesn’t allow content that “incites violence or risks imminent harm,” he said the company left Trump’s message up “because the National Guard references meant we read it as a warning about state action, and we think people need to know if the government is planning to deploy force.” Zuckerberg also seemed to argue that Twitter’s reasoning was muddled, writing, “We believe that if a post incites violence, it should be removed regardless of whether it is newsworthy, even if it comes from a politician.” Facebook uses third-party fact-checkers, but only to “really catch the worst of the worst stuff,” Zuckerberg said in an interview on CNBC Thursday, adding, “In terms of political speech, again, I think you want to give broad deference to the political process and political speech.” Trump signed a legally fraught executive order Thursday, which attempted to limit the liability protections of internet companies after Twitter added context to an erroneous tweet sent by the president recently, regarding California’s mail-in voting. Zuckerberg was critical of Twitter, saying on Fox News this week that social media companies “shouldn’t be the arbiter of truth.” Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey shot back by tweeting, “This does not make us an ‘arbiter of truth.’ Our intention is to connect the dots of conflicting statements and show the information in dispute so people can judge for themselves.” After Zuckerberg’s comments on Fox News, Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) called them out on MSNBC: “As far as the platforms are concerned, they want two things from the federal government: no regulation and no taxes. And so they cater to the Trump administration all the time. I think that Mark Zuckerberg’s statement was a disgrace.” Trump shared Zuckerberg’s statement on Twitter. Trump's shift in focus to regulating social media companies comes amid the coronavirus pandemic and the death of Floyd in Minneapolis. A video showing a white police officer, Derek Chauvin, pressing his knee into the black man’s neck as he complained he couldn’t breathe went viral on Monday and sparked days of protest, during which tear gas was shot at demonstrators and a police precinct was set afire Thursday night. Chauvin and three other officers on the scene—Thomas Lane, Tou Thao and J. Alexander Kueng—were fired, and Chauvin was arrested Friday on charges of third-degree murder and manslaughter. The U.S. leads all countries in confirmed cases of the coronavirus with 1,745,606, as well as reported deaths with 102,798. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusGlobal public health experts denounced President Donald Trump’s decision to cut ties with the World Health Organization, calling it “unconscionable” and “dangerous,” promising to hinder the world’s ability to combat the coronavirus pandemic as well as future disease outbreaks. A photo taken in the late hours of May 29, 2020 shows a sign of the World Health Organization (WHO) ... [+] at their headquarters in Geneva amid the COVID-19 outbreak, caused by the novel coronavirus. Trump on Friday said he will terminate the U.S. relationship with the WHO, which he has accused of being controlled by China and having covered up the spread of the disease in the country. The president said he will redirect WHO funds to other global public health needs, but there are questions as to whether Trump has the legal authority to withdraw funds from the WHO without authorization from Congress. Peter Hotez, dean of the National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor University, told Forbes the move will make it harder for the WHO to coordinate drug trials for treatments and vaccines as well as combat the pandemic in developing countries.  Outside the coronavirus, Trump’s actions threaten the WHO’s efforts to provide expertise and coordination on health issues including polio, tuberculosis, HIV and malaria.  Not participating in WHO decisionmaking would also ensure the U.S. loses its “seat at the table in shaping global practices and guidelines, crisis response operations, and partnerships,” said the Center For Global Development, a think tank focusing on reducing global inequality. The military’s Africa Command is also concerned that withdrawing WHO funding could be used by China to expand its influence in Africa, the Nation reported.  “I was just disgusted that we would terminate the relationship with WHO at a time when the only way we’re going to solve the Covid-19 pandemic is through the closer links to the WHO for international cooperation around disease control and vaccine development,” Hotez said. 15%, that’s the share of the WHO’s budget covered by the U.S, making it the organization’s largest contributor.  Public health experts have criticized Trump for his coronavirus response, including the administration’s failure to ramp up testing in the early days of the pandemic and continuing to praise hydroxychloroquine, an unproven drug that may put patients in danger. Two Legal Experts Explain Why The U.S. Should Not Pull Funding From The WHO Amid COVID-19 Pandemic (Forbes) An Infectious Disease Expert Explains Why The WHO Is Crucial For Fighting The Coronavirus Pandemic (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusMedical professionals prepare to administer a coronavirus test at a drive-thru testing site run by ... [+] George Washington University Hospital. As Covid-19 coronavirus testing becomes more abundant and accessible—more than 15 million have been administered across the U.S. to date—so do questions about the various testing locations and types of tests being offered. But when you’re trying to discover this information, it’s not always easy to come by. “At the onset of a pandemic, there was a lack of information sharing as well as a scarcity of certain resources,” says Dylan Cahill, a first-year student at Harvard Medical. “Early on we were thinking there might be some way in which we could create some sort of a crowdsourcing platform that would help connect people with these resources.” This thought led Cahill and his friend J.C. Panagides, also a first-year med student at Harvard, to develop a way for people to get better information about coronavirus testing. More than half of Americans are turning to the Internet for essential guidance throughout the pandemic, but Cahill and Panagides wanted to ensure testing site information was accurate, relatable and, above all, first-hand.  The duo launched both the mobile and desktop version of their Covid-19 testing location app on March 17. Their initial aim was simply to provide information about where testing sites were located. “Our intentions were to track the location and operational capacity of sites as they opened around the country at a time when it was almost impossible to find a testing location or get specific, up to date information about that site,” Cahill. Starting May 1, Cahill and Panagides expanded the information their site offered, asking people receiving coronavirus tests to share more about their experience, including details like waiting times and doctor-patient rapport. So far, some 50 reviews have come in from 16 states in locations mostly in the New England, Southeast, and West Coast areas. Groopit's Covid-19 testing review app. “There’s a lot of value in people sharing their personal stories and experiences,” says Cahill. “Other people can read these stories and experiences and better know things like what they should have prepared for [testing] or how much time out of their day they should budget, and even understand the emotional side.” To help build the platform, Cahill and Panagides sought assistance from Groopit. The Seattle-based crowdsolving service, which launched in 2018 and is backed by LinkedIn, PayPal, 23&Me, and Microsoft investors, works with customers interested in collecting real-time data about things like activist engagement, environmental monitoring and violence prevention. Because the company was already working with health-related scenarios, its software is HIPAA compliant, meaning it adheres to medical privacy and security regulations. That was a big leg up in helping develop their platform, Panagides says.  Since the start of the pandemic, gathering virus-related information has been a popular request among new clients, says Groopit CEO and cofounder Tammy Savage. A group of neighborhood associations in Nebraska, for example, are using Groopit’s services to share and compare Covid-19 data and identify local volunteers. “The problem that we're solving 30 days from now is probably not exactly the problem that we're solving today,” says Savage. “One of the really important things about crowdsolving is that you can adjust in the moment and you’re always contributing the most important information in real-time and solving those problems in real-time.” Cahill and Panagides are keeping in mind the long term benefits of their real-time data, and are confident it'll be useful in helping shape future coronavirus research.  “These sorts of details could be helpful for policymakers and public health officials who monitor trends—seeing what people are saying, what is working, what isn't and the gaps that need to be addressed,” says Cahill. Full coverage and live updates on the Coronavirus Greece will welcome international tourists from nearly 30 countries back in June, but will retain a ban on holidaymakers from countries with high Covid-19 infection rates like the United States, the Greek government announced. Greece will begin permitting some foreign tourists in June.  Visitors from 29 permitted countries will be able to enter Greece via direct flights to Athens and to Thessaloniki, a city in the north starting June 15, the Greek Tourism Ministry said Friday. Americans will not be allowed back in just yet, as Greece will continue to block travelers from countries with high Covid-19 infection rates. Countries like the U.K., Brazil and Sweden have also not received the go-ahead for their residents to have a Greek vacation until at least July, when the tourism ministry said they hoped to expand their list of approved countries to include more.  For those allowed to enter, Greece will implement measures to keep visitors and Greeks safe, like capacity limits and designated doctors for hotels, while visitors will be subject to random Covid-19 testing, according to Reuters. Greek officials are eager to attract travelers in time for the peak of the summer holiday season, as tourism makes up about a fifth of the Greek economy. Roughly 33 million visitors brought in about $21 billion to Greece in 2019. “Our aim is to be able to welcome every tourist who has overcome their fear and has the ability to travel to our country,” Minister of Tourism Harry Theoharis said on a Greek television station Friday. Greece has been praised for largely controlling its Covid-19 outbreak, thanks in part to ordering a lock down early on. On Friday, Greece had counted 175 deaths and just less than 3,000 confirmed cases, and no infections have been found on most of the country’s islands, a popular holiday destination. Greece’s move to open to international travelers follows the same decision by Italy and Spain, two vacation spots that also depend on tourist spending. Greece: Tourists from 29 countries can fly in as of June 15 (Associated Press) Greece to open to tourists from 29 countries from June 15 (Reuters) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusThe market fell sharply for most of Friday as investors braced for President Trump’s announcement regarding China, but despite new sanctions and penalties, stocks turned positive after the phase one trade deal was kept intact. Trump will make an announcement regarding U.S.-China relations on Friday.  The Dow Jones Industrial Average was flat on Friday, while the S&P 500 was up 0.5% and the tech-heavy Nasdaq gained 1.3%. Stocks moved lower for much of the day, with the Dow falling by around 250 points, as Wall Street nervously awaited Trump’s news conference on U.S.-China relations.  The president announced Friday that he would impose new sanctions and visa restrictions on Chinese officials who played a role in “smothering” Hong Kong’s freedom; He also directed his administration to revoke the city’s preferential treatment. The United States will also terminate its relationship with the World Health Organization, Trump said, adding that China has “total control” over the WHO. The moves came in response to Beijing’s new national security bill for Hong Kong, which reduces the city’s autonomy from mainland China. The market rebounded sharply following Trump’s announcement, with the S&P 500 turning positive, after it became clear that the phase one trade deal with China would remain intact. U.S. consumer spending plunged by a record 13.6% in April, more than the 12.9% expected, according to new data Friday. The U.S. savings rate, on the other hand, surged 33% to an all-time high as more Americans stockpiled cash and cut back on spending amid the pandemic. JPMorgan 
  
  JPM 
  strategist Marko Kolanovic, who correctly predicted the market’s recovery in late March, warned investors to be more cautious about stocks because of a possible economic clash with China. “A complete breakdown of supply chains and international trade, primarily between the two largest economies (U.S. and China), would justify equities trading drastically lower,” Kolanovic said in a recent note. Rising U.S.-China tensions could threaten the market’s recent rally. Trade fears have escalated as both countries continue to blame each other for spreading the coronavirus pandemic. Trump has criticized the Chinese government’s response to the outbreak and has repeatedly touted a controversial theory that the virus originated in a Wuhan lab. U.S. lawmakers have also increasingly pushed back on China increasing its grip over Hong Kong. Earlier on Friday, the White House’s top economic advisor, Larry Kudlow, told Fox News that the U.S. government is “furious” with China’s behavior in recent weeks. On Wednesday, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo confirmed to Congress that Hong Kong is no longer “politically autonomous” from China. The United States wants an “open and constructive relationship” with China, Trump said on Friday, but added that because Beijing has broken its promises, the U.S. will defend its national interests. Shares of Twitter continued to fall on Friday, after President Trump signed an executive order targeting social media platforms late on Thursday. The move comes after Twitter for the first time fact-checked some of Trump’s tweets, prompting outrage from the president. Trump first announced the news conference regarding China late on Thursday, causing stocks to tumble—the Dow gave up 300 points—and turn negative in the final hour of trading. While the market was down for most of Friday, the major averages sharply cut their losses right before the press conference, following a report from Bloomberg which said that Trump would not scrap the phase one trade deal. The market is still up for the week, thanks to increasing optimism on Wall Street over a successful reopening of the economy and a potential coronavirus vaccine. Stocks broke back above two crucial milestones on Wednesday that show the market’s recovery from the coronavirus downturn in late March. The Dow closed above 25,000 and the S&P closed above 3,000, both for the first time since March. Trump Announces New Sanctions On Chinese Officials, But Won’t Scrap Phase One Trade Deal (Forbes) Dow Falls 150 Points After Trump Moves To Pressure China (Forbes) Dow Closes Above 25,000 For First Time Since March (Forbes) As Las Vegas Reopens, Should Investors Bet On Casino Stocks Rebounding? (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusIn an increasingly confrontational approach to China, President Trump announced new targeted sanctions against Chinese officials on Friday and directed his administration to revoke special trade exemptions for Hong Kong, though he said he would keep a phase one trade deal with China intact. “We will take action to revoke Hong Kong’s preferential treatment,” Trump said. Trump announced that he would impose new sanctions and visa restrictions on Chinese officials who played a role in “smothering” Hong Kong’s freedom, while also directing his administration to end the city’s preferential treatment, separate from China, in customs, trade and travel.  The move comes in response to Beijing’s new national security bill for Hong Kong, which reduces the city’s autonomy from mainland China. China unilaterally imposed control over Hong Kong’s national security, Trump said: “China is abandoning of idea of ‘One country, two systems’ in favor of ‘one country, one system.’” The United States will also terminate its relationship with the World Health Organization, Trump announced, claiming that China has “total control” over the WHO. Trump cited his belief that China has engaged in a cover up of “the Wuhan virus,” accusing the country of instigating the global pandemic that has killed millions. Stocks had been falling for most of the day as Wall Street braced for Trump’s press conference: The Dow was plunged by around 250 points on fears that the president would either impose new sanctions or trade penalties. Stocks rebounded sharply and turned positive after Trump’s announcement, however, as it became clear that he would not pull the U.S. out of the phase one trade deal with China.  “This is a tragedy for the people of Hong Kong, the people of China and indeed the people of the world,” Trump said. The United States wants an “open and constructive relationship” with China, he said, but added that because Beijing has broken its promises, the U.S. will defend its national interests. Trump first announced the news conference regarding China late on Thursday, causing stocks to tumble—the Dow gave up 300 points—and turn negative in the final hour of trading. While the market was down for most of Friday, the major averages sharply cut their losses right before the press conference, following a report from Bloomberg which said that Trump would not scrap the phase one trade deal.  Rising U.S.-China tensions could threaten the market’s recent rally. Trade fears have escalated as both countries continue to feud over blame for spreading the coronavirus pandemic. Trump has criticized the Chinese government’s response to the outbreak and has repeatedly touted a controversial theory that the virus originated in a Wuhan lab. U.S. lawmakers have also increasingly pushed back on China increasing its grip over Hong Kong. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo confirmed to Congress on Wednesday that Hong Kong is no longer “politically autonomous” from China.  Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusIn a Friday press conference on relations between the United States and China, President Trump announced he's terminating the country's relationship with the World Health Organization amid the Covid-19 coronavirus pandemic—but also refused to take questions from the media, avoiding any discussion of his controversial “shooting” tweet about protests in Minneapolis. President Donald Trump speaks in the Rose Garden of the White House, Friday, May 29, 2020, in ... [+] Washington. (AP Photo/Alex Brandon) In April, Trump put a 60-90 day hold on U.S. funding to the WHO, accusing it of "severely mismanaging and covering up" the outbreak. On Friday, he accused the WHO of misleading the world due to pressure from China, though Trump himself praised the country for its transparency up into March and did not make major moves in February to address the oncoming pandemic. Trump did not take questions after his statements, which follows protests in Minneapolis over the killing of 46-year-old George Floyd while being taken into police custody. Amid the Minneapolis protests Thursday night, Trump threatened in a tweet with historically racial connotations, "When the looting starts, the shooting starts." Right before his press conference on Friday, Trump attempted to backpedal, linking his threat against demonstrators to the seven people shot during a protest in Louisville, Kentucky Thursday night, saying "It was spoken as a fact, not as a statement" and that the only people that should have a problem with it are "the haters and those looking to cause trouble on social media." Derek Chauvin, the former officer who is seen on video with his knee pressed against Floyd's neck as he says "I can't breathe," was taken into custody by state authorities Friday afternoon and charged with murder and manslaughter, though the three other arresting officers who were relieved on their positions have not yet been arrested. Key background: A video of Floyd's death while being held down by a white police officer in Minneapolis went viral on Monday. Chauvin, along with former officers Thomas Lane, Tou Thao and J. Alexander Kueng, arrested Floyd on suspicions that he used a counterfeit $20 bill at a convenience store. Local, state and federal authorities are investigating the incident, which was filmed by a bystander. Protests began soon after, with teargas being shot at unarmed demonstrators and a police precinct being set afire Thursday night. These events are all occurring during the ongoing Covid-19 coronavirus pandemic. The United States leads the world in confirmed cases of the virus with 1,729,185 and in reported deaths with 101,963. News Peg: Amid the killing of Floyd and the pandemic, Trump has shifted his focus toward Twitter's new policy of fact-checking select tweets. On Thursday, after Twitter added context to an inaccurate claim he made about absentee ballots in California, Trump signed a legally fraught executive order attempting to curtail liability protections for Internet companies under Section 230. During the signing, Trump admitted that it would probably be challenged in court and any new regulations would likely require the cooperation of Congress. Twitter subsequently added a disclaimer to his protest tweets, saying it "violated the Twitter Rules about glorifying violence" but that it would keep it accessible for "the public's interest," with Trump later tweeting "REVOKE 230!" Crucial Quote: “I did not know that he was going to tweet. He certainly can. It's just not helpful. It's not helpful," Minnesota Governor Tim Walz said of Trump's comments on Twitter. Chief Critics: Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) called Trump’s executive order a distraction in a statement Thursday. “Clearly and sadly, the president’s executive order is a desperate distraction from his failure to provide a national testing strategy to defeat Covid-19." Regarding the defunding of the WHO, billionaire Bill Gates, one of its largest voluntary donors, said in April that the move is "as dangerous as it sounds...the world needs WHO now more than ever." Responding to Trump's tweets, including the assertion that he's "very weak," Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey on Friday said, "Weakness is refusing to take responsibility for your actions. Weakness is pointing your finger at somebody else during a time of crisis." Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusElderly ill woman and healthy caregiver wearing face masks to protect against coronavirus. People aren't equally susceptible to coronavirus disease. We know relatively little about which factors influence the severity of symptoms you would experience if infected by the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The elderly are especially vulnerable, for example, but the reasons why are a lot more complex than a weaker immune system. Medical researchers have now identified one factor that influences your risk of severe disease: a variant of the gene 'APOE', which is associated with dementia. You normally inherit two copies of this 'dementia gene' (one from each parent), which comes in variants that include e3 and e4. Among individuals of European ancestry, the most common APOE genotype is two copies of the e3 variant, e3/e3, which isn't linked to dementia. But in around 1 in 36 'Europeans', both copies are e4 (you have the letter 'C' instead of 'T' in your DNA) and the gene produces a faulty APOE protein. This variant is a common genetic factor associated with late-onset Alzheimer's disease. According to the new study, people who carry APOE e4/e4 have twice the risk of developing severe COVID-19 (when compared to those with e3/e3), as discovered after scanning the UK Biobank, a database containing DNA sequences from half a million volunteers. I understand more than most about APOE after having my whole genome sequenced. Reading every letter in my DNA revealed that I have one copy of each APOE variant (my immediate ancestors originated from Asia via Africa). Note that if, like me, you carry the e3/e4 combination of APOE variants, it's unlikely you'll be at higher risk of severe COVID-19 because a working gene can often make enough protein to compensate for the other, faulty variant. By analogy, missing one functional gene isn't like a car you can't drive because it's missing a wheel, but like a broken headlamp — the working light will still let you see the road in the dark. The new analysis was published in the Journal of Gerontology: Medical Sciences and carried out by researchers at the University of Exeter in the UK and the University of Connecticut in the US. The two teams previously showed that those with dementia are three times more likely to suffer from severe COVID-19. That result could potentially be explained by older people having an increased chance of exposure to the virus in care homes, however. The new research suggests a genetic factor is also involved. Of the 382,188 participants in the BioBank with European ancestors, 9022 (2.4%) carry the faulty e4/e4 genotype. And of the 721 individuals who tested positive for coronavirus, 37 (5.1%) also have those genetic variants of ApoE. APOE stands for 'apolipoprotein E' and, as the lipid part of its name implies, the gene produces a protein that enables our bodies to transport cholesterol and other kinds of fat through the bloodstream — which is why variants of this so-called 'dementia gene' are also associated with cardiovascular conditions. This highlights how faulty APOE genes can have knock-on effects beyond the blood and brain — including the body's response to COVID-19. The study was led by epidemiologist David Melzer, who emphasised that the greater vulnerability to severe disease isn't just down to ageing — genetic predisposition also plays a part. "This high risk may not simply be due to the effects of dementia, advancing age or frailty, or exposure to the virus in care homes. The effect could be partly due to this underlying genetic change, which puts them at risk for both COVID-19 and dementia." Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusNew York Governor Andrew Cuomo said in a press conference on Friday that his state is coming “close” to the bottom of the curve, with five regions now set to begin a phase 2 reopening. Most of the states regions have begun a phase 1 reopening. The number of coronavirus hospitalizations, intubations and new cases were all down again on Friday, Cuomo said, which continues to be good news. Another 67 New Yorkers died from the virus, which is down from 74 deaths in the previous day. The daily death toll continues to decline, hitting its “lowest level ever,” Cuomo said. “We hope and we pray that continues to be the case.” 5 upstate New York regions will now enter a phase 2 reopening, Cuomo confirmed on Friday: “Their data has been reviewed and the experts say to us it’s safe to move forward.” Those regions that will enter phase 2 include: Central New York, North Country, Finger Lakes, Southern Tier and the Mohawk Valley. Phase 2 allows offices, stores and personal-service businesses like barber shops to reopen, but with restrictions. The New York City region, which will be “more complicated” to reopen, is on track to enter phase 1 on June 8, Cuomo said. Gov. Cuomo announced a new executive order on Thursday that allows businesses to deny entry to customers who don’t wear masks or face coverings. Almost all of New York’s regions, except for New York City, have so far qualified for a phase 1 reopening after meeting seven metrics outlined by state health officials. The Long Island and Mid-Hudson regions began their phase one reopening earlier this week.  New York City, which was hardest-hit by the pandemic, will be the last in the state to open: It currently only meets four out of the seven criteria required by the state to begin a phase 1 reopening. That’s how many cases of coronavirus have been confirmed in New York as of Friday, according to Johns Hopkins University. Cuomo Will Let New York Businesses Deny Service To Customers Without Masks (Forbes) New York Reports Lowest Number Of Coronavirus Deaths As Two More Regions Reopen (Forbes) New York Coronavirus Deaths Fall To Less Than 100 Per Day (Forbes) Cuomo: Five New York Regions To Begin Reopening Today (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusFlorida Tech eliminated its football program after only seven season at the Division II level. The ... [+] Panthers made two playoff appearances under coach Steve Englehart. Steve Englehart arrived at Florida Tech less than a decade ago to launch a football program and fulfill the many dreams that go along with it. Those dreams morphed into realities and created memories that will not fade anytime soon, though those memories span a timeline all too short. “I showed up here in 2011 with nothing more than a bunch of ideas and hopes that this place could be what I thought it could be,” he said. “That would be a Division II goldmine knowing that we were the only Division II program in the state of Florida at the time. We would have a great location for recruiting and all those things. That’s why we were able to be successful so quickly.” The Panthers took the field in 2013 and went 5-7. In their first game they defeated visiting Stetson 20-13, with the outcome mirroring their inaugural year. In 2014, they traveled to Texas and toppled No. 12 Tarleton State at AT&T Stadium. The next season the Panthers continued to realize their dreams when they shattered those of No. 1 West Georgia on Senior Day. “To beat the No. 1 team in the country was huge,” said Englehart. “It was like, ‘Wow, we may have arrived.’ That was our sixth victory in the row and it was only our third year.” Memorable wins yielded memorable seasons as Tech advanced to the playoffs in 2016 and 2018. Alas, a 42-3 win over fellow Gulf South Conference member Shorter University to close out the 2019 season proved to be the final chapter in the Panthers’ seven seasons.  "Indeed, all of higher education is struggling to deal with the realities of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the uncertainty that accompanies a global disruption to daily life,” president T. Dwayne McKay said in a message posted on the school’s website May 11. “Some universities will no doubt close. Florida Tech, however, has plans to persevere." In order to achieve that last point, the administration felt it had to make several cuts across in academics and athletics, including eliminating the football program. “It’s tough because it came as such a surprise,” said Englehart, whose assistants over the past seven years included former Cincinnati head coach and Notre Dame defensive coordinator Rick Minter, who served as the Panthers’ DC in 2017 and 2018. “You watch the Michael Jordan documentary, The Last Dance, and I kind of wish (the administration) would have given us a last dance where they said, ‘We can’t do it anymore, but we’re going to give you this year and understand at the end of the season you’re done.’” There will be no such gridiron finale at the private school founded in 1958. Located in Melbourne, about 20 miles south of Cape Canaveral, the school had close to 5,000 undergraduate and graduate students on the main campus in fall 2019.  “You never want to have a program go down, especially when it has been successful and with a great bunch of people running it,” said interim athletic director Pete Mazzone, who became Florida Tech’s associate athletic director in 1985 and coaches men’s and women’s track and cross country. “Coach Englehart did a fantastic job, he and his staff. To build a program from scratch and have that kind of success at a private university, an academically-driven university, then you’ve done a very good job.” According to the U.S. Department of Education, Florida Tech’s football program accounted for $3.1 million, or about 30% of the athletic department’s $10.7 million in expenses during the 2018-19 fiscal year. It was a fiscal year in which many cracks surfaced as the school dropped its men’s and women’s tennis and women’s golf programs.  As with those student-athletes, the 120 affected by the loss of football will have their scholarships honored up to four years. Englehart noted that several of them have opportunities to play elsewhere, including six or seven that could sign with Division I programs. One of them, linebacker Evan Thompson, committed to FAU ten days after Florida Tech shuttered its program.  Thompson said he immediately heard from nearly 100 football coaches with 10 making an offer to resume his career. Football Bowl Subdivision programs other than FAU to contact him were Temple and Liberty.  Linebacker Evan Thompson led Florida Tech in tackles, tackles for loss and sacks in 2019. He will ... [+] play his final season of college football at FAU. The 5-foot-11 and 212-pound Thompson, who has one year of eligibility remaining, led the team last season in tackles (89), tackles for loss (13) and sacks (5.5). At FAU, which is about 135 miles down the coast from Melbourne, he will play for coach Willie Taggart and defensive coordinator Jim Leavitt, both in their first years at the school.  “It’s a dream come true,” he said of the opportunity to play for the Owls, who won a pair of Conference USA championships the past three years under Lane Kiffin. “I didn’t have the accolades or achievements to go there out of high school and I would never have expected this to happen. The thing I am most excited about is joining coach Leavitt’s defense. I can’t wait to get down there and play for the new coaching staff.” Football was far from the only thing for Thompson, who grew up outside Orlando, to consider in committing to FAU. He is also a golfer and because this past season was cut short due to the pandemic, he will have two years of eligibility on the links. At FAU he will be able to complete his undergraduate studies (entrepreneurship with a minor in sustainability) prior to going for his master’s.  “When I first decided I was transferring, the school I wanted to attend was one where I can complete my undergrad and play my final season of football and also do my graduate studies and play my final two years of golf,” said Thompson, who noted the family-type relationship among Panthers players and coaches is what he will miss most about his time at Florida Tech. “FAU was the one that stood out the most. It worked out perfectly.” While Thompson has the next chapter in his college career lined up, other players are sorting out the many details, including kicker Trey Schaneville. Like Thompson, the Melbourne native is a two-sport athlete as he is also a guard on the Panthers’ basketball team.  Schaneville, who as a freshman in 2018 set the school mark by making 15 field goals (20 attempts), is undecided as to where the remainder of his college career will play out. He has heard from several schools and if he moves on, Valdosta State, which is interested in him for both sports, is a potential landing spot.  For football only, Schaneville heard from Football Championship Subdivision member Gardner-Webb.  “I have a couple of options to transfer, but I am not sure if I am leaving yet,” said Schaneville, who noted one of his career highlights was an overtime field goal that defeated North Greenville last season. “Valdosta State offered me for both football and basketball, so that is an option I  am strongly considering.”   While Thompson is set with what’s next and Schaneville is among those weighing their options, many football careers have come to an end. Trent Chmelik, who totaled 3,041 yards as the Panthers’ starting quarterback in 2018 and one season of eligibility remaining, will not be moving on.  “He had one year left and is in grad school,” said Englehart, of the fifth-year senior from Clearwater. “He is not going to play his final season because he wants to stay and complete his master’s.”  As for Englehart, who was a quarterback at Indiana State in the late ’90s and served as offensive coordinator at his alma mater before arriving at Florida Tech, he is taking this time to look at career options outside of football while leaving the door open to remaining in the game. “I am in wait-and-see mode,” he said. “I have always had interests in other areas, but with coaching and putting in 90-hour weeks you rarely have time to do other things. I am going to take some time to explore opportunities in business and investment-type areas and see where it goes. Who knows? I may get back into football.” Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusA deadly disease caused paralysis in decision-making at the top and misinformation to spread on social media—in a simulated epidemic from September 2019 that provides hard lessons for today. Benjamin Davies led an epidemic simulation in September 2019 that has eerie parallels to the current ... [+] pandemic. In September 2019, Benjamin Davies, who creates war games for the U.S. Naval War College, designed a simulated epidemic to improve crisis management among experts who combat similar situations in real life. In the simulation, an infectious disease spread through a densely populated city with 21 million people and pockets of inequality that became a hotbed for contagion. Those who contracted the virus suffered a cough and a raging fever that led to respiratory failure. Even when a cure was developed, authorities couldn’t prevent a cascade of failures. Of course, Davies wasn’t thinking of the current coronavirus pandemic when he created the game. He had another infectious disease in mind, namely Ebola. But the results of that simulation provide insight into what’s going wrong in the response to the Covid-19. The simulation’s goal was for participants to act as they would in their real-life roles in the event of a similar threat. To make it as accurate as possible, the US Naval War College teamed up with the National Center for Disaster Medicine and Public Health and the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory and brought together 50 stakeholders from organizations, many of which are now responding to the Covid-19 pandemic. Experts from the State Department, the US Health and Human Services and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) came to Laurel, Maryland for the two-day workshop in September, along with representatives of the private sector and NGOs. “We wanted to identify risks and come up with ideas to remedy decision paralysis,” Davies says. No one expected the war game become reality so soon. “The timing is uncanny,” says Captain Alexander Soukhanov, director of Moran Cyber Shipping and a simulation participant. What the simulation unearthed was a dynamic that hampered effective crisis management: a preference for inaction.  The idea of the “Urban Outbreak 2019” simulation came to Davies and his colleagues at a civilian-military humanitarian workshop, when they realized there was surprisingly little written about disaster response in big cities. Response to epidemics has been professionalized for rural environments, but cities create a unique challenge because they operate in some ways like a living organism, where different organs interact. The simulation’s aim was to identify risks in such a dangerous scenario and work out ideas to overcome them. The simulation began with the World Health Organization (WHO) declaring a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. A fictional virus called P.ashlii spread with a high reproduction value, induced flu-like symptoms and caused a small part of the population to wind up in intensive care. Over 90,000 infected with P.ashlii died. Ironically, some experts invited to the war game found this storyline unrealistic, and so the war game had to be toned down before the simulation began. Months later, it has become clear to these researchers that a learning opportunity to prepare for a pandemic was lost.  Phase One: A Chaotic Response The first weeks of the simulation were geared to be the time for relevant agencies and organizations to gather information and work out who is in charge. “The first five steps in mitigating an outbreak are far more important, than the last 50 moves,” says Davies. What the simulation unearthed instead was a dynamic that hampered effective crisis management: a preference for inaction. Players from the military and government agencies were quick to provide reasons why they could not act, according to a summary report of the simulation. They also avoided getting involved with the affected population, preferring instead to work on coordination with each other, notes Davies. “The big fear was that we wouldn't coordinate enough, or we wouldn't follow the right command and control structure, or we wouldn't be creating a great common operating picture,” he says. Representatives of the CDC, the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and the US Agency for International Development (USAID) were more concerned with “nebulous high-level policy issues,” according to the summary report, and focused more on details about the command structure. These representatives actively avoided discussing how to distribute the antibiotics needed to heal the disease in favor of bureaucratic issues. Frontline healthcare workers and first responders participating in the simulation, were considered to be a better source of realistic assessment, according to Davies, and were frustrated with the response of the military and USAID. “Health care workers don’t need to waste time discussing coordination – our mission is the population in front of us,” humanitarians said in the summary report. Phase Two: Misinformation And Supply Shortages “The bug exploded in the second phase” of the exercise, Davies says, which simulated the third month of the outbreak. By this time misinformation was spreading in the population about the fictional disease. One element designed by the researcher was that many in the public believed the government was using the outbreak to kill slum dwellers and take back land.  Short supplies in medical equipment and the failing medical system created ripple effects in the simulation, both good and bad. For example, there was a lot of generosity and donations among the simulated public. But the outbreak exacerbated existing deficiencies, too. Debt, spousal abuse and drug problems ticked up. Health systems and supply chains started to collapse, public services became intermittent, and hoarding and theft led to extremely lucrative black markets.  Participants had to rely on themselves when there was no guidance or authority coming from the federal government.  As a consequence, the risk for certain population groups would rise. Within the simulation, Davies constructed game scenarios which sound realistic in the current pandemic. If ambulances couldn’t handle the high number of emergency calls, people started taking informal transportation and cabs to get to the hospital. But cab drivers didn’t necessarily want to serve as ambulances, so only a handful were simulated to be willing to take the risk, though the number grew as it became more lucrative to give rides.  “It’s a race to the bottom in terms of risk for the cab driver,” Davies says.  Davies observed another behavior that he’s seeing again in the current pandemic. While professionals in charge of responding to an outbreak are the best in their field, they don’t feel confident about making large scale decisions affecting so many levels. “The hard part about a pandemic is that it requires us all to get out of our expertise,” he says. An epidemiologist doesn’t just make strictly medical decisions, but also has to consider their feasibility and economic implications. If those decisions don’t get made, a leadership vacuum can emerge, leading to hesitation and confusion.  As the simulation progressed, Davies observed that national government agencies “pretty much abdicated any interest in this city out of political paralysis.” Within the gameplay, this meant that participants had to rely on themselves when there was no guidance or authority coming from the federal government. “The truly scary thing for many people is probably that they themselves are the best response there is,” says Davies. Government paralysis made non-governmental organizations and the private sector stand out in the game, because it was clear that they couldn’t do their work without engaging those, who were affected by the outbreak. “NGOs are used to being independent and making decisions with little or no support,” says Davies. For Alex Soukhanov, a long-time logistics professional, exercises such as this are nothing out of the ordinary. He and his company’s global network don’t only meet in times of crisis. Many industries have built up global networks which are regularly mobilized to mitigate risks, he says. “If there is a risk for one member, there is a risk for all,” he says about the security of supply chains.  Phase Three: Aftermath When the disease finally stopped spreading,  participants were left working to recover the economy, coping with still-ongoing public health emergencies, burying their dead. Davies was surprised to see that players blindly accepted the data they were given.   In the end phase of the simulation, there were 90,000 bodies in one city that needed to be buried or disposed of. “Everyone just took it as given, that people could do this,” says Davies. The Red Cross Movements took the role of mortuary affairs, but they had never been asked to dispose of 90,000 bodies in three months. This showed that even an established organization may not be able to scale its capacity in the extreme circumstances created by an outbreak.  In the final round, the reported number of infections fell dramatically. Though the reports given the players never clearly indicated the reason for this decline, many of them thought this reflected their successful response. Davies expected players to question the reliability of the numbers, and was surprised to see that players blindly accepted the data they were given.  What The Simulation Teaches Us Davies was surprised that the simulation revealed players blindly accepting data, and that people in ... [+] charge had a preference for inaction. The scale of the Urban Outbreak 2019 in the mythical city of Olympia cannot be compared to a real-life pandemic like Covid-19. The phases of crisis management and dynamics of response in the game, however, can help participants better understand what affected countries are going through. One problem that Davies took away from this is: “We’re too networked.” What he means is that unlike the “Urban Outbreak 2019” or other humanitarian crisis that might be localized, the high number of countries affected by Covid-19 creates a unique situation. According to Davies, the usual progression of humanitarian response assumes an overwhelmed country can request support from somewhere else. That assumption breaks down when a crisis is global.   “Under the current circumstances everybody is for themselves,” he says. Italy’s first desperate requests for medical supplies in mid-March remained unheard by its European neighbors, who feared shortages of masks and ventilators in their countries. While the Italian government eventually received help from some states, this experience goes to show that countries can’t necessarily rely on international partners to step in and help during a pandemic. Despite all this, Davies sees a grim silver lining to Covid-19. According to data from the World Health Organization, previous epidemics have involved diseases that kill at a far higher rate: Ebola has an approximate case-fatality rate of 50%, MERS has a 34% case-fatality rate and smallpox kills 30% of the infected and is more contagious than the Covid-19. With those numbers in his head, Davies says the current crisis could have been worse. “I am happy we’re not facing a pandemic with an even deadlier virus,” he says. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusThe chief of SoftBank’s embattled Vision Fund, Rajeev Misra, got a huge pay bump  last year despite overseeing a record loss of $18 billion after huge bets on companies like Uber and WeWork flopped. The Vision Fund chief saw his salary more than double despite historic losses at the Japanese tech ... [+] group. The Vision Fund CEO was awarded a 113% raise, earning $15 million in total compensation for the fiscal year ended in March—more than double his pay a year earlier, according to a regulatory filing from SoftBank on Friday. Misra, a former Deutsche Bank debt trader, has overseen a period of historic losses for SoftBank’s Vision Fund, in which major bets on companies like WeWork, Uber and hotel chain Oyo have all soured.  The Vision Fund reported a record-breaking loss of $18 billion earlier this month, with the overall SoftBank group posting an operating loss of $13 billion. The Japanese investing conglomerate has been forced to write down its valuation on WeWork from $47 billion in 2019 to just $2.9 billion, while Uber’s valuation has fallen over $10 billion in the past year. Experts think that against the backdrop of SoftBank’s dismal performance, Misra’s compensation package is certainly “high,” and it’s “hard to see how it could be based on performance,” Morningstar analyst Dan Baker told CNN. Misra is now the second-highest paid SoftBank employee, behind only Marcelo Claure, the former chairman of telecom giant Sprint who received an annual salary of almost $20 million—a 17% increase from last year. SoftBank CEO and founder Masayoshi Son, who has a net worth of $23.5 billion according to Forbes, saw his own executive pay fall 9% to $1.9 million. Whether SoftBank’s $108 billion Vision Fund 2 will still go ahead as planned. The second Vision Fund is up and running, but with only $38 billion from the SoftBank Group itself. Son has said that he won’t try to raise capital from outside investors until companies in Vision Fund 1 start performing better. At SoftBank’s earnings presentation earlier this month, Son said that he expects 15 companies in the Vision Fund’s portfolio of 88 companies to go bankrupt. As the investing conglomerate struggles to steady some of its businesses amid the economic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic, SoftBank has so far written down valuations on a total of 47 companies in the Vision Fund. Exclusive Interview: Masayoshi Son Talks WeWork, Vision Fund And SoftBank Under Siege (Forbes) SoftBank’s $18 Billion Loss Has Founder Likening Himself To Jesus Christ (Forbes) WeWork Cofounder Adam Neumann Sues Onetime Ally SoftBank Over Abandoned $3 Billion Buyout (Forbes) Coronavirus Has ‘Warren Buffett Of Japan’ On The Ropes As SoftBank Takes Dive (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusDr. Matthew Binnicker, an expert in the diagnosis of infectious disease, explains why someone might still test positive for Covid-19 weeks after they’ve recovered. PCR tests are precise, but they can also detect the presence of the virus well after it's no longer ... [+] contagious. To date, the majority of patients with Covid-19 have been diagnosed using a laboratory test called PCR, which detects the virus’ genetic material (i.e., RNA) in clinical samples (e.g., nasal swabs). PCR is a very sensitive laboratory method – meaning it can detect minute amounts of viral RNA – and has been used for nearly 2 decades to diagnose a variety of infectious diseases, including influenza and strep throat. Despite being a rapid and inherently sensitive test, PCR has certain limitations that need to be carefully considered when interpreting the results. One of those key limitations of PCR is its inability to determine whether a patient is infectious, or not. This is because the test is designed to detect the virus’ RNA, which is generally present when a virus is causing an active infection. However, RNA can also be present, and therefore, detected by PCR after a virus has broken down (i.e., become non-infectious) and released its genome into host cells or body fluids. From prior experience with other infectious diseases, we know that PCR tests can be positive for days or weeks after a patient has recovered from the illness and is no longer infectious. As more testing is being performed for Covid-19, we are learning that some patients can test positive for weeks following their initial diagnosis. A recent study showed that 16% of patients with Covid-19 continued to test positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA up to 24 days after resolution of symptoms and discharge from the hospital. In addition, some Covid-19 patients who recover from their illness and test negative by PCR may again test positive (i.e., go from PCR positive to negative to positive). So does this mean they never fully recovered? Are they still infectious? Or did they become reinfected with a new strain of the virus? Here are some things to understand. RNA from SARS-CoV-2 might be found in your body long after you've recovered from the disease. Even though they inform isolation and return-to-work decisions, PCR tests don’t measure if someone is contagious When an individual tests positive for Covid-19, it is a common policy to require that they remain in isolation for a period of 10-14 days. In fact, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that those who test positive for Covid-19 remain in isolation until they have received two negative PCR results on samples collected at least 24 hours apart.  This is a conservative approach, but has been justified during the early stages of the Covid-19 pandemic due to the lack of data on the period of infectiousness of SARS-CoV-2, as well as the significant repercussions of allowing an infected individual to return-to-work or interact with others before there is confidence they are no longer infectious. However, PCR is not typically used as a ‘test of cure’ for other infectious diseases, since it can remain positive after a patient has cleared an infection. What does it mean when a patient tests positive after recovering from Covid-19? While studies are being performed to definitively answer this question, new data are emerging that suggest the period of SARS-CoV-2 infectiousness may not correlate with PCR positivity. In other words, an individual may not be able to infect others for as long as they test positive by PCR. To determine this, researchers have investigated two important questions. First, can the virus be cultured, or grown, from samples that are collected weeks after resolution of a patient’s symptoms but test positive by PCR? And second, do close contacts (e.g., family members, coworkers) of patients with persistently positive PCR tests become sick with Covid-19?  Last week, the South Korean CDC published important data aimed at addressing these questions. The study followed approximately 800 contacts of Covid-19 patients after they had recovered from their illness, tested negative, but once again tested positive by PCR. The researchers found no evidence that the contacts became ill with Covid-19. In addition, the South Korean scientists were unable to grow the virus from samples that were PCR positive at the latest time point. Although these results suggest that Covid-19 patients may not be infectious for weeks or months following resolution of their symptoms, the exact timeframe over which an individual can transmit the virus to others remains unclear. Additional studies are needed to better define the period of viral infectivity, so that we can prevent the spread of Covid-19 but allow recovered patients the opportunity to emerge from isolation as soon as it is safe to do so. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusA signboard of payments Apple Pay is seen in Causeway Bay. 21AUG17 SCMP / Sam Tsang (Photo by Sam ... [+] Tsang/South China Morning Post via Getty Images) For most people, the effect of Covid-19 on the body is temporary. A dry cough. Fever. Shortness of breath. Then recovery. But the way the pandemic has altered the behavior of consumers may turn out to be a more permanent shift. A recent article in the Wall Street Journal reported that the global cosmetics market is down 8%, with less people venturing out of their homes. Demand for at-home cooking products such as Hellman’s Mayonnaise, Knorr soup cubes, and frozen dinners are on the rise. Consumers are ordering more online, embracing food-delivery services, and buying cleaning and hygiene products in droves.  And this is just the tip of the iceberg.  Here are three ways the pandemic has shifted consumers’ mindsets and purchasing behavior, with the data to prove it. 1) Live entertainment in the age of coronavirus The live entertainment industry has experienced significant disruption since Covid-19 began spreading globally in January. The NBA suspended its season in early March. The International Olympic Committee postponed this summer’s Olympic Games in Tokyo until next year. Concert venues have been shuttered as many countries have limited social gatherings to 50, 10, or even 2 people. What does the future hold for live entertainment? Data suggests that consumers’ fear of Covid-19 might keep them from returning to arenas, concert halls, and other venues even after the industry kicks back into gear. A recent global survey by Dynata, the world’s largest first-party survey platform, found that over half of people expressed significant concern about returning to live events.  “Our findings suggest a mood of caution as people think about a return to live experiences,” state the researchers at Dynata. “Sixty-five percent overall say they will return to live concerts quite slowly or not at all; 55% say the same for movies, 57% for sporting events and 64% for live theater.” The team at Dynata also found that, since the pandemic started, more than half of those surveyed have live-streamed a concert, movie, sports event, or theatrical production, with movies being the most popular choice of entertainment. Live-streaming events is most common in China, where close to 70% of Chinese people have live-streamed at least one movie since the pandemic began. Dynata, 2020 Consumers aren’t nearly as shy about returning to restaurants. A recent survey by the Cincinnati-based experiential marketing firm AGAR found that consumers were more likely to indicate a desire to return to restaurants than sporting events, concerts, and cultural holidays and fairs. Moreover, consumers are voicing a growing interest in health-conscious event planning. Asking consumers what event features they would most desire in the future, the team at AGAR found that hand sanitizing kiosks, social distancing ground stickers, and spaced-apart seating were on the top of the list. Interestingly, over a third of people expressed a willingness to pay a premium to attend smaller events with limited capacities. “The results of the study clearly show us the path forward, what must be done to bring people back and to make them comfortable,” said AGAR founder, Josh Heuser. “It’s vital that we ensure people feel supported, safe and cared for while attending events.” 2) Contactless payment is becoming the rule not the exception Covid-19 may have finally given contactless payment the nudge it needs to become the go-to mode of payment. The team at AGAR found that consumers view contactless payment as a necessary feature at live events moving forward.  Prior to the pandemic, approximately 22% of the more than 11,000 global respondents surveyed by Dynata expressed a preference for cash. This has now fallen to 15%. The countries most prepared to make the shift to contactless payment are China, Singapore, and the United Kingdom.  “The past few months have seen an increase in the availability of contactless methods,” according to researchers at Dynata. “The biggest growth has been seen in the USA, moving from 38% to 46% ownership of a contactless method of payment.” 3) Adjusting to telemedicine According to the researchers at Dynata, 84% of people using telemedicine services during the pandemic were doing so for the first time. And the data show that it is here to stay; 55% of people using telemedicine found the experience to be extremely or very satisfactory. Interestingly, people in the United Kingdom, United States, and Canada were most satisfied with the experience, perhaps because there is a relatively low number of doctors per capita in these countries. Beyond telemedicine, consumers are increasingly interested in products that provide protection against environmental contaminants and pathogens. Wesley LaPorte, co-founder and CEO of PhoneSoap, a company that makes UV light phone sanitizers, notes a significant uptick (+500%) in PhoneSoap web traffic.  “As awareness of the spread of COVID-19 began to grow in the country, PhoneSoap quickly sold out of UV-C light sanitizers,” said LaPorte. “After the spike in March, web traffic is still significantly higher than last year, with consumers continuing to place pre-orders at unprecedented levels.” Conclusion: Sigmund Freud was famous for popularizing the idea that human behavior is largely guided by sex, attraction, and the pleasure principle. Covid-19 provides a compelling counterpoint to Freud’s theory — that, especially during times of heightened panic and threat, it is the survival instinct that trumps all other motivations. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusWe may benefit from sharing data, but we don’t want to lose control of it. We may benefit by ... [+] collaborating, but we want to protect our interests. Pioneers are turning to blockchains to advance our capability to simultaneously share and protect. In our jet age, a virus doesn’t heed borders. The high stakes, worldwide pressure test we are in demonstrated that while we are clearly interconnected, we have much work to do to effectively collaborate. In a matter of weeks, we saw basic structures we depend on—hospitals, education, supply chains, even the concept of an office—suddenly falter. One after another, Covid-19 exposed fragility long hidden behind the normalcy of day-to-day operations. Business as usual stalled the world over and our response demands a new level of agile collaboration—this time across organizations, ecosystems, and even industries. Naturally, we turn to our digital tools for support. Yet, it’s becoming starkly clear that despite 30 years of the web under our belts, there are still gaps—that the way we want to use the internet still doesn’t quite match up with the functionality it offers. We want to share data across organizational or regional borders, but we don’t want to lose control over that data. We want to collaborate, but we want to protect our interests and our IP.  Many in the technology community see answers in an emerging technology, blockchains. Blockchains offer features that could advance our capability to simultaneously share and protect. Here are seven projects demonstrating how pioneers are leveraging this technology to support safer collaboration in the fight against Covid-19.  Safely Collaborate With Health Data Blockchain platform Hacera’s MiPasa project is using the technology to create a safe, protected hub of verified pandemic data from credible sources to drive new insights.  Technologists, data scientists and public health officials can apply analytics against multiple data sets—far more data than available in a single organization.   Around the world, governments and corporations have struggled with the tension between individual privacy and public health as contact tracing apps become a vital tool to restart the economy—and these apps have also suffered low usage. The Stanford Medicine Healthcare Innovation Lab and Prysm Group are developing a solution to both preserve privacy and experiment with incentives for use. A European consortium has piloted a tamper-proof immunity passport for Covid-19. The consortium, which includes Guardtime, Swiss security firm SICPA, and French health data platform OpenHealth will use the technology to issue and manage certificates based on antibody test results. The data is timestamped and used via an app and QR codes. Safely Share Intellectual Property In the journal Science this month, a team of researchers described how blockchains could be used to protect diverse teams of researchers around the globe working together on a cure for a pandemic. Researchers may be hesitant to share findings that have not yet been formally published because there hasn’t been a way to protect patents, interests of employers, and prove attribution. They are looking to blockchain technology to enable a auditable trail, prevent tampering, and selectively grant access to data only to trusted collaborators.  Retired USAF Colonel James Allen Regenor founded Rapid Medical Parts this March to protect the veracity and track the use of designs for 3-D printed parts using a blockchain-based platform. The company was awarded a contract by the Pentagon to support the conversion of sleep apnea machines (which are in ample supply) into ventilators, ensuring that designs and printing instructions have not been subjected to tampering.  Boost Supply Chain Resilience Rapid Supplier Connect is a new blockchain project that supports health-care providers in identifying nontraditional but vetted suppliers of medical equipment that they can trust, as companies from across industries mobilize to provide medical supplies. Hospitals can search for supplies on the platform, but vendor financial information and certification is only revealed once the supplier agrees to share it—supporting trusted connections while retaining control of how data is used. Covid-19 has revealed what pressure on global supply chains that lack connectivity and data exchange can look like. The World Economic Forum (WEF) has identified blockchains as instrumental to develop supply chain resilience by helping to build more transparent, interconnected, and interoperable networks. Last month, WEF released a toolkit supporting the work of using blockchains in supply chains. In Time For Our Current Crisis? While many of these projects mobilized around the current crisis, it’s a long road ahead to achieve impact at scale—and this may not come in time for the Covid-19 pandemic. Unfortunately, this won’t be the last time we need global-scale agility in response to a pandemic or other black swan event. As blockchain technology is more broadly adopted and integrated, its functionality offers the promise to strengthen our ability to carry forward, next time. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusFarmers Insurance, GM Financial, And Tryg use AI text analytics from Clarabridge and Verint as well ... [+] as chatbots from IBM Watson, Boost.ai, and LivePerson. Companies that invested heavily in their digital customer outreach were able to evolve and tailor those communications to meet the new demands and challenges presented by the Covid-19 pandemic. Businesses, such as insurance companies Farmers Insurance and Tryg, as well as GM Financial, the financing arm of the carmaker, turned to chatbots and AI technologies to help maintain their customer bases. Those innovations will only increase in importance in the coming months,  representatives of these companies said, as businesses reopen and customers adapt to the new ways of doing business in a post-pandemic world. As the number of calls skyrocketed in March, GM Financial’s AI chatbot “Nanci” answered 60% of customer interactions, while Tryg’s chatbot “MIA” handled about 80%. Chatbots use AI-based algorithms to comprehend and respond to text or voice questions from customers.  Farmers Insurance, GM Financial and Tryg also employed text analytics software to listen and learn from their customer interactions. Since these companies were early adopters before the crisis, they could respond daily to the evolving needs of customers amid the Covid-19 outbreak, such as fielding queries about delaying payments and other relief measures. How businesses handle customer conversations, otherwise known as “customer experience,” will be a crucial  concern as companies head back to the office in the upcoming months. GM Financial "Our 700 employees started working from their homes within a week of the shutdown orders," said Bob Beatty, the executive vice president and chief experience officer at GM Financial.  "We trained everyone on LivePerson and deployed a virtual desktop phone to everyone in the first week of remote working." Bob Beatty, the executive vice president, and chief experience officer at GM Financial, uses IBM ... [+] Watson, LivePerson, and Clarabridge to support customers. According to Beatty, his team digitized every step of customer interaction. They chose LivePerson for their person-to-person chat platform, IBM Watson for their conversational chatbots and Clarabridge for text analytics. Early into the pandemic, communications using live chat between agents and customers rose from 10% to 60% of total call volume.    Their AI chatbot Nanci handled 50% to 60% of all the inbound requests without a human.   Built using IBM Watson, "Nanci runs 24x7, and gets updated every night by our analytics team," said Beatty. “Analyzing the thousands of customer conversations from chat and phone calls play a key role in knowing what our customers are thinking,” said Michael Beste, vice president of analytics for GM Financial.  “Clarabridge extracts the topics and emotional tone from the thousands of daily customer interactions.”   Beste’s analytics team then uses the output to update Nanci on how to respond. “As the pandemic increased in the U.S., customers worried about the ability to pay from our conversations with them,” said Beatty.  “GM financial responded by offering different payment solutions to fit each customer's need, and empowered the client service representative with the ability to offer a solution immediately to a customer.”  Farmers Insurance  It’s the business of Farmers Insurance to be prepared for the unexpected. “In March, Farmers Insurance transitioned 19,000 employees from the office to working from home remotely in the matter of a few days,” said Melissa Joye, chief customer experience officer for Farmers Insurance. Melissa Joye, chief customer experience officer for Farmers Insurance uses AI text analytics to say ... [+] on top of what their customers are saying. Prior to the pandemic, Farmers invested in the digital customer outreach software that their network of insurance professionals use to speak to customers.  The company uses a variety of software apps to provide a real-time pulse on what customers are saying and what needs attention.  A case in point, Farmers isolated COVID-related customer feedback in the Covid dashboard using Clarabridge, a text analytics company. "We recognized early on in the pandemic that many customers would face financial challenges during this time, and we extended payment grace periods," said Joye. "As we evaluated mileage data we could see driving was decreasing and what that would mean for accident frequency."    The company responded by reducing car insurance premiums by 25% for April for customers with Farmers and 21st Century branded policies.   Farmers made other like minded business policy changes to help their customers during the crisis. "Our ability to listen to customers across channels, analyze data in real-time and empathetic customer experience professionals are helping us maintain positive customer experience momentum during the pandemic," said Joye. Clarabridge Turned On Covid Command Centers  Covid Command Center dashboards showing the conversation topics, sentiment, and emotions expressed ... [+] by customers During the rise of the pandemic, companies used products like Clarabridge and Verint to analyze chat, phone, and email conversation for companies using a form of artificial intelligence called natural language processing. “The conversation topics started around the stay at home orders, then quickly moved to topics on the stimulus and financial worry after the first two weeks,” said Mark Bishof, CEO at Clarabridge. Mark Bishof, CEO at Clarabridge, said that their Covid Command Center dashboards helped over 100 ... [+] companies turn customer conversations into response during the pandemic.  Bishof noted that Clarabridge created a special dashboard for their customers during the crisis called “Covid Command Center.”   He noted that over 100 customers use these dashboards to track how what their customers were saying  and how they were feeling. Emotional models highlighted how people were feeling in the pandemic such as anger or frustration. The sentiment model showed daily whether the conversations were negative, neutral, or positive.  Sentiment is a measure over time — an hour, day, weeks, or months — to let companies see how certain topics or customers are trending. Tryg Insurance  Tryg's "MIA" chatbot powered by Boost.ai handled 80% of the customer traffic in Norway.  "Our digital customer platform delivered better than expected during the COVID-19 pandemic," said Benjamin Alex, business efficiency lead at Tryg. "During the first two months of the pandemic period our customer calls increased by 50% with our AI chatbot MIA handling about 80% of the conversations.”  Alex added that manually handling a spike in volume of this magnitude would typically require us to activate an additional 10-15 resources. Benjamin Alex, business efficiency lead at Tryg A/S uses Boost.ai for AI chatbots, Verint for speech ... [+] analytics, and UIPath automation. Trgy  is the largest non-life insurance company in Denmark, Norway, and Sweden with 4 million customers processing 1 million claims annually.   According to Alex, customer interactions are handled mostly by phone in Denmark, and by phone and chat in Norway and Sweden. "We have many tools to handle different tasks, such as Verint for Speech Analytics, Boost.ai for AI chatbots, and UIPath for RPA (Robotic Process Automation)," said Alex. "We have established a Center of Excellence for each of those tools where we identify and adapt the right tool according to the needs of both the business and our customers." Prior to the crisis, Tryg handled 60% of all inbound claims are handled through the self-service features of the platform and 45% of all claims are submitted online.  Alex added that 30% of all claims are processed without human involvement. Henry Vaage Iverson, chief commercial officer, and co-founder at Boost.ai have chatbots live in a ... [+] network of 200 finance, insurance, and retail companies in the US and Europe. The company behind MIA, Boost.ai, saw similar jumps in traffic across their network of 200 companies in the US and Europe.   “We saw spikes in conversations, as high as 300% increases, related to the pandemic not only in the insurance sector, but also in other areas such as banking, healthcare, and the public sector, “said Henry Vaage Iverson, chief commercial officer at Boost.ai. Customer Conversations Become A Priority "Last October, the Forrester Customer Experience, or CX, index predicted that 25% of CX professionals would lose their jobs for not showing value of customer experience to their companies," said Faith Adams, a senior analyst serving customer experience professionals at Forrester Research. “It is the white elephant that many organizations did not want to touch.”  Faith Adams, a senior analyst at Forrester, thinks how companies listen to their customers will be a ... [+] bigger priority in the post-pandemic recovery period. Forrester’s CX Index measures how successfully a company delivers customer experiences that create and sustain loyalty. With the rise of the pandemic, Adams started getting phone calls from panicked customer experience leaders.   “They wanted to know what they should do, continue business as usual or make changes on how they engaged their customers,” said Adams. “To survey or not to survey was often the question.”   Adams explains that while customers’ surveys are ineffective, analyzing real-time conversations captures more insights.  She added that the voice of the customer technologies show trending conversation topics as well as the sentiment and emotional tone of the customer.   Clarabridge's Covid Command Centers uncovered some important topics during the pandemic, such as ... [+] "stay at home", "stimulus", and "delinquency fears" among others. "We observed that companies with technology capabilities that could capture the real voice of their customers could better understand their needs, and how to respond," said Adams.  She noted that some Forrester customers are utilizing customer feedback loops, like Clarabridge and Verint in hopes of emerging from the pandemic in a stronger position. Customer feedback loops analyze all of the content of customer conversations on a daily basis pointing out main topics being said, then assigning an emotional tone, such as happy or sad, and sentiment, such as positive, negative or neutral. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusA resident, wearing a protective face mask with the national colors, waits for the arrival of City ... [+] Hall workers delivering bagfuls of free food amid a lockdown to help curb the spread of the new coronavirus in Bogota, Colombia, Wednesday, May 27, 2020. The city government is distributing food to the poor who are unable to get out and work due to the lockdown. (AP Photo/Fernando Vergara) Whether to wear a mask or not for coronavirus protection is widely debated these days. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) updated its guidelines in April calling for the use of cloth face masks in public settings (such as grocery stores and pharmacies) where social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.  But what about wearing a face mask inside your own home?  Before you dismiss the suggestion, consider this new research published in BMJ Global Health that says wearing masks at home is 79% effective at preventing spread among family members.  The key part: to be effective, home mask usage must happen before any symptoms emerge.  Researchers came to their conclusion after questioning 460 people from 124 families in Beijing, China about their household hygiene and behaviors during the pandemic. They found that most of the person-to-person transmission of SARS-CoV-2, which causes the Covid-19 infection, occurred in families.  Each family in the study had at least one confirmed case of Covid-19 between late February and late March. Family size ranged from 2 to 9 people and usually comprised three generations.  Researchers wanted to find out what factors would increase or lessen the risk of other family members catching the virus during the incubation period—14 days from the start of the first person’s symptoms.  During this time, secondary transmission occurred in 41 out of the 124 families with 77 adults and children falling ill. Symptoms in the children were typically mild. In the adults, 83% had mild symptoms, while 1 in 10 suffered severe symptoms. One person became critically ill.  The study says wearing face masks at home before symptoms emerged, including the first person to have symptoms, was 79% effective in reducing transmission. It also credits frequent use of bleach or disinfectants for household cleaning, which was listed as 77% effective.  Study authors say their findings back universal face mask use in public spaces and also at home, and say the advice is most relevant for families living with someone in quarantine or in enforced social isolation, and for families of healthcare workers who may face ongoing risk of infection. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusThe Veterans Administration has all but stopped using hydroxychloroquine as a coronavirus treatment, even as the White House continues to praise the controversial drug despite no evidence of its effectiveness and one study that showed it may actually be dangerous. Veterans Affairs Secretary Robert Wilkie speaks during a hearing on Capitol Hill in Washington, ... [+] Thursday, May 28, 2020, on the Department of Veterans Affairs response to COVID-19. Secretary Robert Wilkie told Congress on Thursday that hydroxychloroquine treatments at VA hospitals have “ratcheted down as we’ve brought more treatments online.” The agency only used the drug to treat three patients last week, compared to 404 patients at the end of March, and expects that trend to continue. Wilkie defended the VA’s early use of hydroxychloroquine when few other treatment options were available at the time, saying it gave patients “hope,” the Associated Press reported. Though there were some promising early studies, there is no clinical evidence the drug is effective: A retrospective study at the VA released in April found hydroxychloroquine showed no benefits while a paper in the medical journal The Lancet linked hydroxychloroquine to an increased risk of death and heart problems compared with those who were not taking the drug. Others have turned against hydroxychloroquine in recent days following the release of the Lancet paper: France, Italy and Belgium banned its use for Covid-19 patients outside clinical trials and the World Health Organization paused a large study this week over safety concerns. Medical providers are allowed to treat patients with hydroxychloroquine while it is being studied further because the Food and Drug Administration issued an emergency use authorization for the drug, though the NIH recommends against using a combination of hydroxychloroquine and antibiotic azithromycin. Trump has touted the drug for months after promising early studies were widely covered on Fox News and hyped in right-wing circles. He even said he was taking hydroxychloroquine himself to prevent infection with Covid-19, but has since stopped. Still, White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany told reporters Thursday that Trump would take the drug again if he thought he was exposed to the disease, according to the Washington Post. Another treatment, remdesivir, made by biopharmaceutical company Gilead Sciences, has shown positive results in early clinical trials, earning a bit of optimism from Dr. Anthony Fauci. “The data shows that remdesivir has a clear-cut, significant, positive effect in diminishing the time to recovery,” he said. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusCoronavirus has swept through a Tyson pork processing plant in Storm Lake, Iowa, with 555 employees of 2,517 testing positive, fueling renewed concerns over safety measures at meatpacking plants. Packages of Tyson Foods Inc. Fully Cooked prepared foods are arranged for a photograph in ... [+] Washington, D.C., U.S., on Monday, Nov. 19, 2012. Tyson Foods, the largest U.S. meat processor, said profit will increase about 10 percent in fiscal 2014 and 2015 after remaining unchanged in the year ahead as the company adds more prepared foods and international sales. Photographer: Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg On Wednesday, with suspicions the plant was the site of a new outbreak, Iowa's Department of Public Health Deputy Director Sarah Reisetter said the state would only confirm outbreaks at businesses where 10% of employees test positive and only if the news media inquires about them specifically. According to the Des Moines Register, cases in Buena Vista County more than doubled on Tuesday, and Reisetter is now confirming around 22% of the employees at the Storm Lake facility tested positive. "We've determined confirming outbreaks at businesses is only necessary when the employment setting constitutes a high-risk environment for the potential of Covid-19 transmission," Reisetter added. On April 28, President Trump signed an executive order using the authority of the Defense Production Act to compel meat processing plants to remain open, but it hasn't stopped facilities from shuttering to address low staffing and safety issues. Tyson was previously forced to shut down its largest pork processing facility, located in Waterloo, Iowa, on April 22 following a number of coronavirus cases stemming from the plant, as well as worker absenteeism. Other meatpacking facilities across the state have also been forced to address outbreaks, including plants owned by Smithfield Foods and JBS. State lawmakers and mayors in Iowa have complained about not getting information about the ongoing situations at meatpacking facilities until it's too late. Sioux City Mayor Bob Scott said because Tyson isn't based in the state, they don't need to report numbers to them. Iowa Rep. Ras Smith criticized Governor Kim Reynolds and the Department of Health's stance on the delays in reporting numbers. Food processing facilities have been the site of numerous outbreaks around the country, with Trump pushing for them to remain open amid fears of food shortages. Earlier in May, the United Food and Commercial Workers International Union, the largest meatpacking workers union, derided Trump's executive order, saying that since its signing, "The administration has failed to take the urgent action needed to enact clear and enforceable safety standards at these meatpacking plants.” There are 18,524 confirmed cases of the coronavirus in Iowa.  Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusAfter over two months of unprecedented shutdowns due to the coronavirus pandemic, Las Vegas casinos have been given a green light to reopen on June 4, a move that could result in a major rebound for their beaten-down stocks. Shares of big casinos have rallied amid optimism about reopening.  Casino operators have had a rough 2020 amid widespread business shutdowns caused by the coronavirus pandemic: Major operators like Wynn Resorts, Las Vegas Sands and MGM Resorts have seen their share prices plunge by 25% or more so far this year. According to investment researcher Morningstar, while the coronavirus pandemic continues to “materially affect near-term travel and leisure demand,” all three major casino stocks are trading at significant discounts to fair value: Wynn (22% discount), MGM (43%) and Las Vegas Sands (18%). As states begin to lift lockdowns and allow some businesses to reopen, casino stocks have recovered somewhat on the possibility of a faster than expected economic recovery. On Tuesday, Nevada Governor Steve Sisolak gave the state’s casinos the green light to reopen starting June 4; Las Vegas Sands rose 6.5%, Wynn 8.5% and MGM 11% on the news. Caesars Entertainment, Las Vegas Sands, Boyd Gaming Corp., MGM and Wynn Resorts say they will open that day. It won't be business as usual however, with social distancing guidelines and other protective measures such as plexiglass barriers in effect; Casinos will also be operating at 50% capacity, meaning the industry won't be returning to normal levels of business just yet. With Vegas slated to reopen next week, casinos could be high-risk areas for the spread of coronavirus, former Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Dr. Scott Gottlieb told CNBC on Thursday. “You look at Las Vegas reopening its casinos… Those are the kinds of settings where I think you have more risk, where you have a lot of people crowding together,” he warned. Amid shutdowns caused by coronavirus, Nevada’s unemployment rate surged to 28.2%—the highest in the entire country—last month, according to recent data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Unemployment surged, up from 6.9% in March, as the state was hard-hit by casino closures and a standstill in the tourism industry. At the request of Gov. Sisolak, Nevada’s Gaming Control Board published requirements for a “phased and incremental resumption of gaming operations.” Those health and safety guidelines say casinos will be responsible for limiting occupancy to 50%, making masks available and checking the temperature of guests. It also requires staff to follow disinfection and social distancing protocols. Nevada Gives Casinos Go-Ahead For June 4 Reopening (Forbes) Dow Closes Above 25,000 For First Time Since March (Forbes) Here Are 13 Stocks That Both Hedge Funds And Mutual Funds Are Buying Up (Forbes) Credit Suisse Thinks These Cruise Stocks Will Jump Over 50% (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusPresident Trump on Thursday signed an executive order with the intent of curtailing rights of social media companies by restricting their liability protections, though he also acknowledged any significant changes such as this would likely be challenged in court and regulations would likely be determined by legislators in Congress. WASHINGTON, DC - MAY 28: U.S. President Donald Trump speaks in the Oval Office before signing an ... [+] executive order related to regulating social media on May 28, 2020 in Washington, DC. Trump's executive order could lead to attempts to punish companies such as Twitter and Google for attempting to point out factual inconsistencies in social media posts by politicians. (Photo by Doug Mills-Pool/Getty Images) Trump’s executive order intends to limit a federal regulation known as Section 230, which gives companies like Facebook and Twitter immunity against being sued over the content that appears on their sites from users.  Trump’s intended changes to Section 230 would mean social media companies "that engage in censoring or political misconduct," would no longer have the same protections; Trump also said the order directs the Federal Trade Commission—an independent agency—to stop social media from "engaging in any deceptive acts or practices affecting commerce." When announcing the executive order in the Oval Office, he claimed that Twitter had "unchecked power to censor" and that Twitter was like an "editor with a viewpoint." Trump also said he'd want to "shut it down" in regards to Twitter, though he doesn't have the authority to do so and he acknowledged that "I'd have to ask the lawyers."  The order has been rumored to be in the works since 2019 but rose back to the forefront this week after Twitter fact-checked an inaccurate tweet from Trump about mailed ballots in California. Press Secretary Kayleigh McEnany during Thursday's White House briefing refused to acknowledge that a tweet sent by President Trump was at all inaccurate and further wouldn't admit that Trump has ever lied in the past. Trump's asserted that "anyone living in the state" was sent a ballot, but only registered voters received them, and his continued claim that mail-in voting is "fraudulent" is counter to research that reports very few instances of misconduct. FCC Commissioner Jessica Rosenworcel said on Thursday "An Executive Order that would turn the FCC into the President's speech police is not the answer. It's time for those in Washington to speak up for the First Amendment. History won't be kind to silence." Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) meanwhile acknowledged issues of misinformation on platforms like Facebook and said Mark Zuckerberg "panders" to Trump, but called the president's reaction to Twitter's fact-check "silly" and "a distraction" from the Covid-19 coronavirus pandemic. "Let's get back to saving lives okay?" Trump's shifted his focus toward social media regulation and away from the pandemic and the crisis in Minneapolis around the death of 46-year-old George Floyd while being arrested by four police officers. Soon after Trump's executive order signing, the FBI is holding a press conference regarding the Floyd killing. The U.S. leads all countries in confirmed cases of the coronavirus and reported deaths with 1,712,816 and 101,129 respectively. The more than 20-year-old Section 230 is considered the "26 words that created the Internet," according to Jeff Kossett, a cybersecurity law professor at the U.S. Naval Academy. 18,000. That's how many false statements Trump has made since entering office until April 3, as estimated by the Washington Post. Trump also said he wouldn't simply delete his Twitter account because of "fake news," though he has a tendency of sharing inaccurate information. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusThe Chinese government told its citizens this week to stockpile masks and other protective gear in case of future outbreaks and emergencies, drawing a sharp contrast to countries including the United States that have warned citizens not to stockpile masks as the healthcare system continues to face shortages, prompting confusion among individuals who hope to be prepared for the future. Disposable masks Families in China should store masks and personal protective equipment (PPE) as part of home first-aid kits, said Ning Jizhe, vice-chairman of China’s top economic planning agency, according to the South China Morning Post.  The U.S. Surgeon General Jerome M. Adams infamously told Americans at the beginning of the coronavirus outbreak not to buy masks: “Seriously people—STOP BUYING MASKS!” Like the U.S., China had a mask shortage at the height of its coronavirus outbreak, sparking criticism of the country’s emergency resource reserves.  As a result, the government is building a three-prong emergency resource reserve plan, reliant on business, family and governmental stockpiles to prevent and control future epidemics, said the agency’s deputy secretary general on Sunday via South China Morning Post.  The agency also hopes this announcement will stimulate domestic consumer spending, as retail sales are down and China is the biggest mask manufacturer in the world. American officials have not advised Americans to store masks; Dr. Adnan Hyder, a dean at George Washington University’s Public School of Health told Forbes, “The hoarding of any medical PPE is inappropriate” in the United States, citing serious shortages for essential and healthcare workers who require medical-grade PPE.  “China has more than 400 million households. Everyone must get into the habit of having reserves and rescuing themselves,” said Jizhe.  In the early days of the coronavirus pandemic, Americans were advised not to stockpile masks as frontline workers experienced shortages; now, as masks are mandatory in many public places while medical-grade PPE remains in short supply for essential workers, the conversation has moved to what type of masks are appropriate and effective for everyday Americans—with experts, including Hyder, advising people to select homemade masks with filters. The issues with the American PPE economy reverberates globally. “The international market for desperately needed medical masks is riddled with fraud,” reports the Washington Post on the matter, saying that on May 18, healthcare professionals treating Covid-19 patients were still forced to ration and recycle masks. Government and healthcare officials like whistleblower Rick Bright say the shortage of masks is the doing of the federal government. And there’s a bizarre New York Times 
  
  NYT 
  story involving Real Housewife-turned-philanthropist Bethany Frankel, New York officials and a failed $82.5 million bid to secure face masks for the state. On the contrary, President Trump said the nation has “tremendous supply to almost all places” in response to a nurse who said that PPE supply has been “sporadic” during a May 6 conference.   Stockpile masks at home in case of emergency, China urges families (South China Morning Post) Federal Vaccine Official Alleges Cronyism, Says Ousted For Raising Concerns Over Coronavirus Response (Forbes) ‘No offense, but is this a joke?’ Inside the underground market for face masks. (Washington Post) Bethenny Frankel’s Dark Journey to Find Medical Masks (New York Times) Nearly 300 Healthcare Workers Have Died From Coronavirus (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the Coronavirus France will allow most bars, restaurants and cafes to open next week after the country marked a week of Covid-19 deaths totaling less than 100 each day, an optimistic sign as Europe begins to emerge from the worst of the pandemic. Some of Paris' famous cafes will be allowed to reopen their terraces next week as Covid-18 ... [+] restrictions are gradually lifted. On Tuesday restaurants, bars and even beaches in most of mainland France will be allowed to reopen, Prime Minister Edouard Philippe announced Thursday. Reopened establishments must enforce social distancing measures, including keeping three feet of space between tables, limiting tables to groups of 10 and having staff wear face masks. A notable exception is the Ile de France region that contains Paris, the country’s most populous and most impacted by the virus, where bars, restaurants and cafes will also only be permitted to serve patrons on their famous outdoor terraces and patios. France marked seven straight days of less than 100 reported daily Covid-19 deaths on Wednesday, with a total of 183,000 cases since the pandemic began. France follows countries like Italy, Spain, Greece, Germany and the Czech Republic in allowing some of their eateries to reopen gradually with safety measures in place. In the U.K., the hardest-hit country in the region, Prime Minister Boris Johnson hinted Thursday that Brits may be able to go back to their beloved pubs by July. Europe, once home to some of the world’s worst Covid-19 outbreaks, is beginning to see the light at the end of the tunnel as more countries experience drops in new cases and deaths from the virus. Despite the overall downward slope, small clusters of new viral outbreaks have been reported, including a dozen people who tested positive for Covid-19 in Germany after visiting a newly-reopened restaurant in Leer, a town in the north. French bars, restaurants and parks to reopen with restrictions from June 2 (France 24) France to reopen restaurants, bars and beaches from June 2: PM (Reuters) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusThe stock market cut gains and turned negative on Thursday, despite optimism about reopening the economy, after President Trump announced that he will give a news conference regarding China on Friday. The Dow fell for the first time in three days. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 0.6%, around 150 points, on Thursday, while the S&P 500 was down 0.2% and the tech-heavy Nasdaq lost 0.5%. Stocks cut their gains late in the day, with the Dow shedding more than 200 points, after President Trump announced he would be giving a news conference regarding China on Friday.  Trump’s administration is widely expected to ramp up pressure on China in response to a newly passed national security bill for Hong Kong, which effectively rendered the region no longer politically autonomous from China. The Labor Department reported on Thursday, that another 2.1 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits in the week ending May 23, bringing the ten-week total to more than 40 million job losses.  The latest unemployment data signaled that the worst of the economic damage from coronavirus may be over, however, as the pace of new filings has dropped significantly and continuing claims plunged by nearly 4 million. The U.S. economy contracted 5% in the first quarter, more than the 4.8% expected, the Commerce Department reported on Thursday. But many market experts are still hopeful on a recovery: Bank of America CEO Brian Moynihan told CNBC that the U.S. economy is already starting to “come out of the hole.” Twitter shares slid over 4% on Thursday, as President Trump plans to sign an executive order targeting social media platforms. The move comes after Twitter for the first time fact-checked some of Trump’s tweets, prompting outrage from the president. “It’s still an extremely large number, but if the number of people continuing to file for unemployment benefits is decreasing then this should be viewed as a positive for the economy as more people are going back to work as states begin the re-opening process,” says Chris Zaccarelli, chief investment officer at Independent Advisor Alliance. “We can take some solace in the fact that claims are moving in the right direction,” according to Bespoke Investment Group. This week's reading was the 8th straight week-over-week decline, the firm points out, which is the longest streak of such declines on record (going back to 1962). The market has so far made robust gains this week, thanks to increasing optimism on Wall Street over a successful reopening of the economy and a potential coronavirus vaccine. Stocks broke back above two crucial milestones on Thursday that show the market’s recovery from the coronavirus downturn in late March. The Dow closed above 25,000 and the S&P closed above 3,000, both for the first time since March. Rising U.S.-China tensions may keep gains in check: Secretary of State Mike Pompeo confirmed to Congress on Wednesday that Hong Kong is no longer “politically autonomous” from China. Not only does that threaten U.S.-China trade, it could also result in new sanctions on Chinese officials on Friday, when Trump gives his news conference. As investors grow increasingly optimistic about an economic reopening, they’ve started to rotate out of stocks that benefit from stay-at-home orders, including companies like Zoom and Shopify. Stocks that would directly benefit from the economy reopening again have jumped in recent days, including cruise lines, casino operators, airlines, banks and some retailers. Dow Closes Above 25,000 For First Time Since March (Forbes) Dow Surges 500 Points As Investors Bet On A Coronavirus Vaccine Breakthrough (Forbes) Here Are 13 Stocks That Both Hedge Funds And Mutual Funds Are Buying Up (Forbes) These 10 States Have The Highest Record Unemployment Rates (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusThe Occupational Safety and Health Administration has been Covid-19 invisible, Democrats charged today. The chair of the House Workforce Protections Subcommittee and other Democrats complained at a subcommittee hearing today that the agency has issued only one enforcement action (a citation for a rule making violation), after receiving 5,000 Covid-19 complaints.  “It has failed to develop the necessary tools it needs to combat this pandemic and it has failed to fully use the tools it has; instead focusing principally on issuing press releases and voluntary guidance,” asserted Workforce Chair Alma Adams of North Carolina. Workforce Protections Ranking Republican Bradley Byrne of Alabama countered by claiming Adams and her colleagues were engaging in partisan legislative games. Byrne, once a private attorney hired by companies to aid them in dealing with OSHA regulations, praised OSHA’s Covid-19 guidance as “extremely important” in helping employers protect their employees. While OSHA has no specific Covid-19 enforcement standards, the Republican Congressman said employers have requirements under general duty provisions. Adams dismissed the general duty obligations as “toothless.” The two also sparred over a Democratic proposal for OSHA to issue an Emergency Temporary Standard for Covid-19 which was included in the May 15 House-passed Heroes Act. Bryne contended there is too little known about the ailment for OSHA to create a temporary standard. He noted it usually takes the agency seven years to come up with a workplace regulation. Connecticut Democratic Representative Joe Courtney pointed out OSHA came up with blood borne disease standards for health care facilities quickly in the wake of the AIDS epidemic in the ‘80s and ‘90s. “It wasn’t a five to 20-year process,” said Courtney.  OSHA Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary Loren Sweatt told the Subcommittee she is proud of the agency’s response to Covid-19. “The priority been removing the worker from the hazard or the hazard,” said the OSHA executive. She added there have been 1,364 Covid-19 whistleblower complaints filed with OSHA as of May 26. Sweatt said there have been no sanctions against companies for retaliation, but worker whistleblowers have been reinstated into their jobs and have received back pay. She noted OSHA’s parent, the Department of Labor, is under a Trump Administration requirement to eliminate one existing rule for every new rule created. Testifying alongside of her, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health Director Dr. John Howard was asked if there are workers who should not wear masks on the job. He said people with pre-existing respiratory conditions are best to go without masks to help their breathing. “They should tell their employers about it,” the NIOSH leader said.  On the same day of the hearing OSHA also issued new guidance on how employers can protect employees from Covid-19 in offices and other joint workplaces. The recommendations include:    Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusGetty Though online banking continues to gain in popularity, there are times when it may be necessary or preferable to visit your bank’s branch in person.  With the threat of COVID-19 shutting down businesses across the country, banking has not been immune. Numerous banks and credit unions, from some of the nation’s largest financial institutions to smaller community banks, in March began shifting to drive-through-only services for customers. Now, with all 50 states in various stages of reopening, you may be wondering what branch banking will look like going forward. Even if you only rarely visit your bank’s branches—preferring instead to do your banking online, by phone or at ATMs—it’s helpful to know what you can expect as the coronavirus crisis moves through its next phases in the U.S. Banks and credit unions are considered part of the “essential business” category, meaning that, despite shutdown orders, they were not required to close. But many financial institutions took the initiative to put measures in place to protect both customers and staff from coronavirus community spread. Those measures have included:   Some banks have taken the additional step of closing branches permanently. According to data from S&P Global Intelligence, 157 bank and thrift branches were closed in April 2020, while only 17 branches opened. Closing branches can be a cost-cutting measure for banks and credit unions, allowing them to streamline overhead expenses.  On the other hand, some banks are moving ahead with expansion plans to open new branches. That’s encouraging if you’re worried about branch banking disappearing altogether as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak. And at least one survey shows that consumers still want branch banking access.  In a poll conducted by Boston Consulting Group, just 3% of Americans said they would stop using branch banking altogether in response to the coronavirus pandemic. By comparison, globally, 24% of banking customers said they would be less likely to visit a branch. With demand for branch banking continuing, banks and credit unions will have to rethink how they handle in-person visits from customers.  How banks and credit unions decide to handle reopening can vary from one financial institution to the next. The American Bankers Association has created a reopening matrix to help guide banks in their decision-making. The matrix offers guidance on things like:   These are guidelines, however, not hard-and-fast rules, and the ABA reminds banks that they should consult the laws in their state for guidance regarding things like social distancing and the wearing of masks.  But, looking ahead, it’s possible that branch banking could feature any of the following, once states begin to fully reopen:   The measures that you’ll see in banks may be similar to the ones retail stores and restaurants are introducing to keep both staff and customers safe. Banks and credit unions face an interesting challenge in trying to balance the needs of customers to do their banking in person while protecting the health of everyone involved.  Since banks are considered essential businesses and were able to use their own discretion in closing, the same is true for deciding when to reopen branches. In other words, it’s up to individual banks to decide when to move ahead with opening and how to do it. That decision may be influenced by state guidelines for reopening. For example, in some states such as North Carolina, Phase One of reopening looked much the same as it did for businesses when stay-at-home orders first took effect. This meant continuing to limit customer access to branches and allowing people inside on an appointment-only basis. Many banks have attempted to make managing accounts easier for customers during this time to help ease the side effects of not being able to visit a branch. Some of the measures banks have taken include:   The Federal Reserve also has announced an interim final rule to suspend the Regulation D limit on savings account withdrawals. Ordinarily, you’d be limited to making six withdrawals from a savings or money market account per month. But to make it easier for people to tap into savings, this restriction has been lifted by the federal government. However, it’s worth noting that banks can still choose to impose a fee for exceeding the monthly limit.  The COVID-19 pandemic has triggered financial worries for many Americans. For example, you may be wondering how to budget your money if your only income is unemployment insurance. Or you may be wary of coronavirus scams that could target your online banking activity. So it’s natural to wonder whether your money is still safe when you can’t get to your bank’s nearest branch. The good news is, your accounts are protected if you do business with an FDIC-insured bank. Regardless of what your bank’s operating plans look like during the coronavirus crisis, your deposits are still protected up to the FDIC limit of $250,000 per depositor, per insured bank, for each account ownership category.  That coverage still applies if for some reason your bank ends up closing permanently because of COVID-19’s financial impact. In the event of a bank closing or failure, the FDIC can step in and take control of the bank and its customer accounts. When that happens, your account can either be transferred to another bank or the FDIC will send you a check for the amount of your covered deposits.  If you’re not sure what’s covered and what’s not, the FDIC offers a helpful tool for determining your coverage. And if you keep your money at a credit union instead of a bank, you should be covered by National Credit Union Association insurance. The NCUA extends the same type of coverage to credit union accounts as the FDIC does for bank accounts.  With bank branch reopenings still a question mark, it’s helpful to know what your options are for managing your checking, savings and other accounts in the meantime.  Banking by phone is one option, and it’s a service most banks offer. With phone banking, you’re typically able to check balances, pay bills and schedule transfers between accounts. That’s similar to what you can do with your accounts at the ATM. Using the ATM to manage your accounts can be useful if you need to withdraw or deposit cash or to deposit checks. Online and mobile banking may be the most convenient way to manage your bank accounts during COVID-19 or any other situation where getting to a branch isn’t possible. With online and mobile banking, you can do things like:   You can’t deposit cash using online and mobile banking; you’ll still need to visit a branch or an ATM for that. But otherwise, online and mobile banking can cut down on the need to visit a branch as often. All of these features can make banking convenient and easy, easing some of the financial stress you may be feeling as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak. If you haven’t signed up for online and/or mobile banking yet, your bank may be able to help you with that over the phone. Banks typically offer online and mobile banking free of charge to their customers. When using online and mobile banking, remember to review things like ACH or wire transfer limits, direct deposit limits and mobile check deposit limits to see how much you can add to or withdraw from your account daily, weekly or monthly. While there are still occasions when you’ll need or want the services of a brick-and-mortar bank location—whether for handling cash, getting advice or accessing a safe deposit box—the past months of the COVID-19 crisis have shown U.S. consumers just how effective mobile and online banking services can be in meeting a variety of customer needs. Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusWhile most of the restaurant industry reels from the economic impact of coronavirus, pizza chains are thriving and sending their stocks higher thanks to a surge in online orders and steady demand during the pandemic. Companies like Domino’s and Papa John’s have seen sales skyrocket in recent months.  Domino’s and Papa John’s recently provided impressive mid-quarter business updates as stay-at-home orders during the pandemic forced customers to turn to online orders and delivery options more regularly. Domino’s and Papa John’s, which trade for $366 per share and $77 per share, respectively, have been soaring in recent weeks; Domino’s stock is up 26% in 2020, while Papa John’s is up 23%.  Papa John’s said on Wednesday that same-store sales shot up 33.5% in North America and 7% globally since last month—the second straight month of the “best sales period in the company’s history.” Similarly, at Domino’s Pizza, U.S. sales have “accelerated materially” in recent months, jumping 14% since late March and 21% in the last month alone. Longbow Research says it’s confident both companies will continue to see the benefits of the delivery and take-out model through the current environment and beyond; the firm has a “buy” rating on both stocks with a price target of $441 per share for Domino’s and $95 per share for Papa John’s.  MKM Partners says that both companies “are doing the right things operationally” and are “well positioned both strategically and financially” to weather the current crisis.  But MKM has concerns about the companies’ recent valuations and has assigned a neutral rating to both stocks; It has a $350 per share price target for Domino’s and a $72 per share price target for Papa John’s.  Even as Domino’s and Papa John’s outperform in a challenging environment, Pizza Hut continues to struggle. Yum! Brands, the parent company of Pizza Hut which also owns brands like Taco Bell and KFC, has seen its stock fall over 12% so far this year. The stock has rebounded to some degree over the past few months, jumping 32% in April and May. According to Yum! Brands’ first quarter earnings, Pizza Hut’s same-store sales plunged 11% during that period. Pizza Hut’s interim U.S. president Kevin Hochman is confident that the chain can make a recovery, telling Yahoo! Finance in an interview earlier this week that “we want to get back to being America’s favorite pizza… we made tremendous progress even over the last ten weeks.” The coronavirus has accelerated a shift toward digital sales for many restaurants with much of those gains “likely to be maintained longer-term,” according to UBS analyst, Dennis Geiger. The firm expects digital and mobile growth, “which was already an increased focus for larger chains,” to continue well beyond the pandemic. It remains to be seen whether booming pizza sales will continue as more of the country reopens. “Some of these gains in May should subside in June because dining rooms are reopening and people are starting to venture out a little more,” says Bloomberg Intelligence restaurant analyst Michael Halen. At some point, as quarantine orders are lifted, sales will inevitably decline to normal levels, he adds. A second surge of coronavirus in the fall or winter, however, “would obviously be a boon for sales again.” Dow Closes Above 25,000 For First Time Since March (Forbes) Dow Surges 500 Points As Investors Bet On A Coronavirus Vaccine Breakthrough (Forbes) Here Are 13 Stocks That Both Hedge Funds And Mutual Funds Are Buying Up (Forbes) Buy These Stay-At-Home Stocks For The Coronavirus Economy, Market Experts Say (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the Coronavirus294 healthcare workers have died from Covid-19 after fighting it on the frontlines, according to CDC data, which the National Nurses Union says is a consequence of PPE shortages.  NEW YORK, NEW YORK - MAY 26: Medical workers wearing protective masks stand outside NYU Langone ... [+] Health hospital as people applaud to show their gratitude to medical staff and essential workers during the coronavirus pandemic. 62,690 healthcare workers have contracted coronavirus, resulting in 294 casualties, according to new CDC data.  There are likely more healthcare worker casualties, as only 21% of cases reported to the CDC include information that could identify the patient as a healthcare worker. National Nurses United, the country’s largest nurse union, calculated a healthcare worker death count using publicly available information like obituaries and found 530 fatalities. These figures come after months of reported PPE shortages at healthcare facilities around the country: “Nurses and other healthcare workers continue to find themselves abandoned at COVID-19’s front lines, without PPE,” said National Nurses United. “Despite nurses’ demands, President Trump has made no effort to mass produce N95 respirators using the Defense Production Act.”  87% of 23,000 nurses surveyed by the NNU reported having to reuse single-use equipment when treating Covid-19 patients and 72% said they had exposed skin or clothing when treating Covid-19 patients.  412: That’s how many first responders died combating the  9/11 attacks. This means that Covid-19 first responder deaths approach that of the most fatal terrorist attack in American history.  "Our members showed up and many of them made the ultimate sacrifice," Pat Kane, executive director of the New York State Nurses Association, told NPR. "And many of them got sick. That was round one. We should be better informed by our experience."  This comes in conjunction with Wednesday’s grim 100,000 deaths by coronavirus milestone. Meanwhile, the PPE shortage remains far short of the 3.5 billion masks U.S. officials have long presumed that the country would need in a pandemic of this nature. On May 22, the FDA issued an emergency use authorization to give healthcare workers greater access to PPE in response to shortages that includes shoe coverings, surgical helmets and gowns. “There is no adequate, approved, and available alternative to the emergency use of these gowns and other apparel,” said the FDA in the authorization.  COVID-19 Has Killed Close To 300 U.S. Health Care Workers, New Data From CDC Shows (NPR) New survey of nurses provides frontline proof of widespread employer, government disregard for nurse and patient safety, mainly through lack of optimal PPE (National Nurses United) Almost $800 Million In Mask Scams Alleged In The U.S. Alone (Forbes) Coronavirus Has Now Killed 100,000 Americans (Forbes) 15 Heroic Firsthand Stories From The Coronavirus Frontlines (Forbes) Full coverage and live updates on the CoronavirusA researcher works in the laboratory of the Amsterdam UMC, in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, on May 28, ... [+] 2020. - Griffioen's team is developing a vaccine against the COVID-19 disease caused by the novel coronavirus. (Photo by Koen Van WEEL / ANP / AFP) / Netherlands OUT (Photo by KOEN VAN WEEL/ANP/AFP via Getty Images) One of the questions I’m asked most frequently is when we will have a Covid-19 vaccine. To that I say, the question is not when, but if. If we don’t have a vaccine, we don’t yet know how safe and effective it will be. Given our well-documented difficulty developing coronavirus vaccines for SARS and MERS, and now the less than promising data from recent studies involving humans and nonhuman primates, we can’t be so sure that the current race to produce a Covid-19 vaccine will end in certain success. We don’t know whether the vaccine will offer sterilizing, long lasting immunity—as hoped—or only transient, partial protection, as seems more likely. What we do know is that public acceptance of a Covid-19 vaccine will play an outsized role in our ability to get as many people vaccinated as possible—and to that end, it isn’t too early to begin planning our efforts to educate the public. As a new analysis published in JAMA makes clear, early planning and public education is a must. To proactively confront barriers to Covid-19 vaccine acceptance in the United States, its authors argue, we must ramp up public health education now. The authors begin with the premise that anything short of broad acceptance of vaccination risks failure. They write, "Given that certain individuals will be ineligible for Covid-19 vaccination due to age, immunocompromise, and other preexisting medical conditions, a vaccine refusal rate greater than 10% could significantly impede attainment of this goal.” The goal in question is that of population immunity, generally referred to by the unfortunate name of “herd immunity.” Why is such a high acceptance rate needed? A major consideration is that a Covid-19 vaccine, like most vaccines, is likely to be ineffective for older adults. As we age, the immune system loses its ability to respond to vaccines for new diseases. This is a problem, since in this case it is the elderly who are most vulnerable to Covid-19—and most in need of protection. To help limit exposure of the elderly to Covid-19, a vaccine must limit the total number of infected people in the population from whom they may contract the virus. I believe that most people aren’t aware that the most vulnerable population is least likely to benefit directly from a Covid-19 vaccine, no matter how effective it may be. Their health and safety depend on low infection rates in the general population. The authors identified points of resistance to vaccine acceptance. These include: Questioning the necessity for a vaccine. Questioning the safety of a vaccine. Vaccination as a matter of freedom of choice. A general suspicion of the health care system. The authors did not mention the anti-vaccine movement explicitly, but its shadow looms large. Combined, these barriers have the power to prevent efforts to control the epidemic through any vaccine that may be developed, no matter how safe and effective it is. Consider also the projection of these issues onto the world stage. Availability and acceptance of the vaccine globally is as important as it is locally. Recall that the infection of one person many thousands of miles from our shores has infected more than 1.7 million Americans—and the count is still rising. Full coverage and live updates on the Coronavirus