WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > 1.9 million join jobless rolls, pushing pandemic total to more than 43 million unemployed > Confirmed cases growing faster than ever around the world as new hotspots emerge  > Civil unrest causes scores of coronavirus testing sites to close, intensifying fears of new US outbreaks  > Autopsy shows George Floyd was positive for coronavirus  >  Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study concludes  > More protests? ‘Anti-vaxxers’ are mobilizing even before a vaccine is developed  > GOP shifting on unemployment benefits as economy continues downturn  > Israel shuts down parliament after member tested positive for COVID-19  > BIO’s Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, says racism is a chronic disease that plagues our culture, claims we have fallen short in our investment in science, but over the long term science and innovation will deliver on current challenges          THE INTERVIEW  Dr. Michelle McMurry-Heath, President & CEO, Biotechnology Innovation Organization (BIO)  Dr. Michelle McMurry-Heath, president and CEO of the Biotechnology Innovation Organization (BIO), says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, says racism is a chronic disease that plagues our culture, claims we have fallen short in our investment in science, but over the long term science and innovation will deliver on current challenges.           Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL’S CORONAVIRUS REPORT Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Thursday, June 4.  Editor’s Note.   Today I interviewed Michelle McMurry-Heath, the new CEO of the Biotechnology Innovation Organization. McMurry-Heath is a scientist. She is African American. And she is BIO’s first female CEO. She is trained both as a physician and a molecular immunologist. In these dark times of science, illiteracy in official quarters and deep gasping spasms over indignities and abuse toward people based on one’s ethnic background and color of skin, McMurry-Heath could turn out to be one of the superheroes we need. She comes pre-packaged with a lot of what is necessary to help America and the world. She can put the resources and frames in place to not only get a COVID-19 vaccine in place, but to continue to fuel biotech innovation in agriculture, make progress on climate change and many other areas. She can also show that excellence in science can be achieved with an open door to talent from every quarter.   While she “has made it” — a term that Rep. Val DemingsValdez (Val) Venita DemingsThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Val Demings calls for a new DOJ Office of Police Standards; Trump, GOP to pull convention from NC MORE (D-Fla.) used in her comments with me Wednesday — BIO’s new CEO has a ton to do. And from my conversation with her, which you can watch in today’s Coronavirus Report, I believe that she understands the scale of the challenge. McMurry-Heath bluntly laid out that we have not investing in science the way we should have been doing previously. She said “it is self evident” that we have not done enough and that “we have fallen short of where we need to be in terms of our long-term investment and commitment to science.”    I think McMurry-Heath has more confidence than I do that the bench of science literacy in Congress is strong, particularly among legislative staff. But I’m heartened to hear that she thinks the pieces are there in Washington to turn around a long erosion in America’s science ecosystem. Our differences on this may be nuanced, though I think the U.S. needs to recognize that its bungling of its response thus far to COVID-19 and the fact that the race to a vaccine is a global one, and not a national one exclusively, is a kind of Sputnik moment when it comes to shoring up America’s core science assets and human talent. That means, as McMurry-Heath alluded, keeping borders open, as scientific advancement and collaboration need to be global.    She said the easy science has already been done. Now is the time for big scientific goals — and those are going to require more, not less, international collaboration. She said “science is central to the survival of the world.” I agree with her, but am not sure that enough folks understand the importance of that tenet. Fascinating conversation.   – Steve Clemons   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik.    Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report  Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus   THE HILL ‘VIRTUALLY’ LIVE  ICYMI: Catch up on last month's programs       On May 21, The Hill hosted “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy anchored by Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE.   Watch the full program video here.    On May 20, The Hill hosted “The Vir[Tech]tual World of Tomorrow.”    Watch the full program video here.  We want to hear from you! Follow us @TheHillEvents and keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 6,570,362 reported cases of coronavirus and 387,634 have lost their lives from the virus as of the time of this newsletter.    The U.S. is reporting 1,860,890 cases and 107,474 coronavirus-attributed deaths. Brazil, which is battling the most aggressive outbreak of any other country, is reporting 548,016 cases. Russia, 440, 538. U.K., 283,075. Spain, 240,660. Italy, 234,013.    Some significant developments from elsewhere around the globe:    > Brazil’s death toll passed 30,000 earlier this week as the country’s president responded that death is “everyone’s destiny.” > Egypt, the Arab world’s most populous country, has seen a recent uptick in cases with the total number of reported cases rising above 28,0000.  > South Africa’s 35,000 confirmed cases are the most in Africa.  > Bangladesh now has over 57,000 known cases after the country’s fight against the virus was hindered last month by Cyclone Amphan. > Pakistan now has more reported cases than China, although the publicly released Chinese numbers have been met with international skepticism.   New York is reporting 375,133 cases. New Jersey, 162,068. Illinois, 123,830. California, 119,915. Massachusetts,101,592. Pennsylvania, 78,214. Texas saw a new single-day high of new coronavirus cases last Thursday, with 1,855 new cases and 39 associated deaths reported. The state is reporting 68,877 cases in total. Florida, 60,183. Maryland, 55,858. Georgia, 48,894. Connecticut, 43,091. Louisiana, 41,562. Ohio, 36,792. Wisconsin, 19,400. Alabama, 19,072. South Carolina, 12,415. Kentucky, 10,410. Kansas, 10,170. District of Columbia, 9,016.    The U.S. has now reported 18,214,950 COVID-19 test results and 479,258 full recoveries from the virus.   WASHINGTON WATCH Trump to UK Global Vaccine summit: Coronavirus “doesn’t discriminate, it’s mean, it’s nasty.” President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE called the coronavirus “mean” and “nasty” in a pre-recorded statement at the virtual UK-hosted Global Vaccine Summit on Thursday. “It’s great to be partnering with you. We will work hard, we will work strong. Send my regards to Boris and good luck. Let’s get the answer,” he added. (CNN)    GOP shifting on unemployment benefits as jobless numbers swell. Faced with staggering unemployment numbers that are likely to remain elevated through the election, Senate Republicans are reversing their positions on ending a federal increase of state unemployment benefits after July. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE (R-Ky.) vowed in a conference call with House Republicans last month that Senate Republicans would block the $600 weekly boost to state unemployment benefits from the federal government. (The Hill)  CDC guidance against mass transit sparks concerns over congestion, carbon emissions surge. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s new recommendations for returning to work have sparked some backlash and raised concerns over unbearable congestion and a surge in carbon emissions from vehicles once people are back in the office. (CNBC)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. John KennedyJohn Neely KennedyMORE (R-La.)  @SenJohnKennedy As Louisiana flattens the #coronavirus curve, we should continue to support the wellbeing of our communities and neighbors. This $18.3M will provide a diversity of resources to help our state recover.   Rep. Mike ThompsonCharles (Mike) Michael ThompsonThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  Gun control group rolls out House endorsements  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Chef José Andrés says most political leaders today are not acting with urgency; Dems crafting 'Rooseveltian' relief package MORE (D-Calif.)  @RepThompson Former Defense Secretary James MattisJames Norman MattisTrump hits John Kelly for defense of Jim Mattis  OVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Trump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism MORE told the Atlantic that this is the “first president in my lifetime who does not try to unite the American people—does not even pretend to try. Instead, he tries to divide us.” Mattis served in this Administration.   Sen. Todd YoungTodd Christopher YoungThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  Is the 'endless frontier' at an end? Hillicon Valley: House FISA bill in jeopardy | Democrats drop controversial surveillance measure | GOP working on legislation to strip Twitter of federal liability protections MORE (R-Ind.) @SenToddYoung Hoosier roads and bridges require maintenance, improvements, and expansion to maintain our robust transportation system. I spoke with @BuildINCouncil  to discuss the #coronavirus impact on Indiana construction companies and Hoosier infrastructure projects.  ACROSS THE NATION George Floyd tested positive for COVID-19 in autopsy. George Floyd had likely contracted and recovered from the novel coronavirus at the time of his death in Minneapolis police custody last week, according to an autopsy report released by the Hennepin County Medical Examiner's Office. (The Hill)    Civil unrest causes scores of coronavirus testing sites to close, intensifying fears of an outbreak. Vandalism and civil unrest have forced at least 70 coronavirus testing sites across the United States to close, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Most were located in private pharmacies in what are deemed “socially vulnerable” neighborhoods, intensifying health officials’ fears that demonstrations against police violence could become a breeding ground for the coronavirus. (Washington Post)    Emergency room visits fall by 42 percent, leading to fears that people are avoiding treatment. Visits to emergency rooms have fallen sharply amid the coronavirus pandemic, leading to fears that people with serious conditions like heart attacks are avoiding treatment, according to a report released Wednesday by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (Washington Post)  New rules for visiting a pool this summer with coronavirus in mind. You may have little concern over jumping into a public pool during a normal summer. This summer, however, our minds are on pressing health and wellness concerns, like contracting and spreading the novel coronavirus. But the weather’s getting hotter, and a swim can offer much-needed relief. So can you safely visit a public pool? Read more here.   WORLD VIEW The number of confirmed coronavirus cases is growing faster than ever as new hot spots emerge.The coronavirus pandemic is ebbing in some of the countries that were hit hard early on, but the number of new cases is growing faster than ever worldwide, with more than 100,000 reported each day. (New York Times)    UK hosts vaccine summit amid calls for free coronavirus vaccine. The British government is hosting a vaccine summit Thursday, hoping to raise billions of dollars to immunize children in developing countries and to discuss how any potential vaccine against the new coronavirus might be distributed globally — and fairly. (Associated Press)  Israel’s parliament is suspended after a lawmaker tested positive. Israel’s parliament, the Knesset, was suspended Thursday, and lawmakers and workers were told to stay away after a lawmaker said he had tested positive for the virus. (New York Times)   SCIENCE Hydroxychloroquine failed to prevent healthy people from getting COVID-19 in trial. Hydroxychloroquine did not prevent healthy people exposed to someone with COVID-19 from getting the disease caused by the coronavirus, according to a study being published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine. (Washington Post)  Watchdog group wants SEC to investigate coronavirus vaccine company Moderna. An anti-corruption watchdog group is calling on the Securities and Exchanges Commission (SEC) to investigate top executives at the biotech company Moderna for allegedly manipulating the stock market and possible insider trading. In a letter dated June 1 and released Wednesday, the group Accountable.US said the trades, which centered around an announcement about promising vaccine trial results, are suspicious and urged the SEC to investigate. (The Hill)   BUSINESS Initial jobless claims drop to 1.9 million. Initial unemployment claims for the last week of May fell to 1.9 million, extending one of the worst unemployment crises in the nation's history. The figure, while staggering, represented a continued downward trend in weekly claims from an April peak of 6.9 million, giving some economists hope that the worst part of the coronavirus-sparked crisis is in the rearview mirror. More than 42 million Americans have now filed for unemployment in the last three months. (The Hill)    IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks. The IRS is facing a handful of obstacles in its efforts to deliver the final batch of coronavirus relief checks. While the overwhelming majority of direct payments have been sent to Americans’ bank accounts or mailboxes, there are a few challenges in getting the remaining rebates to eligible households. The agency has not provided an estimate on how many people are waiting for their payment. (The Hill)  American Airlines looks to fly 55 percent of scheduled flights in July. American Airlines is set to fly 55 percent of its scheduled domestic flights in July, as it has seen a steady rise in passengers since concerns of contracting or spreading COVID-19 diminished travel. In May, the airline flew 20 percent of its schedule from a year earlier. (CNBC)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS The millions of young people forgotten amid pandemic response. Congress has an important opportunity to double down on what works for young adults at a time when millions need it more than ever. By extending proven solutions to help opportunity youth become full participants in the economy and their communities, Congress can help catalyze their recovery and that of many more. In the process, it can unleash the talents of a generation ready to continue their education, find productive work and give back to their communities and country. (Melody Barnes for The Hill)    Coronavirus lockdowns threaten an electoral lock up for Trump. Coronavirus lockdowns threaten to lock up the Electoral College for President Trump. For four years, Democrats have prepared for a presidential campaign on national issues of their design. Now to Joe BidenJoe BidenOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Davis: 72 hours cementing the real choice for November OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump signs order removing environmental reviews for major projects | New Trump air rule will limit future pollution regulations, critics say | DNC climate group calls for larger federal investment on climate than Biden plan MORE’s detriment, Democrat governors’ imperious coronavirus lockdowns may localize the campaign in key battleground states. (J.T. Young for The Hill)  “Anti-vaxxers” are organizing even before a coronavirus vaccine is developed. "Anti-vaxxers," people who are opposed to vaccines, have joined protests in California and other states calling for stay-at-home orders to be lifted and businesses to reopen. Both groups have questioned recommendations from public health officials and experts and some members go as far as doubting the legitimacy of the coronavirus outbreak and ensuing pandemic. (The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS 25 black students surprised with acceptance into elite Harvard program. Twenty-five students received the surprise of a lifetime on their front doorsteps when they learned they had been accepted into a prestigious program at Harvard University. The Harvard Debate Council Diversity Project usually has a grand surprise ceremony to reveal all of the students accepted into the program each year. While they can't celebrate together this year due to COVID-19, program founder and assistant debate coach Brandon Fleming didn't let the pandemic ruin the tradition. (Good Morning America)    Lego praised after donating $4 million to black youth and pulling ads for police and White House toy sets. Lego has received much praise online after announcing that it will donate $4 million to support black children on Wednesday. "We stand with the black community against racism and inequality," the Dutch toy production company said. "There is much to do. We will donate $4 million to organizations dedicated to supporting black children and educating all children about racial equality." (Insider)  ICYMI: STEVE’S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  > Steve interviews US Surgeon General JEROME ADAMS  > Steve interviews Rep. RO KHANNA (D-Calif.)  > Steve interviews former Rep. JOHN DELANEY (D-Md.) > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Healthy Security’s JENNIFER NUZZO  > Steve interviews Rep. VAL DEMINGS (D-Fla.)   Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.  Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report  Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus    VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVESteve Clemons: Each day we're interviewing consequential leaders and innovators in the battle against the coronavirus. Science may have been put on the back burner in certain corners, but researchers and scientists are working around the world and around the clock to study COVID-19 in a search to find a treatment or cure. While many scientists may have been discouraged by the discourse, others are optimistic that science will fundamentally change how we combat this virus. And one pace-setter recently sent a message of hope to her cohort, saying in part, “I want scientists and clinicians and innovators to hold their heads high knowing they are addressing the most important issues we face today. And I couldn't be prouder for this opportunity to support their work and shout their message from the rooftop.” That positive message came on the heels of her recent appointment as incoming president and CEO of the Biotechnology Innovation Organization, or BIO. Dr. Michelle McMurray-Heath has been a science and technology policy fellow at the American Association for the Advancement of Science and Vice President of External Innovation and Global Leader for Regulatory Science with Johnson&Johnson. She's hoping to start a new conversation around science and patients, a timely one, clearly, with social justice as a cornerstone. Michelle, welcome, and thank, so much for joining us today. You started all of this out with, really, a comment about, “lift your heads high.” It was really a comment about morale. So, before we get into all the things that BIO may do in this moment, I want to talk about the morale of science and the morale of those that are out there, because there has been a tough time for scientists in this time, and I would love to get your insights on that. And just to acknowledge that you yourself are a scientist. Michelle McMurry-Heath: Yes, well, you know, it's so interesting to me because I've had the privilege of knowing so many amazing scientists and clinicians through the last 20 years of working in this space, and I know why they got into what they do. They are doing science in the health care space because they want to save lives and transform the human experience, and they are doing it out of commitment, out of passion and out of drive, and they’re inspiring. And so I just want the American public to see the side of science that I've gotten to see all these years, which is an amazing group of committed and talented people trying to make the world a better place. And that's really what I think biotechnology is about. Clemons: Are you concerned about the, at least in my mind from my perch, about the struggles over science versus politics in the White House and as we've approached this health pandemic. Do you think there are things that you can bring to the table that would help bolster science at this moment and remind the public, “hey, this is worth the investment.”  McMurry-Heath: I'm not concerned. I'm not concerned because I take the long view. I know that as we faced challenges through history, science has often been the tool that we've used to really surmount them. And the current crisis that we're facing with COVID[-19] is a perfect example. Science has the ability to solve the most pressing issues that we face today, and making that science, making sure that that science gets done, that the innovators have the space to create and get their creations out to the patients and people who need them, that is a social justice fight that I am willing to fight and that I think we can win.  Clemons: Now, I watched your welcome videos — for those of you who want to watch them, go to BIO’s web page — and they’re a series of fascinating videos, interviews with you, really, of one-minute snapshots and the one that I really liked, as you said, “look, we've done the easy science. The low-hanging fruit has been taken. This is a time for big science.” Can you walk us through what we need, how we need to think about vaccines and antivirals and the various kinds of pharmaceutical approaches to battling COVID-19 and what's involved? McMurry-Heath: Well, we need to do exactly what we've been doing, which is forget about borders. Forget about distinctions. Forget about small companies, large companies, academia, federally-funded, private-funded, and all get together and collaborate and find new ways to approach this and take as many options, as many approaches as we can. I have been so heartened by the fact that over a short 16 weeks, over 400 projects have been started among BIO member companies to try to address COVID[-19]. Over 130 of those are targeted just at trying to develop a vaccine. This is the way we win. This is always the way science wins. Let a thousand flowers grow, and let's use all of our brain power and all of our collaborative approaches and all of our communication skills to get those approaches over the finish line. Clemons: One of things I love about BIO is it's not all just big organizations. There are many, many, you know, small private-sector innovators in that space. And you've been at Johnson & Johnson; one of your roles was looking at innovation out there. So, what does that community of innovators and small BIO businesses need that it doesn't have today? McMurry-Heath: Well, one of the things I love about BIO is that it's not just in the health space, you know. We have companies small and large and everything from agriculture trying to improve our food supply, the environment, trying to find an end to global warming and in the healthcare space. And it's just a testament to how biotechnology can touch so many parts of our lives and improve so many areas of our culture and our future. So, that is very, very inspiring. You talk about the nexus of small companies and large companies and the whole ecosystem of innovation. It is that, it's an ecosystem, and ecosystems rely on all of the components being healthy and vibrant. And that's really what BIO, the organization, stands for, making sure that we have lots of different contributors, from lots of different segments of this approach and making sure that they all work together. Clemons: You've been in this town a lot. You worked with lots of different organizations and you've been either a fellow or a director. You've been in the private sector and you know Capitol Hill. How do you grade the literacy of those people, those decisionmakers on Capitol Hill when it comes to the biological sciences and biological security. And I'll just add to this that I've had the privilege of interviewing people like former Senator Bill Frist, Senator Chris CoonsChristopher (Chris) Andrew CoonsCoronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Michelle McMurry-Heath Republicans turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks Voting rights, public health officials roll out guidelines to protect voters from COVID-19 MORE, Republican and Democratic legislators, all of whom have said, “look, we've been warned about pandemics before. We need to do more to invest in protection in platform vaccines in this whole sector than we're doing now.” But a lot of members of Congress don't get that yet. So, I'm interested in how you, heading this important organization, are going to reach those that have been somewhat recalcitrant and not on the line and believe that they're not all literate in the same way. So, how are you gonna bring them in, bring them over?  McMurry-Heath: So, I came to Washington, D.C., 20 years ago as a science policy fellow for what I thought was going to be a year and has turned into close to 20. And part of the reason I stayed was it is such an incredibly vibrant and intellectually robust community of people who really care about policy issues. Now, there are lots of policy issues to care about and we have lots of important needs as a society and as a culture. But I don't want anyone out there to underestimate the intellectual heft that staffers on the Hill, members of our executive branch agencies, policy leaders throughout the policy ecosystem have. They bring a lot of brain power to bear, and they're always impressive. I think our job as scientists, and it is our job, is to find a way to translate what we know about science and how pivotal a role science can play in so many of those policy issues, into the areas that they care about, so that it becomes part of the American debate and dialogue around what we need to accomplish as a culture. So that's on us. And I think we're up to the task. Clemons: I largely agree with you. And I also worked in the Senate sometime when I know you were working with Senator Lieberman on his campaign, and I think the staffers that are there, I just think it would really be great if their bosses read up to. But that aside, back to school for a moment, you had another remarkable achievement as being the first African American woman to graduate from Duke University's Medical Scientist Training Program. And while that sounds great, I was astonished by that because that means that only recently that that happened. And so, part of the time, you know, the issues that we're dealing with today are ones of inclusion, of diversity, of making that real, and that includes in science, in medicine, across the board. So, I'd love to get your thoughts on how that door gets opened that you've clearly attained, but to so many others, so that we can have a genuinely inclusive scientific community here. McMurry-Heath: So, let me start by saying that the events of the last week have been heartbreaking. Heartbreaking and yet not surprising. I believe racism is a chronic disease that we face, that plagues us as a culture, and we have to address it as such. We have to do everything we can to make sure that we are being as inclusive as possible, that we are breaking down barriers and silos, that we’re making every space of science and biotechnology open and welcoming to a diverse set of minds, because it's only in that diversity that we get all of the brainpower and perspectives that we need to solve the major issues that we face. So that's critical. BIO is committed to that. We are going to be having a very interesting dialogue surrounding race at our upcoming BIO digital conference, which is taking place next week, and we are going to face this very difficult conversation head-on. And I believe that frank dialogue is where we need to start. But then there needs to be followed very closely by a lot of action. You need to figure out what we can do to build the bridges and make sure that we have a more inclusive and diverse scientific community. I personally have benefited from so many great efforts from people of color, but also people who aren't of color, who really have wrapped their arms around scientists, young scientists trying to come up in the field. And I think we need to do more of that. But stay tuned. There's going to be a lot more to come and you're going to see BIO front and center on this effort because it is critical to advance in science and making sure that science is successful. Clemons: Do you think among your companies that they get this? … I know [BIO is] doing the digital forum on this, but basically to set a practice of new norms, if you will, in terms of how it cultivates talent, how it outreaches to universities, how it creates partnerships for the inclusion of talent. It's just something — I can feel in your words, but I'm just wondering, do you have ideas on how you can make this a deep commitment of many of your members?  McMurry-Heath: Well, I don't think I have to make it a deep commitment. I think that it is a deep commitment. My phone has been ringing off the hook this week from BIO member companies who are passionate about this area, who have been working in this area, in this space, for quite some time. And they want that work to be more visible, more powerful and more impactful. And we're gonna come together next week not just at the conference, but also at our board meeting to figure out what is the best way for BIO to support those efforts because they are myriad, they are numerous, and I am so proud of how this community has really risen to this challenge. You can look at some of the statements that have come out from BIO member companies’ CEOs and just take heart in the fact that they take this very seriously and they are committed. I mean, Ken Frazier, the CEO of Merck, gave an amazing interview earlier this week where he said, “You know, it could have been me.” He spent over 15 minutes on CNBC talking to business leaders about what a critical issue this is. It's that kind of personal leadership and courage that I see throughout our member companies. And I think the public will see more of that in coming weeks. Clemons: Great. And just in our final couple of minutes, Michelle, I'd love to get your thoughts on the science ecosystem out there. You know, I've done a lot of programs with groups like Triple E S and Research America and others and your predecessor, in fact, who'd been worried that we weren't investing in basic science enough, that our funding commitment to university research out there, that when you kind of look broadly at that science ecosystem that some of the support was eroding and that was dangerous for the country. I'd love to get your insights on how to turn that around or whether you even agree with those views. McMurry-Heath: Well, whether I agree or not, it's self-evident. The crisis we face today with COVID[-19] is a clear example that we have fallen short of where we needed to be in terms of our long-term investment and commitment to science. You mentioned my comment earlier about there being no easy science left. This is big science. These are big, tough issues and it takes a sustained, focused effort to make headway. That's headway I know we can make. It's within our ability and it's within our ambition. But we just have to maintain that commitment. So, I'm hopeful, personally, that given how pivotal this crisis has been, that we will regain that focus, that we will regain that commitment and use this as an opportunity to say science is central to the progress of America. Science is central to the survival in this world. Science is central to social justice and equality and moving our culture in the right direction. And so, for that, we need to have a sustained focus and a sustained investment. Clemons: Well, Michelle McMurry-Heath, thank you so much for those thoughts today. I should say that one of the things that I really love about BIO is Good Day BIO. For those of you watching tand don’t know, Good Day BIO is a daily newsletter I get on what's happening across the bio field and many of the members, but it's just one of the great primers that gives you an understanding of science, government policy. And I absorb it every day. So, thank you and congratulations on your new job.WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Trump to pull GOP convention from Charlotte; NC gov says ‘protecting public health and safety’ a priority  > White House selects 5 companies most likely to produce a vaccine > US should have ‘a couple hundred million’ doses of coronavirus vaccine available by start of 2021, Fauci says > Gottlieb says any such coronavirus vaccine will likely be ‘seasonal’  > White House to block Chinese airlines from flying to US  > Private payrolls declined by 2.76 million jobs in May; stocks continue June rise  > Bolsonaro says ‘death is everyone’s destiny’ as virus continues to ravage country  > Sweden’s top epidemiologist, who managed the pandemic response, says ‘could have done better’  > How to safely protest during a pandemic  > Rep. Val DemingsValdez (Val) Venita DemingsThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Val Demings calls for a new DOJ Office of Police Standards; Trump, GOP to pull convention from NC MORE says U.S. doesn’t need a divider-in-chief, calls for a new DOJ Office of Police Standards, notes that 9/11 anti-terror equipment not purchased to use against citizens   As U.S. coronavirus cases surpassed 1.8 million, President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE says Republicans will pull their nominating convention from Charlotte, N.C. With civil unrest spreading across the nation and more than 1.8 million coronavirus cases reported in the United States, it’s hard to envision what political parties’ nominating conventions will look like in August. What does seem increasingly clear is that President Trump will accept the Republican nomination somewhere other than Democratic-led North Carolina, where Gov. Roy Cooper has refused to pre-authorize a gathering of more than 19,000 people. High-profile events, such as Trump’s televised acceptance speech, will probably take place elsewhere, with Orlando, Nashville, Las Vegas and Jacksonville, Fla., being floated as possibilities. (Washington Post)    THE INTERVIEW  Rep. Val Demings (D-Fla.) Rep. Val Demings (D-Fla.), a potential vice presidential nominee, says U.S. doesn’t need a divider-in-chief, calls for a new DOJ Office of Police Standards, notes that 9/11 anti-terror equipment not purchased to use against citizens and says Dems, GOP need to unify country like former President George W. Bush did, and adds that ‘by the way, it’s hurricane season.'          Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL’S CORONAVIRUS REPORT Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Wednesday, June 3.  Editors’ Note.    The following was written by a friend of mine, a former MSNBC colleague when we were both contributors, a Black republican who is now an employee at Facebook. I admire him for navigating moments of ethical stress now and many times in the past.  He shared this earlier this week on his internal Facebook account, viewable within the company, and I have permission to share it:   I am a Black employee at Facebook. In support of today’s walk-out by Black employees at the company, I will not be responding to any business communications today.   The President of the United States has advocated for the murder of Black lives, which violates Facebook guidelines. Facebook leadership has failed to acknowledge the clear violation or to respond in a manner consistent with its stated policies. The hateful rhetoric advocating violence against Black demonstrators by the US President does not warrant defense under the guise of freedom of expression.   Along with Black employees in the company, and all persons with a moral conscience, I am calling for Mark [Zuckerberg] to immediately take down the President’s post advocating violence, murder and imminent threat against Black people.   “Our lives begin to end the day we become silent about things that matter.” -– MLK We have seen many at Facebook stand up for what they believe is right, with some even resigning their positions. This reminded me of something a professor once imparted to me. He said that we don’t understand the true norms of people or a community, or society, unless we observe it under stress. We have seen amazing stories of heroism in the battle against COVID-19 — front-line health workers, community workers sewing masks, an army animated by José Andrés and Tom Colicchio to feed vulnerable communities and to keep the food supply chain intact. And we see my friend taking a risky stand inside Facebook against the views of his company’s founder and CEO.My interview subject today, Rep. Val Demings (D-Fla.), a former Orlando Police Chief, asked her former brothers and sisters in blue, “What in the hell are you doing?” in a powerful Washington Post op-ed. How they behave under stress matters on the front lines of our personal security every day. And while many of these officers are great and have “taken a knee” like the NYPD chief did Tuesday, there are too many engaging in harassment, brutality and murder with impunity. Those norms are evident in this stressful time — and that’s the conversation we should be having.    The COVID-19 story has now become enmeshed with the stories of inequality and racism in America, in our growing social and economic divides, and we are going to have to sort through all of this at the same time to get to the other side. America is struggling on all of these fronts, and who knows what is next. In our discussion, Demings pointed out, “Oh, by the way, it’s hurricane season.”   – Steve Clemons  Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik.    Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus   THE HILL ‘VIRTUALLY’ LIVE  ICYMI: Catch up on last month's programs       On May 21, The Hill hosted “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy anchored by Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE.   Watch the full program video here.    On May 20, The Hill hosted “The Vir[Tech]tual World of Tomorrow.”    Watch the full program video here.  We want to hear from you! Follow us @TheHillEvents and keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are a reported 6,435,453 cases of COVID-19 around the globe and 382,093 have lost their lives as of the time of this newsletter.    The U.S. is reporting 1,839,167 cases and 106,553 deaths. Brazil has emerged a new global hot spot and the country is now reporting 555,383 cases. Russia, with 431,715 reported cases, continues to see its new cases and death rate rise. The U.K. is reporting 281,264 cases. Spain 240,326. Italy 233,836. India 216,314. France 188,450. Germany 184,121. Peru 170,039. Turkey 165,555. Iran 160,696. Chile 108,686.  South Africa 35,812. Israel 17,342. Afghanistan 17,267. South Korea 11,590. Nigeria 10,819. Finland 6,911.    New York is reporting 374,085 cases. New Jersey 162,068. Illinois 122,848. California 117,493. Massachusetts 101,163. Pennsylvania 77,654. Texas 67,354. Georgia 48,207. Virginia 46,912. Louisiana 40,746. Minnesota 25,876. Tennessee 24,342. Washington 22,157. Nebraska 14,616. South Carolina 12,415. Kentucky 10,185. Oregon 4,335. Idaho 2,933. Alaska 486.    The U.S. has recorded 17,757,838 coronavirus test results and 463,868 have reported full recoveries from COVID-19.   WASHINGTON WATCH       McConnell blocks resolution condemning Trump over treatment of protesters. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE (R-Ky.) on Tuesday blocked a resolution from Democrats that would have condemned President Trump after rubber bullets and gas were used on peaceful protesters near the White House. Senate Minority Leader Charles SchumerCharles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerGOP lawmaker calls on Senate to confirm Michael Pack as head of US media agency McConnell blocks resolution condemning Trump over treatment of protesters House Democrat demands answers from Secret Service about role breaking up White House protests MORE (D-N.Y.) tried to pass the resolution, which was introduced earlier Tuesday, by unanimous consent, meaning any senator could block it.    The CDC waited its entire existence for this moment. What went wrong? The Centers for DIsease Control and Prevention, long considered the world’s premier health agency, made early testing mistakes that contributed to a cascade of problems that persist today as the country tries to reopen. It failed to provide timely counts of infections and deaths, hindered by aging technology and a fractured public health reporting system. And it hesitated in absorbing the lessons of other countries, including the perils of silent carriers spreading the infection. (New York Times)    Republicans turning against new round of $1,200 rebate checks. Republican lawmakers are voicing deep skepticism about passing another round of $1,200 rebate checks as they contemplate the next and possibly final stage of coronavirus relief legislation. Senate Republicans on Tuesday said they are more focused on reforming the Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program, providing more money for cash-strapped state and local governments, boosting benefits for Social Security recipients and fixing other elements of COVID-19 relief bills passed earlier this year. (The Hill)  Trump administration plans to block Chinese airlines from flying to the U.S. The Trump administration on Wednesday said that it planned to block Chinese airlines from flying into or out of the United States starting on June 16, after the Chinese government effectively prevented U.S. airlines from resuming service between the countries. (New York Times)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.)  @SenBlumenthal Right for the DC National Guard to investigate this apparent abuse in use of military force. Disproportionate responses in DC & across the country cannot go unchecked. The Senate Armed Services Committee must conduct additional oversight with scrutiny.   Rep. Ken BuckKenneth (Ken) Robert BuckThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Val Demings calls for a new DOJ Office of Police Standards; Trump, GOP to pull convention from NC House GOP urge Trump against supporting additional funding for state and local governments House Judiciary Committee calls on Bezos to testify as part of antitrust probe MORE (R-Colo.)  @RepKenBuck Let me get this straight. Democrat mayors and governors will allow thousands of rioters to flood the streets and destroy their communities, but it’s still too dangerous to worship at church in person?   Rep. Yvette ClarkeYvette Diane ClarkeThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Val Demings calls for a new DOJ Office of Police Standards; Trump, GOP to pull convention from NC Democrats introduce coronavirus-focused privacy legislation NY Democrats call for mortgage forgiveness in next coronavirus relief bill  MORE (D-N.Y.)  @RepYvetteClarke Tear-gassing peaceful protestors at the White House is just the latest racist bullying tactic by our country's prime bully, Donald J. Trump.  HE IS A DISGRACE. HE IS SHAMEFUL. HE IS #NOTMYPRESIDENT. We will not be silenced. #JusticeforAll  ACROSS THE NATION As protests against police brutality and racism spread in the U.S., there are fears that so, too, will the virus. The protests against police brutality and racism that have spread across the United States since the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis have spurred fears of a resurgence of the virus. Concerns have forced people sympathetic to the movement to weigh the risks of attending demonstrations, where there is often little social distancing. (New York Times)  Oklahoma State football player says he tested positive for coronavirus after attending protests. An Oklahoma State University football player says he has tested positive for COVID-19 after attending demonstrations protesting the police killing of George Floyd. Amen Ogbongbemiga, a senior linebacker, tweeted Tuesday that he had tested positive for the virus after attending protests in Tulsa. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW  Brazil’s Bolsonaro says death is “everyone’s destiny” as 1,262 reported dead in one day. Brazil reported a record 1,262 new coronavirus-related deaths on Tuesday evening, raising the country’s fatality total to at least 31,199. Despite the intensifying calamity, Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro continues to downplay the severity of the pandemic. He told supporters Tuesday, “We lament all deaths, but it’s everyone’s destiny,” Reuters reported. (Washington Post)   Germany plans to lift its travel ban on European countries. Germany will lift its travel ban on 29 European countries, including Britain and Iceland, on June 15 and replace it with travel advisories, Foreign Affairs Minister Heiko Maas said. The ban was imposed on March 17, when infections were rising exponentially in Europe. (New York Times)   SCIENCE Trump administration selects 5 companies most likely to produce a vaccine. The Trump administration has selected five companies as the most likely candidates to produce a vaccine for the coronavirus, senior officials said. Noah Weiland and David E. Sanger of The New York Times report that the five companies are Moderna, a Massachusetts-based biotechnology firm, which Dr. Fauci said he expected would enter into the final phase of clinical trials next month; the combination of Oxford University and AstraZeneca, on a similar schedule; and three large pharmaceutical companies: Johnson & Johnson, Merck and Pfizer. Each is taking a somewhat different approach. (New York Times)    U.S. should have a "couple hundred million" doses of a coronavirus vaccine by start of 2021, Fauci says. The U.S. should have 100 million doses of one candidate COVID-19 vaccine by the end of the year, Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE said Tuesday. “Then, by the beginning of 2021, we hope to have a couple hundred million doses,” he said during a live question and answer session with the Journal of the American Medical Association. (CNN)    Coronavirus vaccine will be “seasonal,” former Food and Drug Administration chief says. Any coronavirus vaccine that proves to be safe and effective will still probably only provide immunity for a limited amount of time, maybe “up to a year,” former Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Scott Gottlieb said. (CNBC)    FDA updates guidelines to allow select impurities in hand sanitizers. The Food and Drug Administration will temporarily allow a certain amount of impurities in alcohol-based sanitizers to keep them accessible during the coronavirus pandemic. The new regulations will monitor and provide further clarity on impurity limits for ethanol companies that recently switched to producing hand sanitizer during the outbreak. (The Hill)   BUSINESS Stocks continue winning streak amid protests. Stocks on Wednesday continued their June winning streak, rising even as widespread protests and unrest continued around the country over racial justice. (The Hill)    ADP report shows 2.8 million jobs lost in May. ADP monthly private payroll estimate released Wednesday found that 2.76 million jobs were lost in May, an unexpectedly small figure given the millions who have filed for unemployment each week. Economists expected the figure to be closer to 8.75 million. Last month's ADP report showed 20.24 million jobs were lost in April. (The Hill)    World Economic Forum in Davos still set to take place in January. The organizers of the World Economic Forum said Wednesday that they are planning to hold their annual meeting as scheduled in January, both virtually and in-person in Davos, Switzerland. Officials have confirmed more than 30,000 coronavirus cases in Switzerland, a country of about 8.5 million people. (Washington Post)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS How to protest safely in a pandemic. Wear masks, carry signs, bring goggles. The United States, still navigating a pandemic that has killed nearly 107,000 people in America, is reeling from protests over the death of George Floyd. Some of them have been followed by riots, looting and a militarized police response. The confluence of events means protesters must try to avoid causing a surge in COVID-19 cases as they prepare for the possibility of being caught up in violence or facing crowd-dispersal tactics that include rubber bullets, tear gas and smoke or flash grenades.    If you’re set on protesting, how can you protect yourself from these dangers? Read more here.    In hindsight, strict COVID-19 precautions made no sense for much of the country. America is a big and diverse country. The magnitude of the threat varied widely from place to place and demographically. The draconian measures taken in the name of the precautionary principle may have made sense in a few locations, and with some segments of the population, but they made no sense for much of the country and most of the population. Those who urged and ordered extreme caution will say that infections and deaths would have been much worse without a shutdown — and they probably would have been — but not everywhere, nor for everybody. (James L. Huffman for The Hill)  COVID-19 — a catalyst for change. Specifically, the pandemic should push America to implement strategies to eradicate the human-made disaster of “mass evacuations” from tropical systems in the future. The typical actions taken by governments to enforce mass evacuations in preparation for a potential hurricane landfall can sometimes have a more significant effect than the hurricane itself. (former Federal Emergency Management Agency administrator Brock Long for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS $3 million raised to help Minneapolis businesses. More than $3 million in donations have been raised to help resuscitate Minneapolis businesses damaged by the looting that trailed protests over police brutality in Minnesota. The Associated Press reports that so far, the fund has earned more than $3 million from more than 38,000 donors since the riots began. (The Hill)   ICYMI: STEVE’S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  > Steve interviews US Surgeon General JEROME ADAMS  > Steve interviews Rep. RO KHANNA (D-Calif.)  > Steve interviews former Rep. JOHN DELANEY (D-Md.) > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Healthy Security’s JENNIFER NUZZO  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.  Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus   VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interview Rep. Val DemingsValdez (Val) Venita DemingsThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Val Demings calls for a new DOJ Office of Police Standards; Trump, GOP to pull convention from NC MORE (D-Fla.). Read excerpts from the interview below.     Demings: When I was the chief of police, I was appointed during the 2008 and 2009 recession, and so those were tough times but certainly what we're experiencing today, we're dealing with something we've never seen before, which requires us to do something we've never done before. We're dealing with COVID-19, this deadly killer that we had never heard of before. And as you will know now, it's taken over 100,000 lives in this country. We're also dealing with civil unrest as a result of the brutal and senseless murder of George Floyd. My heart goes out to his family and others. And, oh, by the way, it’s hurricane season. And so, you know, when I think about that, that's a lot. But this is America. This is a country that has seen its share of tough times, and I really do believe with all of the challenges that we face if we remember, regardless of the challenge, our number one responsibility is the health, safety and well-being of the American people. We will get through this one as well. We have to remember, as we watch what’s happening in the streets throughout this country what brought us there in the first place. And I heard a young activist say something last night that was just so profound because the reporter was asking her about, you know, or reminding her about the COVID-19 virus and the concern about the spread of the virus that could certainly bring death. And she said, maybe the virus of racism is worse. And while they understand the risks, and we certainly understand the challenges of additional spread of the virus, I had to listen to what that young activist said, because the virus of racism, it just may be worse. And so we'll do what we've always done in this country. We will balance a ton of issues and all of them critical.   Clemons: What is your impression of what White House leadership is getting right and what it is getting wrong. Demings: Well if we want to start with coronavirus, all health experts agree that the sooner we take action, the better we are, the better prepared. We know that the White House eliminated the pandemic response office which certainly could have made a difference in our response, i.e. in the number of lives that were saved. We have to continue to listen to our scientists and our medical professionals, our public health experts. This is a public health crisis, and we have to listen to them. We know that practicing social distancing and wearing masks, something as simple as that can save lives. And so, you know, it would be good to see the president really echo the recommendations coming out of the CDC, and working with the world to develop a vaccine, get us back on track. With civil unrest in our nation, understanding number one what brought us here in the first place. We condone illegal behavior. Those who have seized the opportunity to loot and create destruction and chaos in our streets. We condone that. But we have to remember what brought us here in the first place. And we do expect our leaders, whether Democrats or Republicans, to come together and unify our nation. As we saw during 9/11, President George W. Bush did. We need someone who will exhibit strong leadership, remind us of who we are, unite us. Not be the divider in chief, not threaten and intimidate and use fear. Those things do not solve problems. Coming together as a nation, the beautiful, diverse nation and country that we are — that's what solves problems. And so the president still has time to not make this a political issue, to try to not further divide but to come together, unify us, reassure communities that police misconduct is wrong, that violence of any kind is wrong and that he's gonna put the full weight of the White House behind finding solutions and not creating additional problems.   Clemons: As a former chief of police and patrol officer, tell me about police culture when you were in that and what we can do to move the needle on getting into a healthier place. Demings: I felt compelled to write the op-ed because, look, I grew up at the Orlando Police Department. I consider them family. Many days I spent more time with them than I did with my own family. Watching what happened to Mr. Floyd was just totally unacceptable, totally inappropriate. And I know that there are a lot of good women who do that job, and I just wanted to remind them of who they are and what they are supposed to represent in this country. … We've got to continue to hire the brightest and the best to make sure that we hire people who have the mind for the job, so they'll make good decisions, but also have the heart for the job. … Law enforcement officers wear the badge over their hearts as a constant reminder that they have to police, right. We are a nation of laws, but they should also police with compassion, that there are situations that require them to be as strong as lions but also as gentle as doves. We need them to see themselves as a part of the community and the community to see the police as a part of them. And so we have to get back to taking a good look at law enforcement. You know, everybody needs to start with the checkup of themselves. Look at your policies. Look at how that happened. Look at who you're hiring. Look at paying benefits. We get what we pay for. Look who's training new police recruits because those training officers really set the informal standard of what's acceptable and unacceptable on the street. Look at use-of-force training. Look at de-escalation training. We have to do that. Also, I would like to see us reinstitute an office of police standards, or law enforcement standards, and training through the Department of Justice and also reinstitute the Office of Civil Rights in a new and powerful way. We can do this, Steve, but it's gonna take the federal, local and state governments working together to fix the problems that we're seeing in law enforcement, but also that we're seeing in other areas as well throughout our nation.   Clemons: Why is training so out of whack? Is there something we have to dial back in terms of the military tactics, the militarization of our domestic police forces, which has really taken hold in the last decade or so? Demings: The training has been designed to really deal with something that I would say was changed during 9/11. As you know, local police officers, police departments they’re the first line of defense, and so the training, the what we would call military equipment and all was really designed to deal with terrorist attacks as we saw officers on 9/11, [on the] front line, all the New York police officers, fire department and others. And so in that equipment, when we have the Pulse Nightclub shooting in Orlando, for example, where 49 people were killed, it was the military-type equipment that allowed us to be able to breach the building and rescue those and have more survivors than those who are dead. So but see, training is critical. You know, a well-trained police department is a department that wins time and time again. And the problem is not so much equipment that we see. That equipment was never purchased to be used against citizens, the community, the equipment was designed to be used against worse than that — terrorists and terrorist responses. … But we have to invest to make sure that training, it doesn't just involve police, you know, tactics and use of force. But it also involves community-oriented police training that helps to further build the relationship and the trust between the police department and the community. Police officers have to be counselors; they have to be salesmen and women; they have to be ministers on many occasions; they have to be social workers; they have to be comforters. And then at the same time, they have to deal with violent crime and hold those accountable who are responsible. … I think at the federal level we can develop some standards as it pertains to training and is particularly use of force and de-escalation training, human diversity training that I think further helps the police department do their job more effectively every day.   Clemons: What do you think Congress still needs to do to stand by people who have been displaced in this time? Demings: We passed a couple of months ago, now, I believe the largest relief package in the history of this nation a $2.2 trillion and quickly realized that wasn't enough, had to pass an additional interim package of $484 billion then the Heroes Act, which was $3 trillion. As I said earlier, we’re dealing with some things we've never seen before, which requires us to do some things we have never done before, and bring in relief as quickly as possible to America's families who are suffering, who were employed working, going to work every day and through no fault of their own to lose their jobs. And the federal government continues to try to work very closely with our governors throughout the states, certainly with the state officials here to make sure that we are properly processing those unemployment applications. … People who are trying to make ends meet, keep a roof over their head and food on the table and help them have enough resources to just bridge the gap until we can come out of this situation that we're in.   Clemons: How worried do you think the American public should be about the health of democracy right now? Demings: Whether it’s COVID-19 or its civil unrest or it's hurricane season or it's the presidential election, all of these things have consequences. And, you know, I've told my story before that I am the daughter of a maid and a janitor. I remember my dad used to go to work seven days a week. He did a lot of odd jobs to provide for his family. I'm the youngest of seven children, but the first of my family to go to college. I made it Steve. I was able to become a social worker, a police officer, police chief, first woman chief, and now a member of Congress. I made it. And now I feel a direct personal obligation to make sure that every other boy and girl, man and woman in this country have an opportunity, have a fighting chance in this nation. I would not have been able to make it, were it not for the precious democracy on which our country stands on. My job is to also help every voter understand that without our democracy, America would not be the greatest nation in the world full of opportunity. And, you know, I served on Judiciary and the Intelligence committees, served as an impeachment manager, the rule of law, our Constitution and upholding the democracy. Primary responsibilities of the impeachment trial, still very critical today. If we want people living in this country regardless of the color of their skin, how much money they have in the bank, their family’s last name, we've got to protect our democracy. Which means we have to vote for the person who has the agenda that puts people first and is fighting to give every citizen a fighting chance.WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Civil unrest and coronavirus: Where we stand 6 months into the COVID-19 era  > #BlackoutTuesday overtakes social media outlets  > International debate brewing over claims COVID-19 is becoming less lethal  > Moderna vaccine candidate clears key hurdle, set to enter phase two of clinical trials  > 7 in 10 Americans would get coronavirus vaccine, new poll finds  > Michigan Gov. Whitmer lifts state’s stay-at-home order  > New Zealand set to lift nearly all coronavirus restrictions after 11 days with no new cases  > Coronavirus outbreak reported at Senegal research institute working on low-cost virus test  > Johns Hopkins’s Dr. Jennifer Nuzzo says America needs public health crisis insurance to pay for victims, calls on policymakers to proactively work to destigmatize the virus or people who are sick won’t reveal their condition         Have you scrolled through your social media today? You may have seen a hashtag at the top of social media trends — #BlackoutTuesday — this morning. You may have also seen some people criticizing the movement, and wondered exactly what is going on. As protests and unrest over the death of George Floyd continue around the United States, a movement was started by music execs Jamila Thomas and Brianna Agyemang, who wrote on a site that Tuesday would be a day to pause all business and take a stand against the “racism and inequality that exists from the boardroom to the boulevard.” The movement is taking the form of posting all-black tiles on Instagram and other social media platforms. (USA Today)    As journalists, it’s our job to bring our readers the news — not to tell you how you feel about the news or which causes you should support. But this is a historic moment in our country. The photos you have seen — many of which we have brought you — of the violent and peaceful protests unravelling across the country will be front and center in our children’s history books.  This is more than just a “cause” — this is a mass-scale movement whose engines are being churned by the deep pain and suffering felt by so many Americans, particularly communities of color. The country is hurting. #BlackoutTuesday   THE INTERVIEW  Dr. Jennifer Nuzzo, Senior Scholar, Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security  Jennifer Nuzzo says America needs public health crisis insurance to pay for victims, calls on policymakers to proactively work to destigmatize the virus or people who are sick won’t reveal their condition, says that underlying injustices and inequities in our society are contributing to the virus’s lethality in communities of color.          Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL’S CORONAVIRUS REPORT Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Tuesday, June 2.  Editor’s Note.    Three storms at once. COVID-19 came like a tsunami, rushing over states, through urban centers and attacking elder care facilities and nursing homes, overwhelming health systems in America. Lots of time for blame and accountability later, but on the front end, the only response leaders had was to issue stay-at-home orders and curfews and desperately try to secure personal protective equipment and ventilators. They shuttered nonessential businesses, and that led to the second storm of now more than 42 million unemployed. In weeks, America went from historic employment levels to historic unemployment. Storm three was brewing here for a very long time — some say generations but that never really makes it into people’s heads — and that is systemic racism and bigotry, not only at the hands of some police officers who have harassed and killed black men and women too long with seeming impunity.   All three storms are feeding each other. Oh, and we are in a political season where President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE, an avowed populist who embraces a muscular, pugnacious nationalism that does appeal to many in the nation, seems to prefer the storm to the calm.   I’ve been hopeful that the antivirals and vaccine therapies now in trials were going to fix all of this and be ready for Americans and people around the world on a much faster timeline than most believed possible. Even the pharmaceutical realist Tom Inglesby of Johns Hopkins University and Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases have said they were optimistic about the possibility of faster than normal vaccines and therapeutics — but both have said, “everything else must go well.” We need smart leadership, pre-investment in manufacturing capacity globally, smart systems management and much more. Given the three storms above raging over a political blood-sport boxing ring — we, at a minimum, need to temper our hopes. Nothing will come easy or fast in the political and economic climate we see today.   – Steve Clemons   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik.    Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus   THE HILL ‘VIRTUALLY’ LIVE  ICYMI: Catch up on last month's programs       On May 21, The Hill hosted “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy anchored by Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE.   Watch the full program video here.    On May 20, The Hill hosted “The Vir[Tech]tual World of Tomorrow.”    Watch the full program video here.  We want to hear from you! Follow us @TheHillEvents and keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 6,318,040 reported cases of COVID-19 and 376,885 reported deaths as of the time of this newsletter.    The U.S. is reporting 1,820,523 cases and 105,475 deaths. Brazil is reporting 526,447 cases. Russia, where the WHO says the outbreak is continuing to worsen, is reporting 423,186 cases. The WHO remains concerned about spikes in cases throughout Eastern Europe, as well.    Elsewhere around the world:    > Spain reported no new COVID-19 deaths Monday, a first since the start of the outbreak.  > Wuhan, China, is finishing up its aggressive push to test all 11 million city residents.  > Parisian life has taken a step back to normalcy with the reopening of city cafes. > South Korea is working to quell a second outbreak that emerged in nightclubs and bars.  > Rwanda is set to announce new restrictions after its first recorded coronavirus death.    Insight into U.S. case numbers from Reid Wilson, The Hill’s national correspondent:    > States with highest number of new cases in the past week: Arkansas (+28), Arizona (+790), California (+3,057), and Utah (+329) > New York recorded fewer than 10,000 new cases last week for the first time since March 21. > Pennsylvania recorded fewer than 5,000 new cases last week for the first time since April 1. > Texas has had a week straight of 1,000+ new cases a day. > Vermont has gone 29 days without recording double-digit increases. > As a measure of how the outbreak has evolved, Virginia reported almost twice as many cases last week as Pennsylvania, one of the early epicenters.   The U.S. has reported 17,340,682 coronavirus test results and 458,231 have reported full recoveries from the virus.   WASHINGTON WATCH Pelosi, holding a bible, urges Trump to help the country heal. A reserved Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE (D-Calif.) on Tuesday called on President Trump to tone down his combative approach to the national protests for racial justice that have followed the death of an unarmed black man in Minneapolis last week. Clutching a Bible in the Capitol, Pelosi urged Trump to reach across the divides of race, party, region and religion to help the country heal instead. (The Hill)    Trump testing czar to return to regular duties. The Trump administration official leading the COVID-19 testing efforts will return to his regular duties in mid-June, he announced Monday. Adm. Brett Giroir, the assistant secretary for health, said at a public meeting Monday he will return to his regular duties next month after spending the past several weeks working with FEMA to increase COVID-19 testing capacity. (The Hill)    Nearly 26,000 nursing home residents died from COVID-19. Nearly 26,000 nursing home residents across the country have died from COVID-19, federal officials said Monday, the first public acknowledgement about the scope of the disease in the care facilities. According to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), states reported more than 60,000 cases of the coronavirus among nursing home residents, and the numbers are likely higher. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET    Rep. Will HurdWilliam Ballard HurdScaled-back Pride Month poses challenges for fundraising, outreach The Hill's Morning Report - Protesters' defiance met with calls to listen GOP Rep. Will Hurd marches with protesters in Houston MORE (R-Texas)  @HurdOnTheHill Violent riots & destruction are drowning the voices trying to address injustice. Let’s not destroy. Violence will not bring George Floyd or the other countless victims back. It will only make the problem worse.   Rep. Alcee HastingsAlcee (Judge) Lamar HastingsThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Johns Hopkins's Jennifer Nuzzo says America needs public health crisis insurance to pay for COVID-19 victims; Protests, pandemic continue to ravage America  Pelosi stands firm amid calls to close Capitol Sanders wants one-on-one fight with Biden MORE (D-Fla.)  @RepHastingsFL As Americans chose to gather peacefully near the WH to protest police brutality & the murder of George Floyd, President Trump chose flash-bang shells, gas & rubber bullets - all for a photo op. Dishonoring our values, including free speech, is not American & it is not leadership.  ACROSS THE NATION Protests highlight COVID-19’s economic toll on African Americans. Protests around the country over the deaths of George Floyd and other black Americans at the hands of police come as communities of color suffer staggering losses to the coronavirus pandemic and the economic crisis it created. Economists and public health experts have issued increasingly dire warnings about the unique toll the pandemic is taking on black Americans and other minority groups, who make up a disproportionate number of COVID-19 deaths and layoffs driven by the health crisis. (The Hill)    7 in 10 Americans would be likely to get a coronavirus vaccine, Post-ABC poll finds. About 7 in 10 Americans say they would get a vaccine to protect against the novel coronavirus if immunizations were free and available to everyone, according to a Washington Post-ABC News poll. The nationwide survey finds that a majority of people of all political affiliations are interested in receiving such a vaccine. (Washington Post)  Michigan Gov. Whitmer lifts stay-at-home order. Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer (D) is lifting the state's stay-at-home order, and will allow bars and restaurants to reopen for both indoor and outdoor dining with restrictions. In an announcement Monday, Whitmer said retailers would be allowed to open Thursday, with capacity limits. Restaurants and bars will be able to start serving patrons on June 8, she said. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW New Zealand expected to lift coronavirus restrictions next week after 11 days without new cases. New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announced Tuesday that nearly all of the restrictions intended to slow the spread of coronavirus in the country could be lifted as soon as next week. Ardern told reporters that the country may move to alert level one next week. That means that all social-distancing measures and bans on mass gatherings would be lifted. However, the country’s borders will remain closed, Reuters reported. (The Hill)   Cases continue to rise in Russia, Eastern Europe, WHO says. As daily new cases continue to decline across Western Europe, hot spots in Russia and Eastern Europe continue to worsen, the World Health Organization said, according to Reuters. “At the moment in Europe, in Western Europe, we are seeing a steady decline,” spokeswoman Margaret Harris told reporters. (CNBC)     Coronavirus has broken out at a research institute in Senegal that is working on a low-cost virus test. The coronavirus has broken out in a prestigious biomedical research institute in Senegal that has been working on developing a low-cost test for home use in Africa and elsewhere. (New York Times)   SCIENCE Global experts go head-to-head over claims the coronavirus “no longer exists clinically.” A very public dispute has broken out between some of Italy’s, and the world’s, most high-profile doctors after one expert claimed the coronavirus “no longer exists clinically.” Alberto Zangrillo, the head of intensive care at the San Raffaele hospital in Milan in the Lombardy region (the epicenter of Italy’s coronavirus outbreak), caused a stir Sunday by telling Italian media that a study by his colleague had shown that the virus was losing its potency. (CNBC)   A COVID-19 vaccine has passed its first human trial. But is it the front-runner? A promising coronavirus vaccine candidate cleared a key hurdle this week, when Moderna Therapeutics entered phase two of clinical trials. The move signals that the company’s mRNA vaccine has passed its initial safety checks and has met an important milestone in bringing this drug closer to the public and commercial markets. (National Geographic)  Secret weapons? Monkeys, ferrets offer needed clues in COVID-19 vaccine race. The animal testing lets scientists see how the body reacts to vaccines in ways studies in people never can, said Kate Broderick, research chief at Inovio Pharmaceuticals. With animals, “we’re able to perform autopsies and look specifically at their lung tissue and get a really deep dive in looking at how their lungs have reacted,” Broderick said. She’s awaiting results from mice, ferrets and monkeys that are being exposed to the coronavirus after receiving Inovio’s vaccine. (Fox Business)   BUSINESS Coronavirus sends MD-88 “Mad Dog” jets to an early retirement from U.S. fleets. A noisier era of aviation ends Tuesday when Delta Air Lines retires its “Mad Dog” jets. Its remaining MD-88s — and a quieter, younger model, the MD-90 — are headed to an early retirement because of the coronavirus pandemic. (CNBC)   Stocks tick higher as Wall Street looks beyond police brutality. Stocks opened with modest gains Tuesday as investors looked past nationwide protests against police brutality and toward a second-half economic rebound from the devastation spurred by the coronavirus pandemic. The Dow Jones Industrial Average opened with a gain of roughly 100 points, rising around 0.4 percent after the fourth consecutive night of demonstrations across American cities. (The Hill)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS Hackers are targeting the COVID-19 response and putting lives at risk. The COVID-19 pandemic is threatening the health of citizens and the economy, which has already put much strain on national infrastructure and society. However, urgent national security vulnerabilities exist that we are not prepared for and that are undermining our ability to respond to pandemics. Recently the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team alerted the public that cyberattacks are happening to organizations involved in the COVID-19 response. (Charles Fracchia for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS Remember the beginning and seemingly more light-humored days of quarantine? The days of “Tiger King,” bread baking and TikTok? Well, those are far gone. But for all you “Tiger King” Fans out there, this may put a smile on your face (depending on where you fall on the Joe Exotic, Carole Baskin feud).   A federal judge in Oklahoma has awarded ownership of Joe Exotic’s famous zoo to his arch-nemesis Carole Baskin. The order gives Baskin control of about 16 acres of land in Garvin County, Okla., that is home to an animal park with an array of big cats. (CNN)    Bank of America pledges $1 billion to help economic and racial inequality worsened by COVID-19. Bank of America announced it’s committing $1 billion to help communities grappling with exacerbated economic and racial inequality caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The bank said in a press release that the program will focus on “assisting people and communities of color that have experienced a greater impact from the health crisis.” (CNBC)   ICYMI: STEVE’S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  > Steve interviews Teva USA President and CEO BRENDAN O’GRADY  > Steve interviews US Surgeon General JEROME ADAMS  > Steve interviews former NIC Director GREG TREVERTON  > Steve interviews Topeka, Kan., Mayor MICHELLE DE LA ISLA  > Steve interviews Rep. RO KHANNA (D-Calif.)  > Steve interviews former Rep. JOHN DELANEY (D-Md.) Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.  Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus   VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Jennifer Nuzzo, with the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. Read excerpts from the interview below. Clemons: How did we get here given the fact that people like you were forewarning of such dark days? Nuzzo: Yeah, it's been really an unfortunate road that we've been on. I mean, I think anyone who has studied pandemics and these sort of viruses, you know, once we knew in January that this virus was capable of sustained human-to-human spread that meant that we were on the path to a pandemic. And so, you know, many of us — lots of us — talked about the need to urgently prepare. Unfortunately, there wasn't a lot of action that happened in January and February, and I think where we found ourselves mid-March, where we were looking down at rapidly accelerating case numbers and worried that we were headed for health system collapse like we were seeing in other countries, you know, that really kind of put us into a position where there was no choice but to implement these very broad and, frankly, you know, damaging in their own right, but nonetheless necessary, lock down and all sorts of other restrictions in an attempt to kind of hit pause and make up for lost preparations.    Clemons: If you were called back to Congress to testify at some point for some commission that looked back on this, what do you think the points of dysfunction were that mattered most in getting us to where we are today?  Nuzzo: There are a few things. I mean one, obviously, the inability to more broadly test for the virus that causes COVID-19. I mean, we constrained for a very, very long time far too long who could get tested for it. So, for months, even after this virus was circulating in many countries across the planet, you could only be tested if you had traveled from Wuhan. We had also shut down travel from Wuhan. So, essentially that left no one to test. Nonetheless, we didn't expand testing at that point. And so, what that meant was that the virus could enter the country. It was already there. It was circulating, but we couldn't see it and that really made us lose ground. One, because we want to find where the infections are so that we can isolate those people, prevent them from spreading their infection to others, prevent the case numbers from growing and taking a real foothold. Other countries that acted early were able to keep their case numbers low, but we never did that. But beyond just the testing, the laboratory issues that we had. And it wasn't all the same, I mean, there were laboratory issues, we couldn't get the test kits out to the state public health labs, and that was a problem. But aside from that, there were other places that could have done testing. We should have fixed that. We basically put all of our eggs in one basket, which was to ban travel, which, you know, may sound like a good idea. It seems, you know, it probably sounds reasonable that if the virus is somewhere else, you don't want it to come here, and so that the way to do that is to stop people from traveling from those places. The problem was, we actually didn't know where the virus was because many countries weren't yet testing and we only banned travel from a few places because logistically it would be impossible to support the travel bans had we expanded it, and so that put all of our eggs in one basket. In my view, I think it's psychologically reinforced this idea that the virus was a problem across the globe and not necessarily a problem that was already likely circulating in the U.S. I think that's one of the reasons why we lost time preparing, thinking about how we were gonna isolate sick people, thinking about how we were gonna expand capacities and hospitals, thinking about how we were gonna protect nursing homes and other vulnerable groups. So, it's really unfortunate. But I hope that now that we've had this pause button that the restrictions have enabled that we've been using this time to try to make up for lost ground.    Clemons: Surgeon General Jerome Adams continues to highlight that communities of color, communities in lower socioeconomic areas are vulnerable communities and they have not had the level of decades on health, investment and ecosystem investment that other communities have. So, they have an underlying condition generically, but they have lots of health underlying conditions. Do you agree with the surgeon general? And what do you think we need to do as a nation to address the disproportionate way that coronavirus is hitting those communities? Nuzzo: Yeah, it's very clear from both the case numbers and the hospitalization data, and the death date unfortunately, that communities of color are being overrepresented and really harder hit than many of us, which is really just a very, very unfortunate situation. I think there are a number of factors that contribute to this. I mean, clearly, underlying health conditions are an issue. We also know that those underlying health conditions don't occur in a vacuum. They are also associated with socioeconomic status and income. And you know the ability to obtain healthy foods can be associated, or the lack of ability, with certain chronic conditions. So, there are deeply entrenched disparities that contribute to this. But also, you know, I mean, the main way that we have been protecting ourselves in these months is telling people stay home as much as possible, telework if you can, and that is not something that's available to all people. Not everybody has the luxury of being able to stay home. Many people are service workers and have to go out because they're essential. But also they need a paycheck to support their families. And so, being able to stay home, frankly, is a luxury and it's not one that's available to everybody. So, there are lots of different ways. We're also hearing about disparities and accessing care, particularly accessing testing for COVID-19. There's been some great reporting lately, suggesting that testing sites tend not to occur in some of the harder hit areas because, you know, if we rely on [national retail] chains, they may not have stores in certain neighborhoods, and so access issues are huge. If people aren't able to be tested early, they're not able to seek care, you know, when they need it, that obviously can worsen their outcomes and unfortunately with deadly consequences. So, all of the injustices and inequities that exist in our society, I think are playing out in the case numbers.    Clemons: You are a scientist. How's the morale of the average person in the world of science today given some of the disregard for science that we've seen in some quarters in Washington? Nuzzo: Yeah, I mean, I think first of all anyone who has any knowledge about COVID-19, and that's a large part of my academic community, I think a lot of us have something to contribute. We're all pretty exhausted, mostly because we feel an urgency to contribute and in our world it's contributing what we know and there's just a lot of need for information right now. So, most people have been basically working around the clock trying to make the situation better the best we can. Obviously, there is a deep disappointment that we got to this point, particularly for those who have been involved in the preparedness community and sounding the alarm for decades. There's a deep disappointment that we turned out to be right on many issues. We sort of hope that these things never happen, but we very much know that they can. But, you know, at the end of the day, those of us in the science community and particularly those who are busy and right now are luckier than most, many of us are not on the front lines we are not the ones putting our lives and families at risk and we are employed and, you know, still getting a paycheck. So, I personally consider myself lucky. You know, my kids are at home. I've got two young kids that we are trying to home-school at home. It's really, really difficult and my kids are suffering. But as a family I would say we're luckier than most. We breathe every day and we're safe.    Clemons: Larry Kramer, a gay, anti-HIV/AIDS activist used to pester Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE to come up with a solution to AIDS faster and to talk about this as being a plague. So, Larry Kramer was an icon to many people and said he bent the curve in terms of what was possible in terms of vaccines dealing with people and de-stigmatizing at that moment. I don't know whether we have stigma issues out there. But, I see some people not reporting that they've had COVID-19 until much later in fear of the consequences of that. But is stigma an issue? Are we having problems with getting the resources in the right place for vaccines? Do we need a Larry Kramer today?  Nuzzo: Well, first of all, I think we always need a Larry Kramer. I mean, the more that people feel an ownership of this issue and realize that when we're talking about public health, we're talking about them. The more the public is in public health, the better. And I think a really engaged and energized populace is the pathway to public health protection. I think a number of countries that have done really well in responding to this, one of the things that I've noticed is that they have data that's highly available and completely transparent so that people can see what's going on and know what's going on and make decisions for their families and hold the authorities to the appropriate standards. So, I think an energized and engaged populace who feels that this is important to them and take interest in it is always important. On the topic of stigma, this is a hallmark of infectious disease outbreaks. This almost always happens. I am not a social scientist, but I have a good colleague Dr. Monica Schoch-Spana who's a cultural anthropologist who studies this very topic on stigma. What she has taught me in her decades of looking at this is that often when we have these scary and seemingly unexplainable events happen to us as communities, we look for someone to blame, and unfortunately we cannot always find someone to point a finger at. And so that is one of the things that contributes to stigma. There's always a perceived cause of the disease, even though the cause is really the virus and not a person. But that stigma is out there, and it has enormous consequences, including, and we've already heard this, there's been some reporting now about people not wanting to be tested that have symptoms of COVID-19 because they don't want to be identified as such. They, you know, may not seek care if they are experiencing worsening of symptoms because, you know, they're sort of afraid of being known. And this can have enormous consequences. One of the things I'm deeply worried about is some reporting that happened over the weekend out of Minnesota, where law enforcement in commenting on the protests, talked about conducting contact tracing on the people who had been arrested, which is an extraordinarily unfortunate phrase to use because contact tracing is a real public health tool that we will need to depend on in order to control COVID-19. What it means in a public health context is when we find a case, we try to figure out who that case may have exposed in the time in which he or she was contagious but possibly didn't know that he or she was infected. And then we go and try to find those people and tell them that they were likely exposed to COVID-19 and that it's in everyone's best interest that they stay at home until we know for sure that they're not sick. When public health does this, it is not a law enforcement action. It is something that we do to help people. Nonetheless, when law enforcement appropriates that term for their very different activities, I worry that it can have deep consequences and it will drive cases underground. And I fear that it will make people fearful not only of being diagnosed, but also potentially participating in real public health, beneficial contact tracing activities.     Clemons: What do you think we need that we don't have in place today? Nuzzo: We're hearing a lot of reports of people being hit with very large treatment bills. So, when you know all of the kind of action on the Hill happened, one of the first things they did was to make sure that people could be tested for COVID-19 for free, or at least not have a fear of costs prevent them from being tested. I think that those actions largely, but probably not completely, solved the problem. But what was not included in that was assurances that people's cost of treatment would be covered. And, some colleagues and I wrote an op-ed a few months ago, basically calling for a public health crisis insurance that would not only ensure that everybody had full coverage, but also that could capture data on who was being treated and what their risk factors were and what their outcomes are because we're still trying to learn about this virus and doing so with very imperfect data systems. One of the things that we've been doing at Johns Hopkins is tracking COVID-19 and most recently stood up an effort called the Testing Insights Initiative, trying to understand who's getting tested and who's not, and how testing compares between states because there's no other way to interpret the case numbers. We need better data. And the extent to which we are systematically omitting people from our data capture systems because testing is not available in their neighborhood or people are sort of off the grid, if you will, persons experiencing homelessness, it's a big problem. But nonetheless, we're not going to be safe unless everybody is taken care of. We saw this in other outbreaks. Just before COVID-19, there were enormous outbreaks of Hepatitis A occurring across the U.S. in large part in persons experiencing homelessness. One of the issues is that they very much rely on private businesses as places to wash up and use the restroom and all those places are closed in many communities. So, I can imagine there's going to be huge tolls unless health authorities and social service organizations are able to have a COVID response plan in the communities of persons experiencing homelessness WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Experts remain concerned protests could lead to spikes in coronavirus cases  > Trump shrinks back amid protests; many calling for president to address anxious nation > Senate returns to Washington as protests roil DC, cities across the country  > Trump urges governors to ‘dominate,’ arrest protesters  > Eli Lilly begins world’s first human study of potential antibody treatment > Russians claim to have effective treatment for virus; hospitals set to deploy drug this month > US sends 2 million doses of hydroxychloroquine to Brazil as countries embark on joint research into drug’s effectiveness > Former Rep. John DelaneyJohn DelaneyThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Val Demings calls for a new DOJ Office of Police Standards; Trump, GOP to pull convention from NC The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Johns Hopkins's Jennifer Nuzzo says America needs public health crisis insurance to pay for COVID-19 victims; Protests, pandemic continue to ravage America  MORE says Trump is spewing venom when he should be leading, says we need a sea change in how we think about race, proposes using Amazon to help test Americans         The weekend that was. A nation in pain. Since the coronavirus pandemic took hold and the country was thrown into lockdown, most days have been a bit different. But this Monday, for so many Americans, is the worst yet — scarier, fiercer, darker. Last night, the nation’s capital, along with major cities throughout the U.S., bore witness to massive protests over the police killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis. In some cities, the protests turned violent. Iconic D.C. monuments were vandalized and aerial footage showed fires blazing and smoke rising throughout the National Mall.    Even under normal circumstances, this weekend’s protests would have marked a dark period in our nation’s history. The outpouring of civil unrest that manifested throughout the country this weekend also took place during a critical moment in our fight against the coronavirus — just as many businesses were beginning to reopen. The looting and property destruction that took place this weekend are another painful blow to the nation’s business owners. As a result of the “protests,” retailers and other businesses in cities across the U.S., including the District of Columbia, New York, Atlanta, Philadelphia and Minneapolis, experienced broken windows, thefts and violence. The actions prompted a number of businesses to shut their doors and raised questions about how exactly the actions relate to the protesters, many of whom were peaceful. Walmart on Sunday closed several hundred stores due to potential protests. Amazon said it had adjusted routes or scaled back delivery operations in some cities, while Apple closed an unspecified number of stores on Sunday. Target said it temporarily closed six stores in California, Minnesota, Illinois and Pennsylvania. On top of it all, health officials remain concerned that the mass gatherings will lead to new outbreaks of the coronavirus — just as many of our metropolises were making serious ground in their fight against COVID-19.    America is sick. 1,797,457 have contracted coronavirus and 104,484 have died in the U.S. from the virus. America is divided — perhaps more than ever before. More than 40 million Americans are out of work as a result of the pandemic. And now, our cities have been put up in flames, our streets vandalized.    We hear so much about the “soul of the nation” — what has made America the greatest country in the history of the world. But where on earth do we go from here? Americans are sick and they are sick of the status quo of white police officers murdering unarmed black men. George Floyd’s last words were, “I can’t breathe.” America needs to take a collective breath. Our “new normal” is here. We all have a role to play in working to make the days ahead brighter than what we saw this weekend.    Where was President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE you ask? The president was moved to the White House's underground bunker to shelter in place for a brief period of time as the protest grew outside the people’s house.           THE INTERVIEW  Former Rep. John Delaney (D-Md.)  Former Rep. John Delaney (D-Md.), who ran for president in 2020, says Trump is spewing venom when he should be leading, says we need a sea change in how we think about race, proposes using Amazon to help more Americans get tested, says facts and data can move the nation forward with health-smart reopening, adds the government should pass a "We Need it in America Act" that would annually review manufacturing needs for the security of the country like active agents for key pharmaceutical production.          Watch the full interview here.      THE HILL’S CORONAVIRUS REPORT Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Monday, June 1.  Editor’s Note.  * Updated to reflect that Anton Black died in Caroline County, Maryland.   I don’t know Paul LA Tue III, but I intend to get to know him. He made an impact on me speaking at a vigil noting society’s open, bleeding ulcer of yet another black person murdered, this time George Floyd. But he said before we think about Floyd’s name, and before Ahmaud Arbery’s name, and Sandra Bland’s name, and a long list of other black men and women harassed and killed in our own neighborhood, there was the case of Anton Black, a resident of Kent County possibly killed in neighboring Caroline County, MD, a young man who died under suspicious circumstances — and I didn’t know about it.    Tue spoke about counseling his son not to live life “apologetically black,” but rather “unapologetically black.” He told the white attendees of the more than 400 who showed up at the vigil, masked and socially distant, in a park to not stand in front of, or behind blacks, but stand with them. He said he was sick and tired of being sick and tired of these kinds of moments but predicted there would be more. He called for an alliance of people to do things to break down the distance between communities as a key step in robbing from the police, or harassers, any sense of permission they think they have to behave the way so many have.     This was a peaceful vigil, a peaceful protest — but many protests around the nation have resulted in stores robbed, people hurt, property vandalized. In Washington, D.C., this morning, profane graffiti is everywhere near the White House, but also in other districts of the city, and I choked on the residual tear gas and smoke from fires and police clashes last night in Lafayette Square in front of the people’s White House. One question for folks to ponder is whether it took violence to get this on the national radar, to underscore how essential it is that the approach to race and inequality not be dealt with in such pathetically insignificant ways. Does anyone think that the climate in the country will improve with 42 million more unemployed because of the economic shutdown the country endured?   I open this Coronavirus Report today with these thoughts because it is inescapable that deep social tensions are being aggravated by a time of distance and fear and seclusion and exclusion — and that the inequalities and divides between socioeconomic status and race in America are demanding attention and solutions. The coronavirus will be solved, though vaccines and therapies or the implementation of health guidelines for working businesses will take some time. But they will come. In my view, the answers we need about healing and diminishing the divides in our society are not ones that should be low on our list of priorities. They should be up there with finding a cure. We need both sets of cures to assure America comes out better and stronger in the future so that Tue can stop being sick and tired of being sick and tired.   – Steve Clemons   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik.    Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus   THE HILL ‘VIRTUALLY’ LIVE  ICYMI: Catch up on last week’s programs       On May 21, The Hill hosted “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy anchored by Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE.   Watch the full program video here.    On May 20, The Hill hosted “The Vir[Tech]tual World of Tomorrow.”    Watch the full program video here.  We want to hear from you! Follow us @TheHillEvents and keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 6,217,949 reported cases of coronavirus and 373,234 have died from COVID-19 throughout the world.    The U.S. is reporting 1,797,457 cases and 104,484 deaths as of the time of this newsletter. Brazil is reporting 514,849 cases. Russia 414,878. United Kingdom 276,156. Spain 239,638. Italy 233,197. India 193,854. France 189,010. Germany 183,594. Turkey 164,769. Peru 164,476. Iran 154,445. Chile 105,158. Canada 93,017. Bangladesh 49,534. Netherlands 46,749. Ecuador 39,098. Portugal 32,700. Kuwait 27,762. Afghanistan 15,750. Oman 12,223. Nigeria 10,162. Armenia, where the prime minister has tested positive for COVID-19, is reporting 9,492 cases.   New York is reporting 371,711 cases. New Jersey 160,445. Illinois 120,260. California 112,491. Massachusetts 96,965. Pennsylvania 76,129. Texas 64,652. Michian 57,537. Georgia 47,628. Virginia 45,398. Connecticut 42,201. Louisiana 40,341. North Carolina 29,399. Minnesota 25,208. Rhode Island 14,991. Missouri 13,438. District of Columbia 8,801.    16,936,891 coronavirus test results have been recorded in the U.S. and 444,758 have recovered from the virus.   WASHINGTON WATCH As protests and violence spill over, Trump shrinks bank. The president spent Sunday out of sight, berating opponents on Twitter, even as some of his campaign advisers were recommending that he deliver a televised address to an anxious nation. (Washington Post)    This week: Senate reconvenes as protests roil nation amid pandemic. The Senate will return to Washington on Monday after days of protests have swept the country. Monday will mark the first day senators are back in the nation’s capital since protests started last week, providing, in some cases, their first encounter with reporters, and each other, about what Congress’s and the administration’s response should be. (The Hill)    Fauci says his meetings with Trump have “dramatically decreased.” Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE said his meetings with President Trump have “dramatically decreased” in recent weeks. "We used to have task force meetings every single day, including Saturday and Sunday, and about 75 percent of the time after the task force meeting we’d meet with the president. So I was meeting with him four times a week back, a month or so ago,” Fauci said in an interview with STAT News published Monday. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEETS Rep. Frank Palone Jr. (D-N.J.)  @FrankPallone With more than 100,000 Americans dead, we must quickly enact the solutions in the #HeroesAct, which will significantly expand testing & tracing.  It is the only way we will be able to protect the American people, and safely and confidently reopen our communities. #FamiliesFirst   Sen. Tom CottonThomas (Tom) Bryant CottonNYT says Tom Cotton editorial 'did not meet our standards' Engel says he refuses to seek NYT endorsement over Cotton op-ed Cotton praises NY Times for 'standing up to the woke progressive mob' in publishing opinion piece MORE (R-Ark.)  @SenTomCotton George Floyd’s death is deeply disturbing, & I welcome quick action to get justice for him in accordance with law. And we should always respect the rights of peaceful protesters. But anarchy, looting, and rioting–we have zero tolerance for that, and it needs to end tonight.     ACROSS THE NATION       Health officials warn that nationwide protests could set off second wave of infections. U.S. public health officials are warning that the massive, countrywide demonstrations against police brutality, which show no sign of abating, could be followed by a sudden increase in novel coronavirus cases. “We still have pockets of spread in communities that aren’t under good control,” former Food and Drug Administration chief Scott Gottlieb said in a Sunday interview on CBS News’s “Face the Nation.” Minnesota, the epicenter of the protests, has seen an uptick in new cases and hospitalizations in recent days, he said. (Washington Post)    Trump urges governors to “dominate,” arrest protesters on late-morning conference call. Trump repeatedly urged governors from across the country to “dominate” the protesters, arrest them and put them behind bars for a long time, according to an official familiar with the president’s remarks who spoke on the condition of anonymity to disclose his private comments. (Washington Post)   WORLD VIEW  Russia claims to have an effective treatment for the coronavirus. Russia has approved an anti-influenza drug, Aviifavir, to treat COVID-19 and will start delivering it to hospitals this month, according to Russia’s sovereign wealth fund. The fund, RDIF, has provided money for Russia’s development and production of the drug which is based on favipiravir, an anti-influenza drug developed in Japan under the name Aviga. (CNBC)   Armenian prime minister and family test positive for COVID-19. Armenian Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan and his family have tested positive for COVID-19. The PM says he most likely  contracted the virus during a working consultation. The prime minister will now self-isolate in his residence and will continue to work distantly. (Public Radio of Armenia)  SCIENCE Eli Lilly gives patients first doses in trial of new coronavirus treatment. The drug company Eli Lilly announced Monday that it has administered the first doses of a possible new treatment for coronavirus patients as it begins a phase one clinical trial. (The Hill)    New coronavirus losing potency, top Italian doctor says. The new coronavirus is losing its potency and has become much less lethal, a senior Italian doctor said on Sunday. “In reality, the virus clinically no longer exists in Italy,” said Alberto Zangrillo, the head of the San Raffaele Hospital in Milan in the northern region of Lombardy, which has borne the brunt of Italy’s coronavirus contagion. (Reuters)  BUSINESS Stocks seek direction after weekend riots; China cuts U.S. agriculture purchases. U.S. equity markets were little changed Monday after protests over the weekend left a trail of destruction across America and China ordered state-run companies to stop the purchases of some U.S. products. (Fox Business) American Seafoods confirms 86 positive cases on vessel. Seafood processing company American Seafoods has confirmed that a further 85 crew members of one of its vessels have tested positive for COVID-19. The testing of the entire crew of the American Dynasty followed a positive test of one crew member while the vessel was in port at Bellingham, Wash. (CNBC)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS We need to trust each other to beat COVID-19. We need bold acts of personal responsibility to accelerate a return to normalcy. We need to trust contact tracers to maintain our privacy and confidentiality. Business owners must take actions that may not be in their own economic self-interest but will serve to protect broader public health. And all of us must be willing to sacrifice certain personal liberties for the larger goal of getting to the other side of this crisis.  (Lyndon Haviland for The Hill)    COVID-19’s “politics of humiliation”: A chance for the US to lead — or to lose control. The opportunity available now to the United States is not about money or guns — the obvious tools that U.S. government officials seek to deploy around the world. The opportunity is about the ability to lead, the ability to define and the ability to inspire. The United States needs to be about something bigger than itself, and it needs to point toward a future to which billions of other people aspire, and also see a pathway to achieving. The United States is not seizing this opportunity, and if missed, the results will echo for decades to come. (Jon B. Alterman for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS Emeril Lagasse Foundation donates $500,000 to coronavirus relief efforts. The Emeril Lagasse Foundation is donating $500,000 toward coronavirus relief efforts to support youth programs and families of hospitality industry workers in Louisiana, Nevada and Florida. “The need to support the youth in our community is a priority of Alden and I through the work of our Foundation. The need is more overwhelming than ever,” celebrity chef Emeril Lagasse said in a statement announcing the effort. (The Hill)  Read the powerful memo Tim Cook sent to Apple employees about the killing of George Floyd. “But together, we must do more. Today, Apple is making donations to a number of groups, including the Equal Justice Initiative, a non-profit committed to challenging racial injustice, ending mass incarceration, and protecting the human rights of the most vulnerable people in American society. For the month of June, and in honor of the Juneteenth holiday, we’ll also be matching two-for-one all employee donations via Benevity.” Read the full note here.   ICYMI: STEVE’S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  > Steve interviews Teva USA President and CEO BRENDAN O’GRADY  > Steve interviews US Surgeon General JEROME ADAMS  > Steve interviews former NIC Director GREG TREVERTON  > Steve interviews Topeka, Kan., Mayor MICHELLE DE LA ISLA  > Steve interviews Rep. RO KHANNA (D-Calif.)  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.  Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus        VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews former Rep. John DelaneyJohn DelaneyThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Val Demings calls for a new DOJ Office of Police Standards; Trump, GOP to pull convention from NC The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Johns Hopkins's Jennifer Nuzzo says America needs public health crisis insurance to pay for COVID-19 victims; Protests, pandemic continue to ravage America  MORE (D-Md.). Read excerpts from the interview below. Clemons: You’re such a pragmatist when it comes to thinking about problem solving. What does the pragmatist do in this moment? Delaney: It is a very tough time right now for our nation. I mean, our major cities are burning and there's such anguish. And as you said, the president has been spewing kind of a venom and not showing the leadership that we need. I mean, clearly there are two things going on right now. One, there are protests, legitimate and incredibly important protests where people are stepping forward and saying, “We've had enough of this.” We need a sea change in how we think about race in this country and in particular, how we think about what's happened to black men in terms of police brutality. But then, within these protests, we obviously have people who are engaging in looting and violence and rioting. And you really need the leadership to help the American people sort this out and to start trying to bring the temperature down and allow people to believe that we will actually finally make a difference on this terrible problem that so many people who saw that video who can't unsee it. And it's really triggered an emotion in so many Americans, that has been there for a while, but I think this is different. It was so graphic, so horrific. And, you know, just to see a murder like that, so clearly before our eyes, I think the American people are broadly demanding change. And we have to respond to that, we have to act on that. That actually does involve finding solutions and getting things done, because the time for talking about this stuff is long gone. We actually have to make some fundamental structural change. But we also need leaders to bring the temperature down, and to appeal to our better angels, not the worst side of where we are right now.   Clemons: What would you tell the president of the United States right now? Delaney: I would tell him to lead. I would tell him to think about the great leaders historically in this country and what they've done at these kinds of moments. And again, to use the Lincoln phrase, “They've appealed to the better angels of who we are,” and that's what we need from our president. And that's not what we're getting. I mean, you can condemn violence and looting while also leading and trying to appeal to the better sides of people.   Clemons: Before the deaths of George Floyd and Ahmaud Arbery, we had the COVID-19 crisis. You have written that we need to find a way forward on that front. How do we bring the economy back online? Delaney: So I think it starts by looking at actually the facts and the data. When coronavirus first hit this country several months ago, we didn't understand nearly as much as we do now, and the lockdown was the appropriate response because we were particularly worried about hospitals being overrun. I mean, this thought of people in parking lot hospitals not being able to get care was really what galvanized the nation to shut down in many ways. Now, as we've seen this unfold, we've learned that this virus disproportionately impacts older Americans or Americans with preexisting conditions. And in fact, if you're not a senior and you don't have some kind of a preexisting condition that makes you vulnerable, the chances of you really having a very, very bad outcome from coronavirus are very low. So that, clearly number one, can inform how we approach this. People who are older, who have preexisting conditions, need to really stay isolated in quarantine. But it is important for the rest of the country to start getting back to work. Because to have good public health, you need a good economy, to have a good economy, you need good public health. So these things have to work together. We also know that masks work. Early on, we were told not to wear a mask. Now we know there's a lot of data to suggest anywhere from 75 to 90 percent decreased likelihood of catching the virus If you wear a mask. A pretty simple thing. So we should be quarantining our seniors. Everyone should be wearing masks in public. We should be testing. You know, I've proposed Amazon sending a test to everyone's home. I mean, Amazon can deliver something to everyone's home once a week. You know, broad-based testing with a particular focus on people who are interfacing with seniors. But I think the rest of the country has to kind of start getting back to work because of where our economy is going and the negatives associated with that — not only the debt we're leaving the next generation. If you look at what's happening to global poverty, 20 years of progress in terms of lifting people out of poverty have been reversed in the last couple of months because of this. Mental illness, depression, domestic abuse, all these other negatives have to be factored into this decision. And we have to understand this decision fundamentally is about trade off. We wish we didn't have to make this choice; we wish there was no coronavirus, but there is one.   Clemons: Tell me more about your Amazon proposal. Delaney: Well it’s actually pretty simple. I mean, Amazon could deliver something to every house in this country, right? We all know that. And so imagine a situation where everyone was getting tests sent to their house. You know, you pick the frequency. You know, once a week, once every few weeks and they could administer a test at home.   Clemons: So how would you solve the production issues? You were running for president of the United States, so let's just imagine, how would you fix this? Delaney: What I would do right now is I would look at the most promising treatments and vaccines, and there are several out there. In fact, the case of innovation has been extraordinary, if you think about how much progress we've made on both treatment and vaccines. I would take a look at the five or 10 most promising ones, and I would ensure that we have a strategy for manufacturing whichever one becomes the most promising. Which may mean that we waste some money. Because imagine there's five vaccines and you're not sure which one's the best. You actually want to start building the manufacturing capabilities for all five. Recognizing four of them may be wasted, but that's what you have to do to accelerate getting a vaccine to people by two or three months, which really justifies whatever amount of money you spend standing up the manufacturing capabilities. More broadly, or more long-term, I think we need a new program in this country called we need it in America, where on an annual basis the federal government identifies manufacturing capability. It is important that we maintain in the United States of America, doesn't have to be 100 percent, but some base level of capacity in things like chemicals that are important for pharmaceuticals, and high speed, powerful microprocessors, things that we've allowed to really leave our country from a core manufacturing competency. We need to make sure that we have public policy in place that incentivize some of this manufacturing capability staying in our country.   Clemons: How do we solve some of the legal issues around bringing people back to work and dealing with their unemployment? I think one of the two areas of law out there that interests me right now is that when companies begin to call back their employees and those employees don't feel safe — my understanding is that their rights to unemployment will cease if they don’t return, even though there may be an ambiguous health situation. I don't know who arbitrates that. The second legal issue, which has been debated, has been about liability, particularly in elder care facilities. Is there not possibly a deal in there where you could find flexibility on both sides because I'm not seeing that happen. I'm seeing people dug into various positions. What are your thoughts? Delaney: We need some clear standards, and we need to recognize that standards will evolve over time. But to the extent that businesses are using good-faith efforts to comply with standards, then they wouldn't have liability. Now, to the extent they ignore the standards or to the extent they’re negligent in putting the standards in place, then they would. So I think this conversation starts with some guidance, either at the state level or the federal level that says based on what we know now, and by the way, in three months we may update these based on new information again, we've got to get back to this trial and error. We gotta get away from this notion of second guessing everything and realize there’s risks inherent in everything we do. We need some clear standards based on what we know now, what are the best practices for a senior care facility, what are the best practices for retail business, those things need to be clearly laid out.   Clemons: Do you think the Biden team and Joe BidenJoe BidenOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Davis: 72 hours cementing the real choice for November OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump signs order removing environmental reviews for major projects | New Trump air rule will limit future pollution regulations, critics say | DNC climate group calls for larger federal investment on climate than Biden plan MORE, who is the presumptive Democratic presidential candidate, has those elements of “John Delaneyism,” in how he is likely to approach some of these challenges? Delaney: One of the things that I think the American people should be most comfortable about the vice president is he's committed to building a real team of experts around him and running the administration by relying on expertise. Your current administration is kind of a gut player, and I think the Biden administration will be very different. It’s gonna be people with expertise in their particular field, and the vice president is going to lean and rely on those people. So I think, for example, the vice president will have a very good forward looking policy around artificial intelligence. But it's not gonna be based on his own intuitive understanding of AI. It's gonna be based on relying on experts.   Clemons: If the president gets what he wants, which is an unmasked, lots of people, human jam convention and the Democrats have a virtual convention, not a human jam, people finding their digital space and making their choices that way. Do you think that sells to the American public for your team? Delaney: I think there's a lot of very creative ways, and we're all learning them every day, about how we can connect without being physically present. So, yeah, I mean, everyone likes to get together, but I also think what the American people are looking for is smart leadership. And when we think about reopening our country, we've got to realize there's certain things that we do that are super spreader events. Going to sporting events, going to concerts, going to bars and going to conventions. Those things spread this virus at a rapid rate, and it is not worth doing them. We're much better off taking risks on things that have real value to society, like public school and university. I'd much rather us push the envelope on opening schools up, as opposed to pushing the envelope on opening up conventions or concerts.Rep. Ro KhannaRohit (Ro) KhannaThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Val Demings calls for a new DOJ Office of Police Standards; Trump, GOP to pull convention from NC Calls for police reform sparks divisions in Congress MORE (D-Calif.) said the coronavirus pandemic has “accelerated” the need to expand broadband into rural parts of the country as more of the country works remotely. “I think it's accelerated the need for that,” Khanna, a top progressive in the House, told The Hill's Steve Clemons.  “I mean, first of all, tech companies realized that remote work is more possible. Facebook has said that they're going to go all remote, or at least half of their staff of their employees are going to be remote. Twitter has said the same thing. So, I think we're seeing that we're gonna have more decentralization of technology jobs and opportunities.”  Khanna pointed to legislation introduced by House Majority Whip Jim ClyburnJames (Jim) Enos ClyburnRepublicans stand by Esper after public break with Trump Klobuchar on defense as Floyd death puts spotlight on record Khanna: Coronavirus has 'accelerated' the need for rural broadband MORE (D-S.C.) that would spend over $80 billion on expanding broadband as an avenue to help bring better internet connection to the whole country. Democrats, particularly those representing rural states and districts, have underscored the need to expand internet access for months, saying there is a noticeable gap in broadband capabilities between their constituents and people in more urban areas.  Clyburn last year announced the creation of an all-Democrat task force on rural broadband, saying it is “unacceptable” that rural areas have limited internet access.  “If rural America is to thrive in the 21st century information economy, it must have affordable and accessible internet service to every community,” he said.  Khanna added that expanding rural broadband and enabling more people to work across the country could ease partisan tensions, citing animosity from conservatives toward social media platforms. “Imagine, just for a thought experiment that some of these social media companies had decentralized work. They actually had employees in the Midwest, in the South who also were part of creating this 21st century public forum,” he said. “They would be much less likely to label these tech folks as other. I think this would actually not just help our economics it would help some of the national cohesiveness that’s missing in this country.”WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Trump terminating relationship with WHO  > US savings rate his record high as pandemic causes Americans to stockpile cash  > New York City mayor announced possible phased reopening of city, likely to begin next month  > Senate Democrats pump brakes on new round of stimulus checks  > How poop – yes poop – could help warn of the next coronavirus outbreak > VA says it has ‘ratcheted down’ use of hydroxychloroquine to treat veterans > No-lockdown Sweden reports economic growth in first three months of the year  > The mystery of the virus: Researchers puzzled why coronavirus has been more deadly  in US and Europe than Asia  > Rep. Ro KhannaRohit (Ro) KhannaThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Val Demings calls for a new DOJ Office of Police Standards; Trump, GOP to pull convention from NC Calls for police reform sparks divisions in Congress MORE says President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE threatening violence against US citizens, says we need a ‘21st Century Social Media Fairness Doctrine’; claims that early Santa Clara shelter-at-home order saved many lives  THE INTERVIEW  Rep. Ro Khanna (D-Calif.)  Rep. Ro Khanna says President Trump threatening violence against US citizens, says we need a ‘21st Century Social Media Fairness Doctrine’; claims that early Santa Clara shelter-at-home order saved many lives         Watch the full interview here.       THE HILL’S CORONAVIRUS REPORT Editors’ Note.   There is a long-documented tension between America’s global do-gooders, usually called liberal internationalists, and realists, those who believe that the world is a nasty, anarchic and lawless place where self-interest rules. Realists often say that their mantra is “seeing the world as it really is, not as one would hope it to be.” This tension is a polite one in my view, usually anyway. But the need to see the world as it really is seems to me to be fundamental even if working on important projects that help others and make the world a better place. Helping lesser-developed nations and their citizens can be an effort embraced by both liberal internationalists and also realists. The liberal internationalists are deploying American soft power and reaping good will and trust in return. But the realists are also calculating, appropriately, that COVID-19 infections that break out anywhere in the world — particularly lesser-developed nations where there is less than adequate health infrastructure — will come back into the U.S. and spread elsewhere in the world. In other words, even idealism depends on an empirical understanding of the world and an understanding of returns built on investment and effort, which are grounded in elements of realism.   What worries me at the moment is the attack on realism — as defined by data, empiricism, science, by rationality. Michael Lewis in his book “The Fifth Risk” saw the attack on data coming. If there are no counters of things, no data to measure performance, then it’s harder to hold government officials, or a presidential administration, accountable. Certainly, the nation’s health will erode, planes may crash, crops falter and investments in science collapse — all of which will have a massive impact on national welfare, in the wrong direction. But Lewis profiled people in his book worried about a new political culture that wanted to wipe out our pursuit and management of “data.”   But it’s happening. The White House has just announced that it will forgo a summer economic forecast of predicted economic performance, given the pandemic. This is simply staggering. This is trying to jimmy the deck, to escape the gravity of realistic, empirical economic data and just skip beyond it.    On top of that, some U.S. cities and states as well as other nations may be purposely undercounting and underreporting COVID-19 deaths. Whether intentional or simply because the health system was overwhelmed, the undercounting may be very large. My colleague Reid Wilson wrote a fascinating piece Thursday on how sewage testing for the novel coronavirus may provide a far more accurate picture of virus incidence in a community. In one case, when there were 446 reported cases in Boston, a sewage-based survey indicated that the number of infected was approximately 115,000.   Without a commitment to data collection and management, there is no way for us to see the world — our world here in America as it really is — and no way to improve things and empower the kinds of innovations and approaches that will rid our society of this disease.   – Steve Clemons  Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik.    Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus   THE HILL ‘VIRTUALLY’ LIVE  ICYMI: Catch up on last week’s programs     On Thursday, The Hill hosted “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy anchored by Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE.   Watch the full program video here.    On Wednesday, The Hill hosted “The Vir[Tech]tual World of Tomorrow.”    Watch the full program video here.  We want to hear from you! Follow us @TheHillEvents and keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 5,867,727 reported cases of COVID-19 throughout the world and a reported death toll of 362,238.    The U.S. is reporting 1,729,185 cases and 101,963 deaths as of the time of this newsletter. Brazil’s cases continue to rise dramatically and the country is reporting 438,238 cases of coronavirus. Russia, with its 387,623 reported cases, saw a record daily rise in COVID-19 deaths today. The United Kingdom is reporting 272,604 cases. Spain, 238,564. Italy, 232,248. France, 186,364. Germany, 182,559. India, 172,569. Canada, 90,027. China, 84,119. Mexico, 81,400. Qatar, 52,907. Ecuador, 38,471. Singapore, 33,860. Columbia, 25,406. Japan, 16,673. South Korea, 11,402. Ghana, 7,616. Greece, 2,906. Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2,485.    New York is reporting 366,733 cases. 157,815 in New Jersey. 115,833 in Illinois. 103,936 in California. 94,895 in Massachusetts. 74,729 in Pennsylvania. 60,416 in Texas. 42,533 in Virginia. 33,915 in Ohio. 25,107 in Colorado. 23,531 in Minnesota. 18,791 in Iowa. 16,974 in Wisconsin. 12,989 in Missouri. 10,788 in South Carolina. 8,538 in the District of Columbia.    15,646,041 COVID-19 test results have been recorded in the U.S. and 399,991 have reported full recoveries from the virus.   WASHINGTON WATCH         Senate Democrats pump brakes on new stimulus checks. House Democrats looking to deliver another round of $1,200 relief checks to Americans are encountering skepticism from an unexpected source: fellow Democrats in the Senate. The $3 trillion House-passed measure is not only facing opposition from GOP senators, it’s also prompting Senate Democrats to raise concerns about what they see as a huge untargeted expenditure. (The Hill)    VA says it has “ratcheted down” use of hydroxychloroquine to treat veterans. The Department of Veterans Affairs has drastically scaled back the use of hydroxychloroquine to treat veterans with coronavirus infections after a major study raised questions about its efficacy and linked it to serious side effects, including higher risks of death. (Washington Post)    COVID-19 workplace complaints surge; unions rip administration. A surge in coronavirus-related workplace complaints is fueling criticism from unions and Democratic lawmakers that the Labor Department is ill-equipped to ensure workers are safe as more businesses reopen. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration, a division of the Labor Department, has received more than 5,000 complaints pertaining to COVID-19, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary Loren Sweatt told a House panel Thursday. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEETS Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE (D-Calif.)  @TeamPelosi As we are grieving the loss of 100,000 souls in America to the #coronavirus that has disproportionately impacted communities of color, bearing witness to the murder of George Floyd is especially painful. Mr. Floyd, his family and our country deserve for justice to be done.   Rep. Dan NewhouseDaniel (Dan) Milton NewhouseThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Khanna says President Trump threatening violence against US citizens; Trump terminating relationship with WHO  GOP lawmaker introduces bipartisan guest worker bill Overnight Energy: Murkowski, Manchin unveil major energy bill | Lawmakers grill EPA chief over push to slash agency's budget | GOP lawmaker accuses Trump officials of 'playing politics' over Yucca Mountain MORE (R-Wash.)  @RepNewhouse There is no reason we should be reliant on a communist country like China to maintain our status as defenders of liberty. By bolstering US mining & manufacturing, we can create jobs, strengthen our economy, and enhance our national supply chain into the future.   Sen. Chris MurphyChristopher (Chris) Scott MurphyPelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC Lawmakers call for legislation to force federal officers to identify themselves Missouri state lawmaker sparks backlash by tweeting 'looters deserve to be shot' MORE (D-Conn.)  @ChrisMurphyCT FYI everything is not terrible. You helped me raise tens of thousands of dollars to get free books to low income kids in New Haven, Bridgeport, and Norwalk - key bc school and public libraries are closed. It's been a huge success. Here are some pics from last Friday in Norwalk.  ACROSS THE NATION As some hard-hit regions move to reopen, pandemic’s hotbeds shift. Slowing rates of infection in some of the hardest-hit parts of the United States have offered a glimmer of hope, as New York City, once the country’s main coronavirus hot spot, announced plans Thursday to ease restrictions after 10 weeks under lockdown. Yet as officials say a possible phased reopening there is likely to start next month, other parts of the nation and the world are bracing for the worst. Globally, the pandemic has shifted to Latin America and the Middle East, as the death toll — now at least 362,000 around the world — continues to rise. (Washington Post)   Millions of New Yorkers had been infected with COVID-19 by the end of March. More than 2 million New Yorkers had been infected with COVID-19 by the end of March — about 10 times the official count, according to a new study. State data, however, shows only about 189,000 cases by the end of March. That means about 1.8 million cases potentially went undetected. (CNN)  And this comes as NYC Mayor Bill de BlasioBill de BlasioFormer Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' Watch live: De Blasio holds press conference on NYC protests, pandemic response The Hill's 12:30 Report: Sights and sounds from the protests MORE (D) has announced a possible phased reopening of the city, likely to start next month:    Half of new COVID-19 cases in Washington state occurring in people under 40. Half of new confirmed coronavirus cases in Washington state are being recorded in people under the age of 40, according to a new analysis. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW  No-lockdown Sweden reports economic growth in the first three months of the year. Sweden’s economy expanded at an annual rate of 0.4 percent during the first three months of the year, official data published Friday showed, following the government’s contrarian decision not to impose a full coronavirus lockdown. The Nordic country reported stronger-than-anticipated gross domestic product data for the first quarter, even as many other European countries recorded a severe economic contraction over the same period. (CNBC)     Researches ponder why COVID-19 appears deadlier in the U.S. and Europe than in Asia. It is one of the many mysteries of the coronavirus pandemic: Why has the death toll from COVID-19 apparently been lower in Asia than in Western Europe and North America? Even allowing for different testing policies and counting methods, and questions over full disclosure of cases, stark differences in mortality across the world have caught the attention of researchers trying to crack the coronavirus code. (Washington Post)    Monkeys steal coronavirus blood samples in India. A troop of monkeys in India attacked a medical official and snatched away blood samples of patients who had tested positive for the novel coronavirus, authorities said on Friday. (Reuters)   SCIENCE How poop – yes poop – could help warn of the next coronavirus outbreak. Scientists looking for new ways to identify potential coronavirus outbreaks are turning their attention to what could be an early warning sign: the stuff you flush down the toilet. New studies increasingly show that the coronavirus's genetic code can be detected in the remnants of fecal matter that flows through sewers and into sewage facilities, either in raw wastewater or in what is euphemistically known as sludge. (The Hill)   BUSINESS Lockdown shopping: Chocolate chips, frozen pizza up; energy bars nosedive. Americans bored at home during the coronavirus lockdown are rediscovering their love of baking and cooking, reversing a decades-long trend that has reshaped the grocery store experience. Consumer data shows sales rising in what the grocery industry calls its center store, the aisles where cereals, baking products and cooking staples are found. On the other hand, deli sales are down, and sales of products like store-prepared meals have dropped sharply. (The Hill)    U.S. savings rate hits record as coronavirus causes Americans to stockpile cash. The personal savings rate hit a historic 33 percent in April, the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis said. This rate — how much people save as a percentage of their disposable income — is by far the highest since the department started tracking in the 1960s. (CNBC)  GM increasing U.S. production of pickup trucks following coronavirus shutdowns. General Motors will return American plants that produce pickup trucks such as the Chevrolet Silverado to pre-coronavirus levels of three shifts. GM is expected to have the vast majority of its roughly 48,000 hourly workers back to work in U.S. plants by Monday. (CNBC)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS   Many patients, little drugs: Who should get scarce COVID-19 treatment. How should we decide who gets promising drugs in short supply? In April, the National Institutes of Health announced that an experimental drug, remdesivir, accelerated recovery from COVID-19. Its manufacturer offered to donate 940,000 vials of the antiviral to the U.S. With no end to the epidemic in sight, this donation will likely be insufficient to treat all patients. But who should get the drug, if it cannot be made available to all patients? (Alison Bateman-House for The Hill)    Journalists and politicians love science, but traffic in fear. COVID-19 news coverage has put science in the middle of the news agenda. That makes sense on one level, given the nature of the biological threat and the expectation that science is called on to eliminate the crisis. The obsession with and worship of science, however, has its limitations. Science alone can’t address the broader sociopolitical, economic and ethical aspects of the COVID-19 emergency. The news industry hasn’t figured that out. (Jeffrey M. McCall for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS Ford Motor Co. donates thousands of COVID-19 face shields to US military. Ford Motor Co. has finalized an agreement with the U.S. Department of Defense to donate 200,000 face shields to military bases across the U.S. and abroad to protect against the coronavirus. The face shields are constructed from car parts and made in Michigan as part of Ford's response to the pandemic crisis. (Fox News)   ICYMI: STEVE’S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  > Steve interviews Mastercard CEO AJAY BANGA  > Steve interviews Teva USA President and CEO BRENDAN O’GRADY  > Steve interviews US Surgeon General JEROME ADAMS  > Steve interviews former NIC Director GREG TREVERTON  > Steve interviews Topeka, Kansas Mayor MICHELLE DE LA ISLA  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.  Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus   VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVESteve Clemons: Thanks so much for joining me today. Let's just start with the fact that this nation was a mess before COVID[-19] hit. COVID[-19] has hit and on top of that now we have protests in Minneapolis. We had yet another case of alleged police abuse and the death of a man. And I just want to ask you, as we start this conversation, how do you as a congressman find your way through this moment where you're dealing both with the national health crisis, but we are also somewhat dealing with a crisis over our own soul? Rep. Ro KhannaRohit (Ro) KhannaThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Val Demings calls for a new DOJ Office of Police Standards; Trump, GOP to pull convention from NC Calls for police reform sparks divisions in Congress MORE (D-Calif.): Well, Steve, it's a difficult time for all of us as citizens. Our country is deeply divided. You have the president of the United States threatening violence against American citizens. Even Richard Nixon was remorseful after Kent State. Even he understood that the United States government shouldn’t be shooting its own citizens. And now you have a president literally going on social media and threatening to shoot protesters. And a president who has called protesters fighting for racial justice “thugs” but unwilling to call those marching in Charlottesville the racist thugs. So, it is a time of a lack of moral leadership in our country. I mean, on the Minneapolis situation, if you want to stop the protests, the way to do it is to arrest the officers; that’s why they're protesting. Have an investigation into the police department there, the sheriff — the PSC called for that. Why they're not arresting those officers is beyond me.   Clemons: We're also in a time where we've been in a tug of war between those who have, I mean, this may be an unfair distinction, but between those who have been saying, we need public health first, public health guardrails that are very strictly adhere to versus those that want to have a rapid reopening. I know there's a middle ground there, but I'd love to get your insights, at this moment when we are seeing so much of the country reopen again, and we're seeing incidents like in Lake of the Ozarks, where there's a kind of human jam going on. What are the equities? What's the equilibrium that we have to get right between those different impulses? Khanna: Well, first we should have listened to science. I mean, had we done what South Korea, which is tell people to wear masks early on, had we gotten private testing companies involved in February, had we sheltered in place back then, like my district did in Santa Clara. March 15 we sheltered in place even though we were one of the first hit we've only had 120 deaths, that’s obviously significant, but it's nowhere near what other regions have faced because we sheltered in place.   Clemons: I mean, let me stop you there for a minute. Can you just profile that? Because when I was reading about Santa Clara and how hard it was hit at the beginning, can you just go through those numbers? Because at the beginning of March you had about 400-some odd cases, which was a lot at that time, and tell us how things have unfolded. Khanna: Well, we were the first county in the nation to shelter in place and as a result the deaths have been much fewer, the cases have been growing at one of the slowest rates in the entire country. In fact, the former CDC head had said that if New York sheltered had place when we did, it would have been 80 percent, 80 percent fewer casualties in New York. Now, this is not because of me or any of the elected officials. It was Sara Cody, the health official, who had the insight after having spoke to epidemiologists to do that. So, you know, that should be a lesson for the country about listening to science.   Clemons: Now, how are you reopening now? I've seen California Governor Gavin NewsomGavin NewsomChief Justice Roberts wisely defers to California governor in church challenge  Senior citizens deserve better than to be left in isolation Supreme Court denies California church's challenge to state restrictions MORE's plans. Where does Santa Clara fit in that right now? How is your own reopening process going?  Khanna: We’re opening cautiously. I mean, we are opening some of the manufacturing businesses we are opening businesses that are essential. We are not opening high-contact businesses. And we're making sure that people have [personal protective equipment] PPE and they have social distancing. And I guess that to me seems to be a way forward. Open up, but do it with social distancing. Do it with worker protection. Do it with providing PPE. And then monitor the results and be willing to slow down or shut things down if the results spike; otherwise, continue to open up in a responsible way. And that's I think a way forward. I think, unfortunately, you had people try to politicize it where most Americans understand the common sense of what we need to do.   Clemons: You've been an advocate and you continue to push the buttons of, we need free testing, we need ever-present testing and we need free treatment for people. Where do those stand?  Khanna: Well, it's not just that we need testing — and we should be at about 600,000-700,000 tests a day. We're still a way from that. But we need to know then what to do with the testing. I mean, we need people who then will engage in contact tracing like they've done in other countries and have people trained for that. [Sen.] Bernie SandersBernie SandersOVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump signs order removing environmental reviews for major projects | New Trump air rule will limit future pollution regulations, critics say | DNC climate group calls for larger federal investment on climate than Biden plan Google: Chinese and Iranian hackers targeting Biden, Trump campaigns Sanders: Police departments that violate civil rights should lose federal funding MORE [I-Vt.] and I called for massive production on the Defense Production Act to build the things that would be, that are the bottlenecks to the testing, because the challenge is we don't have some of the swabs and the equipment for the testing. Look, we're getting better, but we're still not where we need to be. And then we want to be treating people, and you shouldn't fear a bill to go get treatment.   Clemons: You know, I talked to CDC Director Robert Redfield recently, and he said he was looking to hire about — somewhere between 30,000 and 100,000 contact tracers. Do you think that's enough?  Khanna: I would defer to him. I mean, I don't want to second-guess a CDC director, and he's pretty nonpolitical. If he says 30,000 to 100,000 then we should do that. You know, there was an MIT professor who had a great idea for a digital work progress administration. Sort of a New Deal idea but in terms of digital skills, that we have such need for contact tracing or electronic records or other areas that the country could employ people in some of these digital tasks and get people back to work.   Clemons: I know, and there been some companies — and I know you're in the tech community and you're a tech guy yourself —  I interviewed recently Andrew Frame, the CEO of Citizen who has created something called SafeTrace in a way to kinda begin looking at how you can create what Taiwan has done and look at how you instantly alert people if they've come into contact with, you know, someone who was diagnosed with COVID[-19] and whatnot. So, there's a lot out there. But getting into the tech area, congressman, I know that you've been, I mean, I think one of the interesting things about COVID[-19] is that it has exacerbated problems and tensions we had in the country before. One of the areas you worked on was rural development and trying to get tech jobs and tech investment into rural areas. And I’d love to hear where that stands now and whether that continues to be, you know, an important priority for you as you look at a more inclusive economic development plan in the country at a time when we've got 41 million officially unemployed.  Khanna: Well Steve, I think it's accelerated the need for that. I mean, first of all, tech companies realized that remote work is more possible. Facebook has said that they're going to go all remote, or at least half of their employees are going to be remote. Twitter has said the same thing. So, I think we're seeing that we're gonna have more decentralization of technology jobs and opportunities. Majority Whip [James] Clyburn [D-S.C.] has an extraordinary bill, $80 billion to finally get the country hooked up to high speed internet so that every part of the country has that. Consider this: We are spending $3 trillion on relief. Can't we spend $80 billion to hook up the internet for every American? And then look at the controversy on Twitter with the president where he's demonizing social media and trying to appeal to his base. Imagine, just for a thought experiment, that some of these social media companies had decentralized work, they actually had employees in the Midwest, in the South who also were part of creating this 21st century public forum. People would feel much more agency. They would be much less likely to label these tech folks as elite or “other.” I think this would actually not just help our economics, it would help some of the national cohesiveness that’s missing in this country.   Clemons: Now the president has, you know, issued an executive order on censorship and social media firms, and he is angrier than I think we've seen him in a while at Twitter. Jack Dorsey is attaching tags to tweets that he sees as either big mistruths or as glorifying violence, breaking rules that Twitter has set up. Previously, Twitter had decided not to take any more paid political ads on its site. Facebook, which you also know well, is on the other side of that. Facebook is taking lots of political ads and saying it's not going to be the arbiter of speech. Where's the right point between those two?  Khanna: Well, look, the president is just engaged in political theater. You know, he wants this fight. I mean, he operates on the premise that all conflict is good. The courts aren’t gonna uphold his executive order. He knows that, but he's just engaged in rhetoric. Here's what I think we need. I think we need a fairness doctrine for the 21st century. Let me explain how that would work. Let's say the president is tweeting out conspiracy theories about Joe ScarboroughCharles (Joe) Joseph ScarboroughPresident Trump is bringing new meaning to the phrase 'Bully Pulpit' The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Trump says he believes Scarborough 'got away with murder' MORE. Well, why not allow the widower who doesn't want the president tweeting about his deceased wife, why not give him the opportunity to send a response, and that response Twitter could send to every person who clicks on the president’s tweet? Or why not allow someone to respond to the president’s claims about vote, ballot fraud? So, what I would say is, you defeat speech with speech. But you didn't give one person a huge megaphone and not allow a fair response. And that was what the fairness doctrine that Reagan got rid of was all about. We need something similar in a social media age   Clemons: Where are you on the issue of mail-by ballot? You know, you're in California right now, I think. But here in Washington, you know, there's also this stuff brewing. Even the president's spokesperson has voted by mail 10 out of the last 11 elections, the president has himself. But we see these assertions that the process would be endemically corrupt and rigged. Where are you on this? And how likely is it that we're going to see most states adopt a mail-by-ballot system? And what does the federal government need to do to make that happen?  Khanna: Well, I’m for it. This is actually a very simple debate. If you want more people to vote or do you want less people to vote? And let's just be blunt: The Republicans believe the less people that vote, the better their chance is. Democrats believe the more people that vote, the better our chance is. The philosophical issue is that more people should vote. And if you believe more people should vote, we ought to have mail-in-ballots. The idea that there is some fraud in that is absurd and there's not a single study that says that vote-by-mail is more fraud than voting in person. And it’s such a miniscule number in either case. So, California’s shown that it could work. It’s been empowering for many people. And we ought to be doing that at the national level, and the HEROES Act we passed provides the resources for states to do that.   Clemons: You know, Ro, you and I have talked a lot about technology and its impact on society and how it can be, you know, essentially something that extends human aspiration in contrast to dislodging human aspiration, if you will. And I guess the question I have at the moment —  you're such a thoughtful guy — is what does our social contract need to be after this period we're in? What does it need to look like? How can we look back to the time of FDR and see things like the WPA or the Tennessee Valley Authority or the CCC? Are there big projects that we need to have people put on the dock that could be part of a new infrastructure that brings this country out of this? Or are we too early for that right now? Khanna: Well, I think our social contract should be that everyone in this country should have the chance that I did. If this country can give the son of immigrants a chance to have a good public education, to have a parent employed with a job that provided health care, to not — to live in a safe neighborhood. If this country can do that for the son of immigrants, why can't this country do that for every American? So, our social safety net should say we believe that you should have the freedom to succeed or fail. But before you get to do that, you also have health care, you also have a good education, you have to have an early childhood education. [James] Heckman, the Nobel laureate, said that by the age of five so much of our life chances are determined based on our upbringing. We have to make those basic investments, and then we ought to be making the investments in the infrastructure for the 21st century. Just like electricity was a necessity, the internet is a necessity. Basic digital skills are necessities, and people don't want to just be taken care of. They want to participate in the new economy, and we have to provide those opportunities. So, I think that the road map on what we need is pretty clear; the question is will we have the political will?  WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Unemployment surges to 41 million with 2.1 million more added to rolls > Trump marks 'very sad milestone' of 100K coronavirus deaths > Sen. Tim KaineTimothy (Tim) Michael KaineDemocratic senators kneel during moment of silence for George Floyd Overnight Defense: Trump's move to use military in US sparks backlash | Defense officials take heat | Air Force head calls Floyd's death 'a national tragedy' Pentagon: Esper, Milley 'not aware' of Trump's church photo-op ahead of time MORE and wife test positive for COVID-19 antibodies > Sen. Elizabeth Warren calls for investigation into OSHA inspections during pandemic > Trump accuses Michigan Gov. Whitmer of 'double standard' following marina flap > NAM reports despite worsening business conditions, industry keeping doors open > Topeka Mayor Michelle De La Isla says cities don’t have enough tests for minorities and homeless communities, says CNAs are unrecognized tireless heroes making $7.25 an hour  Grim milestone: U.S. tops 100,000 coronavirus deaths with no end in sight. A staggering wave of death has brought the world's largest economy to its knees as the federal government struggles even now to mount a concerted nationwide response. As of Wednesday evening, the U.S. had recorded 1,695,776 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 100,047 deaths, according to a Johns Hopkins University tracker. (The Hill) 2M more Americans file new jobless claims, pushing coronavirus toll past 40M. Since the week ending March 22, more than 40 million Americans have filed initial claims for unemployment benefits as the spread of COVID-19 and the restrictions imposed to slow it forced thousands of businesses to close up shop. The national unemployment rate rose to 14.7 percent in April, and 14.5 percent of the U.S. workforce had received jobless benefits as of the week ending May 16, according to the Labor Department. (The Hill) THE INTERVIEW Topeka, Kansas Mayor Michelle De La Isla Some highlights from interview with The Hill’s Steve Clemons:  About the tensions between those who do not take health concerns seriously and those who do: “But the keyword was something that you just said. It's liberty. We in our country talk about our liberty. … We are responsible as well not only for ourselves, but for our fellow citizens. And as we are exercising those liberties, we have to have the facts so that we are able to protect each other.” About whether the federal government is doing enough: “But the tests are still not enough in order for us to do broad testing like we need in the African American, the Hispanic population, and in the homeless population.” About her health heroes: “You know, I think that this is a great time in our country for us to talk about not just the nurses and the doctors, but our CNAs. Our CNAs are phenomenal. The clerks at the pharmacy desk that are not the certified pharmacist, but they are the ones that are having that face-to-face contact with you. Those individuals that are delivering food, the people that are helping Meals on Wheels, the people that are working that cash register, the people that are helping you get your food and your nourishment, these are individuals that are being paid more than likely $7.25 or $7.50, and these are heroes. These are the individuals that are keeping our economy going, and I think that we have to take a broader look at how we sustain these individuals.” Watch the full interview here. THE HILL’S CORONAVIRUS REPORT Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Thursday, May 28.  Editor’s Note.  I have been wondering for years what would trigger a profound collapse of confidence in U.S. global leadership along the lines of the British Suez Crisis of 1956-57, which accentuated America’s definitive “coming out” as the world’s leading superpower and sent the British looking for new and smaller things to do. This pandemic may be that moment, and certainly there are other writers including my friend Parag Khanna and Stephen Marche who are thinking along those same lines. But even before them there were others who pointed to the trend. Charles Kupchan’s book, “The End of the American Era: U.S. Foreign Policy and the Geopolitics of the 21st Century,” written in 2003 amid the U.S. invasion of Iraq, punctured America’s superpower mystique and showed the world the limits of American financial, military and leadership power. And another was Princeton’s G. John Ikenberry, who wrote the seminal “Liberal Leviathan: The Origins, Crisis, and Transformation of the American World Order.” Kupchan and Ikenberry teamed up recently in a very smart op-ed titled “Global Distancing” in The Washington Post. They write that “traditionally, a catastrophe like this — something that touches everyone — triggers an ordering moment in international politics. Nations should be aligning their efforts to develop a vaccine, contain the disease, produce and allocate medical equipment, and stabilize the global economy. They should be strengthening the World Health Organization (WHO). But nothing of the sort is happening. Countries are competing for, and hoarding, medical equipment as they engage in a biotech arms race to find a vaccine. They are closing their borders and scapegoating foreigners. The United States is treating the WHO like a punching bag.” They go on to write that the United States, Russia, India and China are all essentially derelict in their roles as leading global stakeholders and are doing little to converge together in response to the human and economic carnage wrought by this pandemic. Singaporean scholar and diplomat Kishore Mahbubani wrote essentially the same thing in The Hill. In particular, Mahbubani calls for strategic focus, and his hypothetical question of “what would Churchill do?” in such times — perhaps as a way of reaching the reading pile of President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE. The Cliff Notes version: Don’t carry on a trade war with China and block scientists from working together across those two key nations when they are both under siege from a vicious and destructive, highly contagious virus. The flaw of all of these thinkers at the moment, from my vantage point, is that they believe the times can be managed. Mahbubani believes that China’s time has arrived and America should just learn to live with it — acquiesce and all will go smoothly. Ikenberry and Kupchan think “global cooperation on the pandemic” can best be achieved by Trump’s electoral loss in November with a vibrant return to the liberal ideals of Woodrow Wilson and FDR, and perhaps to American global leadership along with China. If this is America’s “Suez moment,” the truth is that the rest of the world is already moving on and won’t easily trust U.S. leadership or prerogatives again. We saw some of that when the U.S. tried to guide economies after the 2008-09 financial crisis. That was a foreshock of the downfall of American leadership we are seeing today — and there will be no quick fix, sadly. This virus has generated significant geopolitical tensions and mistrust, not attacking only our bodies, but our willingness to solve great global problems. And it’s going to be that way for a long time. We have to prepare and get better at the choices we collectively make as we make the slide down in our relative weight in the world.  – Steve Clemons Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up to date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare.  THE HILL ‘VIRTUALLY’ LIVE  ICYMI: Catch up on last week’s programs The U.S. is reporting 1,709,996 reported cases and 101,002 deaths. Brazil still leads the rest of the world with the most cases and stands at 411,821. The next national leaders are Russia at 379,051 and the United Kingdom at 270,507. A sampling of others includes Turkey at 160,979; India at 165,358; Saudi Arabia at 80,185; and Singapore at 33,249. New York has reported that 29,529 people have died from COVID-19 as of the time of this newsletter. 11,339 dead in New Jersey. 5,083 in Illinois. 6,547 in Massachusetts. 3,918 in California. 5,373 in Pennsylvania. 5,334 in Michigan. Texas, 1,581. Maryland, 2,428. Georgia has lost 1,963. Virginia, 1,338. 1,392 in Colorado. 1,095 in Washington. 539 in Wisconsin. 590 in Alabama. 693 in Mississippi. 453 in the District of Columbia. 329 in New Mexico. Oklahoma, 325. 54 in South Dakota. 131 in Puerto Rico. 55 in Vermont. 14 in Wyoming.  15,192,481 COVID-19 test results have been recorded in the U.S. WASHINGTON WATCH Trump marks “very sad milestone” of 100K coronavirus deaths. President Trump on Thursday morning said that the United States had reached a “very sad milestone” in exceeding 100,000 deaths due to the novel coronavirus, expressing sympathy for those who have lost loved ones. (The Hill) Tim Kaine tests positive for COVID-19 antibodies. Sen. Tim Kaine (D-Va.) said on Thursday that he and his wife tested positive for COVID-19 antibodies, an indication that they have previously been infected with the disease.  (The Hill) Lack of child care poses major hurdle as businesses reopen. Child care remains a central obstacle to reopening the economy as the school year ends and camps and summer programs remain on hold due to the coronavirus pandemic. (The Hill)  PILING ON... Two Indiana billboards suggest people think twice about going to Michigan during the pandemic. As vehicles leave Indiana, they encounter an electronic sign that reads: "Now Entering Michigan: Really? You're sure about this?" Likewise, southbound travelers are greeted with a sign as they cross into Indiana that reads: "The Great State of Indiana Welcomes Michiganders To A Free-To-Roam State. We Thank You for the Revenue!" But the man behind the billboards said they are actually meant to support Michiganders during their quarantine, not poke fun at the restrictions in place. (CNN) LAWMAKERS TWEETS Sen. Bernie SandersBernie SandersOVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump signs order removing environmental reviews for major projects | New Trump air rule will limit future pollution regulations, critics say | DNC climate group calls for larger federal investment on climate than Biden plan Google: Chinese and Iranian hackers targeting Biden, Trump campaigns Sanders: Police departments that violate civil rights should lose federal funding MORE (I-Vt.) @SenSanders 1.4 million people who work in the health industry have no health insurance at all. Americans are working in hospitals amid a deadly pandemic without any health coverage. How insane is that? We need Medicare for All. Rep. Kathy CastorKatherine (Kathy) Anne CastorThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Unemployment claims now at 41 million with 2.1 million more added to rolls; Topeka mayor says cities don't have enough tests for minorities and homeless communities Bright says his warnings on supply shortages were ignored Overnight Energy: 600K clean energy jobs lost during pandemic, report finds | Democrats target diseases spread by wildlife | Energy Dept. to buy 1M barrels of oil MORE (D-Fla.) @USRepKCastor Horribly, in just a few months time, far more than U.S. military deaths in Vietnam, Iraq + Afghanistan wars combined; 39 times the # of Americans who were killed at Pearl Harbor and 31 times the number of victims of the September 11 terrorist attacks. Sen. Susan CollinsSusan Margaret CollinsOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump GOP Sen. Murkowski 'struggling' with whether to vote for Trump  MORE (R-Maine) @SenatorCollins During this public health crisis, America’s first responders have continued to work on the front lines and keep our communities safe. The next COVID-19 relief package must include additional funding to support these brave men and women. ACROSS THE NATION Immigrant doctors prepare for family's deportation if they die of coronavirus. Immigrant doctors practicing in the United States are bracing for their family's deportation, should the doctors die from coronavirus. “If I get sick and if something happens to me, it’s basically over for my family,” Parth Mehta, a hospitalist in Peoria, Ill., told NBC Asian America. He added: “It’s kind of weird that we are considered essential when it comes to saving lives, but we are considered nonessential when it comes to immigration purposes, and your family faces the risk of deportation if you die." (The Hill) Here’s what will be different Friday, when most of the state of Illinois (but not Chicago) moves into phase three of Gov. J.B. Pritzker’s (D) reopening plan. All four regions of the state are poised to move into the next phase of Pritzker’s reopening plan Friday, which means many restaurants will be back open for outdoor service and “nonessential” retailers will be open to shoppers. Except in Chicago, where Mayor Lori Lightfoot has said restrictions won’t be loosened until “early June.” (Chicago Tribune) Big Wyoming Summer Rodeos Canceled Over Virus. A little over an hour after news broke that Cheyenne Frontier Days has been canceled, Governor Mark Gordon (R) announced Wednesday that the Central Wyoming Fair and Rodeo also will not take place in 2020. (K2 Radio) WORLD VIEW Salvadoran leader says he takes hydroxychloroquine. Salvadoran President Nayib Bukele said he uses hydroxychloroquine, the antimalarial drug touted by President Trump as a potential coronavirus cure, even though international health experts have questioned its efficacy and have warned of harmful side effects. "I use it as a prophylaxis. President Trump uses it as a prophylaxis. Most of the world's leaders use it as a prophylaxis," said Bukele during a press conference. (CNN) What Bolsonaro said as Brazil's coronavirus cases climbed. That Brazil saw warning signs would be a dramatic understatement. As COVID-19 raced across Europe, knocked the U.K. prime minister flat and throttled New York City earlier this year, Brazil had plenty of notice that a catastrophe was on its way. But was some of the danger drowned out by the megaphone of its bombastic President Jair Bolsonaro, who has repeatedly dismissed the virus as a "little flu"? (CNN)  English Premier League to return on June 17 after 100-day break amid coronavirus. The Premier League is set to resume on June 17 after the clubs gave "Project Restart" the green light at a shareholders meeting on Thursday. (ESPN)  SCIENCE Researchers ponder why COVID-19 appears more deadly in the U.S. and Europe than in Asia. It is one of the many mysteries of the coronavirus pandemic: Why has the death toll from COVID-19 apparently been lower in Asia than in Western Europe and North America? Even allowing for different testing policies and counting methods, and questions over full disclosure of cases, stark differences in mortality across the world have caught the attention of researchers trying to crack the coronavirus code. (Washington Post) BUSINESS NAM survey: Despite drop in optimism, majority of manufacturers keeping doors open. The National Association of Manufacturers on Thursday released the results of the Manufacturers’ Outlook Survey for the second quarter of 2020 showing that despite a historic drop in optimism, to nearly 34 percent, and challenging business conditions, the vast majority of manufacturers (98.7 percent) have continued or only temporarily halted operations. (NAM) CVS says it will reach goal of opening 1,000 coronavirus test sites on Friday. CVS will reach its goal of opening 1,000 coronavirus testing sites across the country on Friday, the drug store chain announced. Final sites will open across 30 states and Washington, D.C., the company said in a press release. (The Hill)  GDP fell 5 percent in the first quarter. America's economy shrank at an annualized rate of 5 percent in the first quarter of the year, according to the Commerce Department's second estimate, more than the 4.8 percent level first announced. The first quarter's economic numbers included two months of normal growth followed by a devastating March, as the coronavirus pandemic took hold and lockdowns across the country slowed commerce to a trickle. (The Hill) ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS The Paycheck Protection Program excludes black and Latino small businesses, so fix it. While the House prepares to revamp the government's small-business aid program, there needs to be a serious reckoning about how this program is driving racial inequality in our country. (Rashad Robinson and Janet Murguía for The Hill)  We cannot ignore the links between COVID-19 and the warming planet. The emergence of COVID-19 suggests that global warming may present an even graver threat to human welfare than many recognize. (Richard Richels, Henry Jacoby, Gary Yohe, and Ben Santer for The Hill)  GENEROUS SPIRITS Dolly Parton releases new song 'When Life is Good Again'. The legendary singer/songwriter released her quarantine-inspired song with Entertainment Weekly. "When Life is Good Again" touches on themes of friendship, compassion and becoming better people. Parton donated $1 million to Vanderbilt University for coronavirus research in April. She also launched "Goodnight with Dolly," a virtual series in which she read children's bedtime stories. (CNN) ICYMI: STEVE’S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH > Steve interviews National Portrait Gallery Director KIM SAJET > Steve interviews former Senate Majority Leader BILL FRIST > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  > Steve interviews Mastercard CEO AJAY BANGA  > Steve interviews Teva USA President and CEO BRENDAN O’GRADY  > Steve interviews US Surgeon General JEROME ADAMS  > Steve interviews former NIC Director GREGORY TREVERTON  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.  YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?  Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare. VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVESteve Clemons: It's wonderful to see you. Thank you much for joining us. You know, very on early in this crisis, I began getting Google alerts on what you were saying and what you were doing early. And early in the crisis Topeka was a place where there wasn't much incidents. It was everywhere else. It wasn't there. But then it began to perk up, and we wouldn't say it went to DEFCON Five, but maybe to DEFCON Three. So, I would just like to hear from you how this has changed the community, how you have tried to comfort them, but not panic them.  Michelle De La Isla: You know, I think that being completely transparent with all the information that we have available is paramount at this time. I think that all of us at this point in time are being bombarded. I think that Gallup this week used the word “infodemic,” of having so much information that you just don't know what to sort through. And we here in our community, Topeka and Shawnee County, have been very consistent with regular factual information to our constituents so that they know exactly what is happening at the local level without being bogged down with what's happening at the national. Our community has changed in the sense that we just like everybody had a safer at home ordinance. Everybody had to stay at home. We were very successful early on on stopping the incidents of the virus. But just yesterday we had 17 cases in our community and we're seeing 51 cases that are active as of this morning. So, we're not in a fear situation. But we're constantly communicating not only with our community through Facebook, through press conferences, but also through working with specific stakeholders that we're working on understanding the data mutually so that everybody understands what the risks are and so that we can learn to live with the virus.   Clemons: Mayor, I mean, what we've been seeing in some of the tenser parts of the country is a real clash from people who are just tired of being told to stay at home. This opens up a lot of fissures and pressures, whether it's business, whether it's just personal liberty. And there are other people saying “Look, don't infect us, don't infect our children, don't have our children endanger our grandparents.” How have you held that together? Have you had those kinds of problems? Or have you been able to get buy in from both corners of that tension?  De La Isla: You know, I would characterize our community like most communities in the United States, we have three camps, right? We have the individuals that are extremely concerned with regards to the virus and they don't want to leave. They don't want to leave their home. They want to stay home. They want to work from home, if possible. We have the camps of individuals that are saying absolutely not. You are not going to infringe on my liberties. I will not wear a mask. I don't believe this virus is so bad. Look at our community. We're doing great. Let's reopen. And then you have the people that are in the middle, who are the individuals that are saying, we want to go forth, but we want to do so with caution. And when you look at the graphs — I'm part of the Bloomberg Harvard City Leadership Program and we were just looking at the charts from Johns Hopkins today. The United States by far outpaces in regards to active cases, and we're starting to come down, and I think Brazil is starting to come up and trend with us. But the keyword was something that you just said. It's liberty. We in our country talk about our liberty. So, when you have government or officials that are health officials telling you that you must stay home and you don't trust government in itself because you are so attached to your liberties, what ends up happening is this clash of values, of wanting to remain safe at the same time that you have the incidents of wanting to also have your liberties. What I try to tell people is that yes, we have liberty, but that liberty should never be forgotten at the fact that we are responsible as well not only for ourselves, but for our fellow citizens. And as we are exercising those liberties, we have to have the facts so that we are able to protect each other   Clemons: One of the things I know you're doing, which I'm charmed by and I wanna listen in, is you are helping out Topeka’s parents with their kids. Tell us what you're doing.   De La Isla: So, every Sunday around eight o'clock, I enjoy very much reading to our community children. And it's interesting because now that I have a following even in Puerto Rico because I read the books both in English and in Spanish. I used to love reading to my kids. It was one of my favorite things to do with them in a rocking chair. But now, understanding all the challenges that our parents are going through, it gives our kids something different to do and something to see. And it's my way of helping parents tell kids. “OK, we heard the stories. Time to go to bed.”   Clemons: Well, you know the other thing I want to put on the table if I'm not — hopefully I'm not revealing too much. But, I happen to know that you have a complex past. You are a complex, complex person and before you were mayor at one point, you were homeless. And I think one of the things we've been getting at, too, multiple times today is, you know, what do you do with the people that are not connected? What do you do with the people that are the most vulnerable? How do we get to communities there? Director [Robert] Redfield of the CDC said to me the other day, “Steve, we've got to go out and test the homeless and if they are infected, we've got to find a place for them to stay.” So, there's concern. I don't know if there's a plan, but given your insights into that world and experience, what do you think, not only in Topeka, but just what do you think we should be doing? Because I don't see everyone getting the aid and support right now they should be getting.  De La Isla: The first thing that we need to do is get enough testing. I think that we talk about the amount of testing that each community is receiving, and we just don't have enough. In Shawnee County, for example, our hospitals now have the privilege that they're working on the reagents so that they can do testing for individuals that are about to have a procedure. But we don't have that yet widely cast out into our community. With regards to the homeless population, yes, I am extremely attached to our homeless population. I love them and I interact regularly with Barry Feaker, who is the person that runs the rescue mission. And even before we had cases in our community, we were talking with regards to what were the needs that our rescue mission had and how were we gonna best mitigate that? We even talked about even getting a hotel if that was a possibility, which we almost achieved. But the problem was making sure that the residents of the mission and our guests had the ability to have the safety networks that they needed in order for them to be successful: the food, the supportive services. But also, in addition to that, how are we gonna get them to have the testing that they needed in case we started to have incidents in regards to that population, which is already immune compromised. So, we have been working very closely with them developing structures and protocols for them so that the rescue mission knows that they have the support that they need in case something were to happen.   Clemons: Do you think there are things that the federal government should be doing, you know, as it's designing these programs and multitrillion-dollar packages, You know, I just don't know, are those communities on the map? Are they not on the map?  De La Isla: Right now, I want to congratulate and thank our Congress and the Senate for the work that they've been doing at creating these packages that are phenomenal. There's been a really big bipartisan effort happening in D.C. However, I do feel like there is not enough testing and support and resources specifically for this population. In addition to that, a lot of the resources that are needed are — there’s families that are going by the wayside, because they feel like they are not able to receive that support. I'll give you an example. We recently started a free clinic that you could drive through at one of our local hospitals for people to receive free testing. But the tests are still not enough in order for us to do broad testing like we need in the African American, the Hispanic population, and in the homeless population that are in such need because we know that there's 40 percent of individuals that are walking around without any symptoms, that once they end up in a location where there is a population that is already predisposed to having this virus impact them much strongly, then would be in a worse situation. So, we need additional testing and we need to figure out ways of supporting our rescue missions in our communities that are in such need.   Clemons: Mayor, you started something called the Rumor Control Group. Tell us about that.   De La Isla: Well, I don't want to take credit for that one. We started the incident command team under Dusty Nichols, who is our emergency management incident commander. We were figuring out ways that we could use our volunteers and immediately came up with this Rumor Control Task Force, which is volunteers that have a Facebook page so that whenever we hear that there is a rumor, we have a group of PIO’s from all of our community that help us come up with graphics and put it out there and just demystify any of that. Those volunteers are priceless to our community. And, for example, Brenda Blackman, she is a teacher that should have been working and she spends all day in the incident command center sitting down, getting those calls in and passing them onto a team so that we could have good information out for the public. Our community is very fortunate to have amazing people that are willing to give up their time to make our community safe.   Clemons: Let me just, in the last minute — it's been a great day — tell me, just who are some of your other health heroes? De La Isla: Some of my who?   Clemons: Health heroes in your community.  De La Isla: You know, I think that this is a great time in our country for us to talk about not just the nurses and the doctors, but our CNAs. Our CNAs are phenomenal. The clerks at the pharmacy desk that are not the certified pharmacist, but they are the ones that are having that face-to-face contact with you. Those individuals that are delivering food, the people that are helping meals on wheels, the people that are working that cash register, the people that are helping you get your food and your nourishment, these are individuals that are being paid more than likely $7.25 or $7.50, and these are heroes. These are the individuals that are keeping our economy going, and I think that we have to take a broader look at how we sustain these individuals that may not be able to have a cost of living that puts them in a position to be a little bit more susceptible to this virus. It helps us have a broader conversation of our values in this country. They are my heroes.More than 100,000 Americans have died from the coronavirus, a staggering wave of death that has brought the world's largest economy to its knees as the federal government struggles even now to mount a concerted nationwide response. As of Wednesday evening, the U.S. had recorded 1,695,776 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 100,047 deaths, according to a Johns Hopkins University tracker. The crisis shows few signs of easing. And as states begin loosening restrictions on business closures and social distancing requirements, many fear the country could be headed for a second wave of infections even before the first has been fully contained. The two months of lockdowns meant to buy time to build the necessary testing and tracing capacity to bring COVID-19 under control have passed with only modest improvements, epidemiologists and public health experts said, at the cost of millions of American jobs and trillions in lost economic activity.  At the same time, the U.S. has made only the barest progress in stemming the spread of the virus. The country has averaged nearly 23,000 new cases a day over the first three weeks of May, down from an April peak of 29,000 cases per day. In April, an average of 1,800 people died from the virus every day; so far this month, that has eased to 1,360 a day, a still-shocking number that has made the United States the epicenter of a pandemic that other countries have brought to heel far faster. "We're making progress too slowly, and we're making progress much more slowly than most of the rest of the developed world," said Jeremy Konyndyk, a senior fellow at the Center for Global Development who headed the U.S. Agency for International Development's Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance in the Obama administration. "American exceptionalism is killing us. Our tendency to do things our own way and not learn from other countries is directly contributing to how poorly we're managing this." The virus has spread beyond its early urban epicenters in New York and Seattle, and new cases are now growing both in smaller cities and outside metropolitan areas. The number of cases reported in nonmetropolitan areas grew by 12 percent last week and by 10 percent in cities with more than 500,000 residents, according to data compiled by Brookings Institution demographer William Frey. Like so many other elements of American life, the coronavirus response has become mired in the bog of partisanship. President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE has lobbed insults at his political rivals and Democratic governors even as he declares victory; armed protestors have rallied at state Capitols in North Carolina, Michigan, Montana and Washington; and leaders in some states have faced allegations that they are manipulating or hiding data about the true scope of the outbreak. In interviews, epidemiologists and public health experts said they saw only modest indications that the United States is using its brief window of opportunity to make changes.  The number of coronavirus tests the country is conducting on a daily basis has risen by about half over the last month, a positive indicator that still leaves most states well short of what they will need to safely monitor the virus's spread over the long term. Laboratories across the country have processed around 400,000 tests most days this week, up from about 250,000 a day at the beginning of the month and about 150,000 a day in the middle of April. The number of contact tracers employed by state and local governments has grown substantially. And the number of promising vaccine candidates in some form of early testing has given hope even if introduction, production and distribution remain months away. "The United States has a health care system that's much better prepared than it was two months ago. The number of tests has increased substantially. We've gotten a bit of a start on contact tracing. Positivity rates are going down. The virus activity is going down in much of the country," said Tom Frieden, the former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention who now runs Resolve to Save Lives, a global health nonprofit. "The physical distancing that we did was effective at reducing the spread. Now the challenge is the balancing act. How do we reopen without rekindling?" Other nations have made far more rapid progress. Eighty days after Spain ordered nationwide lockdowns, the number of new cases reported on any given day had declined by 93 percent from their peaks. After an equal number of days in lockdown in Italy, daily case counts were 80 percent off their highs. In the United States, 80 days after our own lockdowns began, daily case counts have fallen only 28 percent. "Unfortunately, we did not implement social distancing measures early enough and aggressively enough in most of the country. The result of that is we haven't suppressed cases and transmission fast enough," said Celine Gounder, a physician and global health expert at New York University's Grossman School of Medicine. "Had everyone across the country implemented social distancing measures promptly and aggressively until transmission was suppressed, frankly I think it would have been a shorter lockdown period with less damage to the economy and fewer deaths." The future looks bleak even as Americans tell pollsters they are not willing to return to their daily lives for fear of contracting the virus. A study by the University of Washington's Comparative Health Outcomes, Policy and Economics Institute projects the number of deaths across the country could more than triple by year's end even if social distancing practices continue. But instead of continuing lockdowns in hopes of starving the virus of new victims, all 50 states have taken initial steps toward resuming economic activity. Tourists flocked to the boardwalk in Ocean City, Md., and to a raucous pool party in Missouri's Lake of the Ozarks over Memorial Day weekend, alarming epidemiologists. Stay-at-home orders have been lifted everywhere except Washington, D.C., which is set to do so on Friday, and cellphone data shows more Americans are leaving their homes on a daily basis. The number of confirmed cases will rise, possibly substantially, as testing capacity improves and those tests identify more people who show few or no symptoms of COVID-19. But the number of cases is also likely to rise as more people venture out in public even before the first wave subsides. "I'm very concerned that we're going to see a second peak, wave, layered on top of what's already an ongoing first wave," Gounder said. As the country loosens its restrictions, governors and local leaders have a new opportunity, this time to learn from other countries that have gone before. France, Australia and New Zealand have reopened schools and traced some new hot spots as they have emerged. In South Korea, a nightclub and a gym have both been catalysts for new outbreaks. "Everywhere that's been hit that responded had a sort of slightly difference response and outcome is a data point. That's a useful learning tool. Retrospectively, when we go through what happened here, we shouldn't be dismissing any of it," said Nita Bharti, a biologist at the Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics at Penn State University. "A lot of those things are just going to be different. Some of them just have to be new. We have to be innovative and creative about building from the ground up for some things." As Trump runs a reelection campaign that has suddenly become more about his pandemic response than his handling of the economy, he has repeatedly declared victory over a virus that still rages and pushed governors in swing states to allow businesses to reopen. On Friday, Trump designated houses of worship as “essential” services. But epidemiologists and economists alike warn that the public health crisis and the economic crisis go hand in hand and that activity will not return to whatever the new normal is until people feel safe venturing out and opening their wallets. They warn of the potential damage that could come when a second wave of the virus hits, damage that could amplify that which has already been done. "The desire for a rapid economic recovery will in fact make the economic recovery much slower and much weaker than if there were just some discipline in controlling the outbreak," Konyndyk said. "It's like a nationwide marshmallow test," he added. "We're eating the marshmallow."WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Trump and Twitter: conspiracy theories and fact-check labels > Fauci: no evidence showing hydroxychloroquine is effective in treating virus > DC to lift stay-at-home order Friday  >  Nearly half of Americans say they would get COVID-19 vaccine if available  > Coronavirus at the border: California hospitals overwhelmed by patients from Mexico > EU unveils 750 billion euro economic recovery response to pandemic  > Boeing to begin first round of voluntary layoffs, will likely shed 2,500 workers  > Companies tracking your movements: what contact tracing could look like in the US  > National Portrait Gallery’s Kim Sajet says COVID-19 era rewiring people’s relationship with culture and art, adds that new art will focus on frontline heroes  Trump’s brewing war with Twitter is getting worse. With the pandemic showing no end in sight, the 2020 presidential campaign will be the biggest digital project for the respective campaigns in a generation. Social media, virtual townhalls — and perhaps mail-in voting, which is facing a heated debate on Capitol Hill — are the latest items added to the list of our “new normal” in the age of coronavirus. On Tuesday evening, Twitter took the step of slapping a fact-check label on President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE’s tweets. for the first time. The move, which escalates tensions between Washington and Silicon Valley in an election year, was made in response to two Trump tweets over the past 24 hours. The tweets falsely claimed that mail-in ballots are fraudulent.    To no one’s surprise, the president took to social media this morning and blasted Twitter’s move, writing that the social media giant is “interfering in the 2020 presidential election” and working behind the scenes to “silence conservative voices.” Twitter spokeswoman Katie Rosborough said Tuesday that the fact-check lebel was added to the president’s tweets because they “contain potentially misleading information about voting processes and have been labeled to provide additional context around mail-in ballots.” The sparring between the White House and social media giants is bound to heat up as an unprecedented virtual campaign for the highest office in the land continues to play out in the lead-up to November’s election.  AND the president is continuing to peddle a highly controversial conspiracy theory surrounding the death of a former aide to Joe ScarboroughCharles (Joe) Joseph ScarboroughPresident Trump is bringing new meaning to the phrase 'Bully Pulpit' The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Trump says he believes Scarborough 'got away with murder' MORE when the “Morning Joe” host represented Florida in Congress. Trump tweeted about Scarborough minutes before today's airing of MSNBC's "Morning Joe" concluded, underscoring how the topic is on his mind, and on his refusal to back down on the subject in the face of criticism. A couple of Republican members of Congress, including House Republican Conference Chairwoman Liz CheneyElizabeth (Liz) Lynn CheneyTrump says he believes Scarborough 'got away with murder' Hillicon Valley: House FISA bill in jeopardy | Democrats drop controversial surveillance measure | GOP working on legislation to strip Twitter of federal liability protections The Hill's Campaign Report: Trump ramps up attacks against Twitter MORE (Wyo.) and Rep. Adam KinzingerAdam  Daniel KinzingerThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: National Portrait Gallery's Kim Sajet says this era rewiring people's relationship with culture, art; Trump's war with Twitter heats up  Cheney says Trump should stop tweeting Scarborough conspiracy Trump again tweets about Scarborough conspiracy, despite heavy criticism MORE (Ill.), are urging the president to stop.     THE INTERVIEW Kim Sajet, Director, Smithsonian's National Portrait Gallery  National Portrait Gallery Director Kim Sajet to The Hill’s Steve Clemons:   “Listen, I always say there's no moral test to be in the portrait gallery. No one is perfect, right? We're not a hall of heroes. We all make mistakes, and we will do good things. What gets you into the portrait galleries is the summation of a life. When the ledger is actually tallied up at the end of it, have you really changed America? …. I would say, look at the long game. But as you journey along the way, you know, reach out to others and have empathy and have open communication”   “I think there's already a lot coming up, but I think what I'm really impressed with is this focus on families, the people around us, maybe less about celebrity in some way and more about those who we’ve spent a lot of time with. But also the people on the frontlines, right? The doctors, the nurses, the cleaners, the people stocking our shelves. I mean, they're the heroes really of this whole situation. And I think we're going to see more of their portraits, certainly in the next portrait competition when that comes out.”         Watch the full video here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Wednesday, May 27.  Editors’ Note.    I find this quote from Pablo Picasso relevant to our times: “To me there is no past or future in art. If a work of art cannot live always in the present it must not be considered at all. The art of the Greeks, of the Egyptians, of the great painters who lived in other times, is not an art of the past; perhaps it is more alive today than it ever was.” I asked Kim Sajet, director of the National Portrait Gallery in Washington, D.C., what she thought would characterize art during the COVID-19 age, and she said it would be “less celebrity,” and more about those we’ve spent a lot of time with like “the doctors, the nurses, the cleaners, the people stocking our shelves … the heroes of this whole situation.”    What I find fascinating is that “artists” as a term, or art as an obsession emanating from “stay at home/safer at home” enthusiasms has a very broad aperture in this time. When we look back on it, we may value both this moment and the art we are creating differently than now – maybe more precious as we flex our wings and fly, or travel, again and are permitted to physically hug and shake hands again.   I’m not an artist, like I’m not a foodie -– but I love great cuisine, chefs and restaurants, and I love museums, particularly the National Portrait Gallery, which I discuss a bit in my daily interview. But if you haven’t noticed there is an explosion of arts and culture bursting out in digital land as we reach beyond the rooms we pace in. Check out Joseph Gordon-Levitt’s moving online confabs paying tribute to today’s heroes but also creating these great multi-artist jams at Hit Record. And who can’t love and be amazed by people imitating the great masters' works and then posting online for their friends and interested lurkers around the world. Most museums are engaging their fans with online time with today’s artists and also offering virtual tours, like the Votes for Women tour at the National Portrait Gallery.    Deborah Fallows captures some of this creative sizzle in a great Atlantic article as part of her and James Fallows’s Our Town series profiling artists like Richelle Gribble, who once was an artist-in-residence in Eastport, Maine, but is now in Los Angeles at home working on a project she calls Quarantine Life. Deborah Fallows also writes that Gribble is part of a “global crowd-sourced project that includes not only artists, but others who are journalists, physicians, ecologists, songwriters, CEOs, astronauts, and more. It’s called the Great Pause Project.”    Some artists and art lovers may scoff at my observation that more seems to be going on now than usual. But so be it. As Sajet shared, parents are having to be their children’s art teachers and are reaching out to online resources like museums to assist. And our human desire to strut a bit and show off, online if not in person, is producing whole new tracks of artistic expression. I am fascinated by the eruption of culture in times of stress -– and like Picasso intimated, I am pretty sure that what we are producing today will mean different things in the future. But it will still say something about us now.   – Steve Clemons   Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE  ICYMI: catch up on last week's programs        On Thursday, The Hill hosted “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy anchored by Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE.   Watch the full program video here.    On Wednesday, The Hill hosted “The Vir[Tech]tual World of Tomorrow.”    Watch the full program video here.  We want to hear from you! Follow us @TheHillEvents and keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive     CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE  There are 5,635,943 reported cases of COVID-19 and 352,235 global deaths from the virus as of the time of this newsletter.    The U.S. is reporting 1,685,955 cases and 99,264 deaths. Brazil’s cases continue to skyrocket and the country is now reporting 391,222 cases. Russia is close behind with 370,680 reported cases of the virus. 268,615 in the U.K. 236,259 in Spain. 231,139 in Italy. 182,847 in France. 181,524 in Germany. 158,762 in Turkey. 157,484 in India. 141,591 in Iran. 45,970 in the Netherlands. 38,292 in Bangladesh. 37,355 in Ecuador. 24,264 in South Africa. 23,851 in Indonesia. 18,756 in Egypt. 21,905 in Ukraine. 16,623 in Japan. 13,228 in Argentina. 12,456 in Afghanistan. 9,633 in Bahrain. 9,069 in Czechia. 7,584 in Morocco. 7,117 in Ghana.    New York is reporting 363,836 cases. New Jersey 155,764. Illinois 113,195. California 99,874. Massachusetts 93,693. Pennsylvania 73,320. Texas 57,288. Maryland 48,423. Georgia 44,279. Connecticut 41,303. Ohio 33,006. North Carolina 24,804. Iowa 18,256. Arizona 16,864. Utah 8,620. District of Columbia 8,406. Maine 2,109.    14,907,041 COVID-19 test results have been recorded and 384,902 have reported full recoveries from the virus in the U.S.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Fauci: Hyrdroxycholoroquine not effective against coronavirus. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE on Wednesday said there's no evidence that shows the anti-malaria drug hydroxychloroquine is effective at treating COVID-19. "Clearly the scientific data is really quite evident now about the lack of efficacy for it," Fauci, the nation's top infectious disease doctor, said during a CNN interview. (The Hill)  How lawmaker ties helped shape Fed chairman's COVID-19 response. Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell's deep ties with lawmakers are paying off as the central bank deploys trillions of dollars in financial support for the economy with the blessing of Congress. With the coronavirus crisis, Powell has drawn from years of experience negotiating with lawmakers, nudging them toward his preferred policy outcomes while showing deference to their treasured oversight responsibilities. (The Hill)  LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. John BoozmanJohn Nichols Boozman7 GOP senators slam State Dept for 'slow and inefficient policy' on passports The Hill's Coronavirus Report: National Portrait Gallery's Kim Sajet says this era rewiring people's relationship with culture, art; Trump's war with Twitter heats up  Congress headed toward unemployment showdown MORE (R-Ark.)  @JohnBoozman The phased approach to reopening businesses in Arkansas is essential, and I support the establishing of protocols to keep us all safe as their doors reopen to customers. READ my latest column about how we all have a part to play in a successful recovery.   Sen. Jack ReedJohn (Jack) Francis ReedBipartisan Senate panel leaders back fund to deter China The Hill's Coronavirus Report: National Portrait Gallery's Kim Sajet says this era rewiring people's relationship with culture, art; Trump's war with Twitter heats up  Overnight Defense: Trump to withdraw US from Open Skies Treaty | Pentagon drops ban on recruits who had virus | FBI says Corpus Christi shooting terror-related MORE (D-R.I.)  @SenJackReed Even before #COVID19 outbreak, the Trump Admin shortchanged seniors citizens & put #OlderAmericans health at risk w/ misplaced budget priorities. Ex: Trump’s FY 2021 budget called for $750 billion in cuts to #Medicare & $844 billion in cuts to #Medicaid over next decade.   Sen. Joni ErnstJoni Kay ErnstGOP lawmakers say Steve King's loss could help them in November The Hill's Campaign Report: Biden on the cusp of formally grasping the Democratic nomination  The Hill's Morning Report - Protesters' defiance met with calls to listen MORE (R-Iowa)  @SenJonErnst As more of the economy gets reopened, the need for hand sanitizer will continue to grow. I'm calling on @US_FDA to clarify its policy for the manufacture of alcohol-based hand sanitizer products so Iowa’s biofuel producers can continue to help meet the needs of our communities.  ACROSS THE NATION  Washington to lift stay-at-home order on Friday. Washington, D.C., Mayor Muriel Bowser (D) announced Wednesday that the city will lift its stay-at-home order on Friday and enter phase one of reopening. Bowser said that the virus is still circulating but said the city had met its metrics of a 14-day decline in community spread of the virus as well as adequate testing and hospital capacity. (The Hill)    North Carolina requests “written plan” from GOP on coronavirus safety for convention. North Carolina’s top health official requested that the Republican National Convention provide a “written plan” on safety regulations it intends to enact at its confab scheduled for August in Charlotte. “As we work together, it is important to have a written plan from you and your team as soon as possible for how you plan to approach the COVID-19 safety aspects of the convention,” North Carolina Health and Human Services Secretary Mandy Cohen wrote to convention President and CEO Marcia Lee Kelly. (The Hill)    California governor says the virus’s first wave there is not over. California Gov. Gavin NewsomGavin NewsomChief Justice Roberts wisely defers to California governor in church challenge  Senior citizens deserve better than to be left in isolation Supreme Court denies California church's challenge to state restrictions MORE (D) said the first wave of novel coronavirus infections in his state has not yet passed as the country moves toward resuming normal life. “I’ve been overwhelmed by 40 million Americans who live in the state of California, the vast majority doing the right thing, recognizing that this pandemic is not behind us,” he said in an interview on NBC’s “Today” show that aired Wednesday. “We’re not into a second wave. We still haven’t gotten through the first wave.” (Washington Post)   WORLD VIEW   Coronavirus at the border. California hospitals overwhelmed by patients from Mexico. As Mexico’s health care system has strained under the coronavirus, small community hospitals in Southern California, some of the poorest in the state, have been flooded with Americans who have fallen ill and crossed the border. (Washington Post)  Lack of COVID-19 testing undermines Africa's “success.” The relatively low numbers of coronavirus cases in Africa so far "have raised hopes that African countries may be spared the worst of the pandemic", in the words of the United Nations. But at the same time it urges caution. There is a general consensus among those in charge of health policy on the continent that testing rates are woefully low, and this could be distorting our understanding of how far the virus has spread. (BBC)  SCIENCE  Half of Americans in new poll say they would get COVID-19 vaccine. Roughly half of the Americans surveyed in a poll released Wednesday said they would get a vaccine to prevent COVID-19. (The Hill)   France bans hydroxychloroquine as COVID-19 treatment. France has banned hydroxychloroquine as a treatment for COVID-19, its government announced Wednesday. (The Hill)  BUSINESS  Boeing to shed 2,500 workers in initial phase of voluntary layoffs. Boeing will announce this week that it will shed about 2,500 workers in its first phase of voluntary layoffs due to the economic downturn caused by the coronavirus pandemic, union officials told The Wall Street Journal. Union officials told the newspaper that the first round of layoffs will focus on the Seattle-area commercial airplanes population and could be announced as early as Friday. (The Hill)   Hertz paid out $16 million in bonuses, days before bankruptcy. Hertz Global Holdings Inc. paid more than $16 million in retention bonuses to senior managers, including its new chief executive, just days before it filed for bankruptcy Friday night. The car-rental company said it agreed to pay a $700,000 bonus to Chief Executive Paul Stone, who was named to the post this month. (Wall Street Journal)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS  Pelosi's COVID-19 aid bill emphasizes an illegal immigration agenda. For everyone else, Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE erased all remaining doubt by holding up desperately needed aid for American citizens with her poison-pill demand to send taxpayer-funded checks to illegal immigrants. Support for open borders is not a byproduct of Democratic principles or policies. It is the principle; it is the policy. They’ve now made it official. (Donald Trump Jr. for The Hill)   The lost generation of Americans face uncertain future in the crisis. The media has labeled the Class of 2020 as the Lost Generation. They lost their final college semester, their graduation ceremonies, their summer internships, their job offers. Three million of them now enter a spiraling job market. Officially, the unemployment rate is 17.2 percent for recent college graduates. But with nearly 40 million Americans unemployed and most job seekers trapped in their homes (meaning not considered as “actively seeking work”) some economists think the real rate is significantly higher. (Former Congressman Steve IsraelSteven (Steve) J. IsraelThe Hill's Campaign Report: Biden on the cusp of formally grasping the Democratic nomination  Biden savors Trump's latest attacks The Hill's Campaign Report: Trump ramps up attacks against Twitter MORE for The Hill)    Contact tracing for COVID-19 will be the most complex health investigation ever. Around the globe, health workers in many countries already have spent months painstakingly calling people to let them know they may have come in contact with someone carrying the virus. This army of tracers urges those who’ve been exposed to isolate themselves rather than risk sickening others. From South Korea to Singapore contact tracing has slowed, though not stopped, the spread of COVID-19, the disease caused by the virus. (National Geographic)  GENEROUS SPIRITS       Britain’s George Gilbert and his wife, both infected with COVID-19, hold hands during a brief visit together. The couple is being treated at different locations and both people are part of a Cambridge trial that scientists hope could prevent organ failure and death in COVID-19 patients.    For hockey fans, some good news: the NHL has approved a 24-team playoff tournament if the season resumes. The National Hockey League moved one step closer to resuming its season that was suspended due to the COVID-19 pandemic. NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman announced Tuesday the league officially ended its regular season and will skip to a playoff tournament to determine its 2019-20 Stanley Cup champion. Bettman also said the league will select two hub cities where games will resume. (CNBC)    Chad “Ochocinco” Johnson leaves massive tip at Florida restaurant after reopening. Former Cincinnati Bengals player Chad Johnson was more than happy to dine in at Havana’s Cuban Cuisine on Monday, with restaurants allowed to reopen in Broward County and Miami-Dade County. Johnson, a former NFL star, left a $1,000 tip on a bill for $37.40, writing on the check “Congrats on re-opening, sorry about the pandemic, hope this helps. I LOVE YOU.” (WPEC)  ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  > Steve interviews Mastercard CEO AJAY BANGA  > Steve interviews Teva USA President and CEO BRENDAN O’GRADY  > Steve interviews US Surgeon General JEROME ADAMS  > Steve interviews former NIC Director GREG TREVERTON    Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.  Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report.  Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus      VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVE The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews the director of the National Portrait Gallery, Kim Sajet Steve Clemons: Kim, great to see you and thanks very much for joining us. You know, I just revealed, that I like to go hang out in the Kogod Court and write some of my articles for The Hill there. But just give me a quick picture of how it is to go from being the director of one of the world's great museum and clearly one of America's greatest museums, with tons of folks coming in, to now having that big piece of real estate and you’re mostly online. Kim Sajet: Right. The world is our oyster, right. We’re the only National Portrait Gallery of America, but now I've considered everybody who could get online as part of our audience. And you're right, we've created all these fantastic ways to still connect with us. So, you can go through eight different exhibitions online, and we started creating sort of special bespoke programs such as the story time for children that are 11 o’clock on Wednesday mornings, Eastern Standard Time. On Fridays, you can meet a real artist who teaches you how to make portraits; that’s also at 11 o'clock, and then all sorts of different ways of connecting with us from coloring books around portraits and educational materials. Because, as you know, there are a lot of people at home becoming teachers and teaching kids at home and setting up classrooms in their kitchens and living rooms.   Clemons: Well, that's something I hadn't thought about before because I do know a lot of people with their children have all of a sudden either online education or in-home schooling and all of that going on. How are you interacting with these desperate parents trying to get resources for their children? Sajet: Look, honestly, the best way to start is to get on to the website. So, that's npg.si.edu. But also, as we’re part of the Smithsonian, you can get on to the Smithsonian website, and there's all sorts of materials there for stay-at-home teacher parents. And so, as I said there are lessons in history but also in math, in natural history, in science. In our case, of course, it's about biography, and the people who have made a difference, like the America’s presidents. So, there's a lot of information, and increasingly we have a lot of information up in Spanish as well. And we have programs up there in sign language for people who are also needing different ways to communicate.   Clemons: One of the things I love about the portrait gallery is that I love the Gallery of the Presidents that we have all been seeing since we were kids, and the latest with the Obamas and others that have been there. But there are portraits of all different dimensions of American society, leaders, every racial group in society, those that have been neglected historically for various reasons that you’ve brought back into the mainstream. And sometimes appearing in that gallery is also an important political statement on inclusion and where we're going. I’d just like to get in your mind a little bit and understand that when we look back on this time of portraits of people who made a difference, you know, heroes in the country. How is that likely to take shape? You know, how is a Tony Fauci going to be depicted? How in this digital age are you going to depict digitally? Where does that go? Sajet: Yeah, right. I mean, part of the challenge is to live up to the motto on the great seal of America, right ,“E Pluribus Unum,” out of many, one. But we know traditionally that not everyone got to have their portrait taken because it was a very elite art form. And of course, not everyone got to become a president or a governor or, you know, a major entity in American history. So, the criteria that men and women who have made an impact on America's history and culture and if we looked at today I mean, we do have Dr. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE in the collection as part of a group portrait that was done a couple of years ago. It’s a video piece, actually. But we're looking for a better one now of him alone. But then, of course, you know, people like José Andrés and we have the Gateses — who, as we know, have been very big supporters right now trying to find a vaccine for COVID-19 — have been in the collection for a while. But, also adding scientists and then saying, do we have women scientists? So, recently we brought in Frances Arnold, who won the Nobel last year for biochemical engineering.   Clemons: You know, one of the other things I've done, and this may not be within the realm of the Portrait Gallery per se, but I just read a book called “The 10 Caesars” or “10 Caesars” by Barry Strauss. And in it he tells a little bit about one of the debilitating issues for Rome, in that time, the Roman Empire, was a virus that hit in the third century and it took 15 years to sort of burn out. When you go back and look at the history of viruses — and, of course, there's a lot of reference to the one that happened about 100 years ago in this country in 1918. How did those moments of pandemics affect the way people think about world? And how has it affected art? Sajet: I think particularly, if I could take the portraits, so I think we do look to people who have made a change. We also look to people who have passed as remembrances. One of things I think is a fascinating period is actually the Civil War, which is the first time you actually get readily available photographs that you could carry around. They were called carte de visite. You could have a camera that would take 4 or 8 or 12 pictures, and many of the men who died on the battlefield were found with those little photographs in their coat pockets, and their families knew that they had actually died with them being thought of. So, I think pandemics and any major disasters we also think about the people who made a difference in our lives. And we realized at the end of the day we're more alike than we are different, and that what matters is communication, empathy, community, sharing, being part of the solution, not the problem.   Clemons: And one of the other things I was thinking about the Portrait Gallery is how political art is, and you are at the middle of a lot of knots, a lot of tug of wars, and I want to say drag you through them again. But you are in a sense a manifestation of the moment, a manifestation of the tensions of the moment, and I'd like you to take your curator’s hat off for a moment and say, what advice do you have for governors? And for those who are sitting in their own political tug of war between contending sides? How do you hear both sides? How do you get it right and get to an equilibrium that is — that may not be the very best, but is the best you can get? Sajet: Listen, I always say there's no moral test to be in the Portrait Gallery. No one is perfect, right? We're not a hall of heroes. We all make mistakes, and we will do good things. What gets you into the portrait galleries is the summation of a life. When the ledger is actually tallied up at the end of it, have you really changed America? And ideally, for the better. I mean, we also have people who weren't so great, like John Wilkes Booth who killed Lincoln. And so, I would say, look at the long game. But as you journey along the way, you know, reach out to others and have empathy and have open communication because they're the people that we can see who have been in the Portrait Gallery, who really were able to take the resources that they had and make them work for them even in the most difficult circumstances.   Clemons: Can you give us a quick glimpse, Kim, of some of your — I mean, I don’t call them best because I know you love all your children, but some of the virtual tours that you have, what you've designed for the great, broad global public to experience at your museum? Sajet: Well, you can certainly go through the America’s presidents. But I think one of my most favorite exhibitions right now is our portrait competition, which happens every three years, and it is a call for entries around the country. So, this time we had 2,700 entrants, we picked 46 artists, and I guess maybe it was fortuitous, but the winning entry is a video piece by an artist called Hugo Crosthwaite that you can actually watch I would argue just as well, if not better, at home, because you don't have all the background noise of visitors in the galleries. If you have a good computer and a pretty good audio system, it's a really great portrait of a woman who is on a bus crossing the border from Mexico into the United States.   Clemons: One of the other things, and I'm sorry to get so practical, you know, and into the grit of all of this, you know, just in reference, I had José Andrés on The Coronavirus Report recently and also interviewed Tom Colicchio, and both of them were putting out playbooks on how to reopen, how to think about it, what are the health guardrails to getting back to something like we used to have? It's going to be different, but getting back. Are you thinking at all about putting health guardrails together or a playbook together for returning to something that's a hybrid of a virtual experience and an in-person experience at the Portrait Gallery? Sajet: You know, we are part of the Smithsonian. So, we're working with all our siblings to work out what that looks like. You know, there are 19 museums and a National Zoo and then all the research centers. So, whatever we do, we're going to do in coordination, and likely it will be a phase project as we sort of think about how we open. But, to your point about, you know, I do think that we’ve added a couple of tools to the toolbox now. For example, we've done one fabulous program with some of our donors where we did a little sort of walk through an exhibition that we're planning with the curator and people were fascinated. They loved it. We have another one actually coming up tomorrow night. And we realized that we should be doing this more often because we are the National Portrait Gallery, and not everyone can come from around the country. And they can still have a relationship with us and learn something and be engaged. So, I do think that we're going to be going into this hybrid model and even more, you know — one of my biggest dreams, actually, is to set up what I call portrait productions. I would love to have a full-time videographer and you know a person who does audio and do lot smaller sort of communications, much as I think, like the BBC has done in the past. I think the way they've changed their model is really kind of fascinating. As you know, I have a podcast. We’re in the second season. We're now doubling our listenership to that. And I want more of that. So, we need to be thinking about the on-site experience, but we more and more need to be thinking about the online experience. Now, the online experience has to be different, and it has to be additive, you know. You can't replace what it's like to look at a real work of art, but you can do it in a very different and engaging way.   Clemons: I think in our last minute, Kim, I'm gonna be unfair to you. I'm gonna ask to put you on the spot again. I remember just a wonderful set of events that you had at the Portrait Gallery where you’d bring in well-known entertainers, or film directors, or talk show hosts, and they would take a piece of art from the gallery — I remember one subject was once a Cy Twombly painting that was there — and then basically give a public talk and even a show, if you will, around that piece of art. So, I want to ask you to pick your favorite piece of art, your most meaningful piece of art during this time of coronavirus. What moves Kim Sajet? Sajet: We have a podcast that's coming up of Sojourner Truth, and it's a photograph of her. What I had not realized until we had talked to our senior historian, Gwendolyn DuBois Shaw, is that in her lap she's holding knitting, but she's actually made the yarn look like the map of the United States. So, here was a woman who was once enslaved, who couldn't read or write, but she controlled her own image and she loved America dearly. And I think that, to me, is, it’s a portrait of resilience and hope and ingenuity, and it's just sort of a fascinating story. So, that's the one I'm in love with right now. But ask me in two hours and I'll have a different portrait.   Clemons: I'm gonna tag onto my last question with one last question: How do you think COVID is going to be depicted in the arts?  Sajet: I think there's already a lot coming up, but I think what I'm really impressed with is just sort of this focus on families, the people around us, maybe less about celebrity in some way and more about those who we’ve spent a lot of time with. But also the people on the front lines, right? The doctors, the nurses, the cleaners, the people stocking our shelves. I mean, they're the heroes really of this whole situation. And I think we're going to see more of their portraits, certainly in the next portrait competition when that comes out.North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper (D) lifted the state's stay-at-home order on Friday but has felt increasing pressure from President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE to guarantee that all coronavirus restrictions will be lifted by the end of August when the Republican Party is set to have its national convention in Charlotte. Trump on Monday threatened to move the convention out of Charlotte, accusing Cooper of still being in "Shutdown mood." "I love the Great State of North Carolina, so much so that I insisted on having the Republican National Convention in Charlotte at the end of August. Unfortunately, Democrat Governor, @RoyCooperNC is still in Shutdown mood & unable to guarantee that by August we will be allowed full attendance in the Arena," the president said in a series of tweets. "In other words, we would be spending millions of dollars building the Arena to a very high standard without even knowing if the Democrat Governor would allow the Republican Party to fully occupy the space," he added. North Carolina has entered the safer-at-home phase of Cooper's plan, which allows previously shuttered businesses such as restaurants and barbershops to operate at 50 percent capacity. Gatherings are limited to 10 people indoors and 25 people are allowed for outdoor events. Cooper was again pressured on Tuesday, this time by RNC chairwoman Ronna Romney McDaniel, who claimed “a lot of states” had offered to host the convention — scheduled for Aug. 24-27 at Charlotte's Spectrum Center — following the president's tweets. “The president is right to say to the governor, you need to assure us before we lock in all these hotel rooms and we bring all of this revenue to your state that you’re going to let us have this convention,” McDaniel said in an appearance on "Fox & Friends." “There’s a lot of states that are calling the president right now saying, hey, why don’t you bring that revenue to our state?” she added.  Florida Gov. Ron DeSantisRonald Dion DeSantisDeSantis pushing to host Republican National Convention in Florida Florida bars and theaters to reopen starting Friday, DeSantis says DeSantis says he's sending 500 National Guard troops to DC MORE (R) piled on as well, saying that he'd "love" to host the convention in his state. Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp (R) made a similar offer, citing the Peach State's "world-class facilities." North Carolina did not implement phase two of Cooper's plan as hoped over Memorial Day weekend, reporting Saturday that a record 1,107 people tested positive for COVID-19 on Friday. The News & Observer reported Monday that 627 new people had been hospitalized due to the virus, a new one-day high for the state. North Carolina's average number of tests returning positive in the past seven days is around 8 percent, according to state health data. That's above the current national average, which is roughly 5.5 percent. Cooper has yet to make the guarantee that Trump is asking for and his safer-at-home phase will run until at least June 26.WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > WHO warns of ‘immediate second peak’ if countries reopen too soon  > A masked Cuomo rings opening bell at NYSE after two month closure; markets open to surge of optimism on promising vaccine candidate > Brazil leads world in daily number of coronavirus deaths; White House travel ban from country to take effect today > Fears of meat shortages rise as coronavirus spreads through packing plants  > Novavax begins clinical trial of COVID-19 vaccine; results expected in July  > Former NIC Director Greg Treverton says US response to COVID-19 worst since founding of republic   The weekend that was. Americans’ abilities to conform with stay-at-home orders and social distancing guidelines faced perhaps the toughest challenge yet as thousands across the country celebrated Memorial Day — traditionally, a long-awaited entree into summer and the good times to follow. But this year, things were different. Officials continued to stress the need for Americans to maintain social distance wherever possible and wear masks to help prevent  further community spread of the virus. To be sure, many did comply and spent their weekend in close quarters with loved ones, sneaking in a bit of “normal” fun along the way.  But many Americans weren’t so careful. At Missouri’s Lake of the Ozarks, scores of revelers flocked to crowded restaurants and pool resorts. Social media erupted with photos and videos of folks packed like sardines into bars and pools, with no attention being paid to social distancing measures. Masks were nowhere to be seen. In fact, you wouldn’t have even known there was a pandemic from watching the footage. The scene at the Ozarks could easily be a microcosm of folks throughout the country doing much the same — rushing to public places in a desperate attempt to regain a sense of the normalcy.   But, for so many other Americans, these scenes are troubling. If we are all being implored to social distance and to wear masks — not just to protect ourselves, but to protect others, particularly the most vulnerable groups — it seems like a stab in the back from our fellow Americans. Are we “all in this together” or will a greater divide emerge between Americans who view attending a crowded bar as their “constitutional right” and the large swaths of Americans who are perhaps more health-conscious and more eager to take the recommended measures to protect the public health? We’re heading toward our new normal. But, as we learned over the weekend, how people are approaching this new phase of reopening will differ drastically across the country.   THE INTERVIEW Greg Treverton, professor at the University of Southern California and former director of the National Intelligence Council        Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Tuesday, May 26.        Editor’s Note.     This weekend, I saw smaller examples of the now widely reported human jam at the Lake of the Ozarks on the eastern shore of Maryland. The throngs of folks I saw were mostly young — but not all. There were a good number of 50+ people wanting to blend in and perhaps round down their age. That’s understandable, and intergenerational projects and fun are something I applaud.   I posted the above picture with no comment on Facebook this weekend other than that I wrote “Coronavirus weekend.” The comments that followed were intense, on all sides of the community debate about what responsible social activity looks like while we all struggle past this vicious and paralyzing pandemic. One good friend said that it’s completely understandable and predictable that these kinds of scenes would happen because people can’t be locked up for weeks on end without contact. He actually said it’s like giving up sex, which he said was impossible. The response was quick and vigorous for those who talked about how irresponsible such gatherings were for the safety of others, how these folks “deserved to die” (I decided to fade that comment from the list), how their calculations of life and death were different than that particular Facebook friend. My friend’s original comment didn’t last the day, and he took it down — which I find regrettable as there was a truth in his comments that deserve their place in the storm we are in.     Another friend asked if my intention in posting the pic was to shame these folks and get my Facebook community to shame them. Her perspective: What these folks had decided to do was nowhere near as bad as some of what she had seen on the beaches or around the country and that this could be seen in part as an exhibition of relatively good behavior rather than of bad behaviors. I responded that my view was neutral. I posted to see what folks thought — and got a variation of responses which I think is consistent with the competing views out there on what lines we cross and don’t cross in these times. I told her I agreed with her that this was not hundreds of people together — and there was no way to know what calculations or communications went on between these folks who wanted to enjoy a nice day out on the eastern side of Maryland’s Chesapeake Bay region.     But the debate was intense and the views, in some cases, strident. I think we all need to find ways to accept that such scenes like the above are going to happen, and that some of these people will interact with us in other parts of our lives — at the grocery store or the bakery, or the gas station, or even as we increasingly go back to some sort of work environment. The key is probably not to demonize others for letting off steam, but rather to continue to assure that one’s own precautions are high. You control what you yourself do, but it gets messy and complicated when trying to change the behavior of others as rules are being relaxed. I would have loved to be at that boat tie-up, but the time isn’t right for me. I get that some others calculate differently. What I saw was “not” Lake of the Ozarks, though it wasn’t in the comfort zone of many. Until we get a vaccine and real protection, this is what learning to live with the virus is going to be like.   – Steve Clemons  Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik.    Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report.  Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE  ICYMI: catch up on last week's programs        On Thursday, The Hill hosted “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy anchored by Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE.   Watch the full program video here.    On Wednesday, The Hill hosted “The Vir[Tech]tual World of Tomorrow.”    Watch the full program video here.  We want to hear from you! Follow us @TheHillEvents and keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive     CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE  There are 5,543,439 reported cases of COVID-19 and 347,836 global deaths as of the time of this newsletter.    The U.S., where all states are beginning some sort of reopening, is reporting 1,669,040 cases and 98,426 deaths. Brazil’s cases continue to skyrocket and now stand at 374,898. For the first time Monday, Brazil surpassed the U.S. Monday for the first time with the most reported coronavirus fatalities over a 24-hour period. Russia is reporting 362,342 cases. 266,590 in the U.K. Spain 236,259. Italy 230,555. France 183,067. 180,802 in Germany. 157,814 in Turkey, 150,600 in India. 139,511 in Iran. 123,979 in Peru. 87,122 in Canada. 84,102 in China. 47,202 in Qatar. 45,780 in the Netherlands. 34,440 in Sweden. 31,086 in the UAE. 23,165 in Indonesia. 11,225 in South Korea. 11,183 in Panama. 8,697 in Algeria.    New York is reporting 362,764 cases of the coronavirus. New Jersey 155,764. 112,017 in Illinois. 96,595 in California. 93,271 in Massachusetts. 72,682 in Pennsylvania. 56,409 in Texas. 54,881 in Michigan. 52,255 in Florida. 47,687 in Maryland. 43,592 in Georgia. 39,342 in Virginia. 20,535 in Tennessee. 20,065 in Washington. 16,784 in Arizona. 15,584 in Wisconsin. 7,026 in New Mexico. 6,138 in Oklahoma.    Now that every state has begun to reopen in some form, U.S. hospitalizations are on a gradual upswing and cases are expected to rise, according to Scott Gottlieb, President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE’s former commissioner of Food and Drugs. “We now see a trend in an uptick in hospitalizations. It’s a small uptick, but it is an uptick and it’s unmistakable and it is probably a result of reopening,” Gottlieb said on CNBC’s “Squawk Box.” “We are going to have to watch it.”   Some observations of the U.S. data from The Hill’s national correspondent Reid Wilson:    The statistics show the outbreak is still a Northeastern phenomenon, but it’s moving more to the Midwest. The 12 Midwestern states make up about 21 percent of the nation’s population, but they accounted for 27 percent of the new cases last week. The nine Northeastern states make up 17 percent of the country’s population, and almost 24 percent of the new cases last week — still high, but a number that has come down substantially as case counts in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and Massachusetts fall from their daunting peaks.   Southern states confirmed 42,554 new cases last week, and case counts are growing week-over-week in Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina and Tennessee. But the 13 Southern states make up 35 percent of the nation’s population and 27 percent of new cases.   The Mid-Atlantic continues to be troubling: Maryland and West Virginia showed week-over-week case increases, and Virginia has lagged far behind in testing capacity, raising questions about just how many cases the Commonwealth is missing. Those three states plus Washington, D.C., and Delaware account for just 3 percent of the population, but 6.6 percent of the new cases.   Western states are doing best, despite a spike in California. States that touch the Pacific have 16 percent of the population, and just 10 percent of new cases.   Some good news: Alaska has gone 19 days without recording a single COVID-19 related death. Hawaii’s streak is at 22 days, and Montana’s is at 26 days. Vermont has gone a little more than a week without a single death.   New York is still experiencing more new cases than any other state, 11,309 last week. But that’s a really positive trajectory, sitting at about one-sixth the number of weekly new cases the state was confirming at its peak in early April.   WASHINGTON WATCH  McConnell: Talking about fifth coronavirus bill 'in the next month or so.' Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE (R-Ky.) said on Tuesday that there would "likely" be a fifth coronavirus relief bill "in the next month or so." "Many of you are asking, what next? I think there's likely to be another bill. It will not be the $3 trillion bill the House passed the other day. But there's still a likelihood that more will be needed," McConnell said during an event at a hospital in Louisville, Ky. (The Hill)    Administration’s travel ban on Brazil to take effect today. The White House's ban on travelers arriving from Brazil, aimed at helping prevent the spread of the coronavirus, will take effect late Tuesday — two days earlier than previously planned.  (USA Today)    GOP faces internal conflicts on fifth coronavirus bill. Republicans are increasingly saying they expect to pass a fifth coronavirus bill — just don’t ask them to agree, yet, on what should be in it. (The Hill) Trump threatens to pull Republican convention out of North Carolina. President Trump began a solemn Memorial Day railing against North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper, a Democrat, ahead of the 2020 Republican National Convention, threatening to pull it out of Charlotte, where the convention is expected to be held Aug. 24 to 27. (CNN)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. Susan CollinsSusan Margaret CollinsOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump GOP Sen. Murkowski 'struggling' with whether to vote for Trump  MORE (R-Maine)  @SenatorCollins Farmers can begin applying for direct relief payments TODAY through the Coronavirus Food Assistance Program created by the CARES Act. I encourage all Maine farmers who have been harmed financially due to COVID-19 to apply for this federal assistance.    Rep. Donna ShalalaDonna Edna ShalalaThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Former NIC Director Greg Treverton rips US response; WHO warns of 'immediate second peak' if countries reopen too quickly  Treasury has not disbursed B in airline support: oversight panel We can't afford to let local news die MORE (D-Fla.)  @RepShalala This #OlderAmericansMonth we celebrate the contributions seniors have made in our families and communities. As we continue to confront the #COVID19 pandemic, we must ensure they have the support they need.   Sen. Marco RubioMarco Antonio RubioIf we seek resilience, we need liberty, not nationalism GOP senator blocks bill giving flexibility to small-business loans but says deal near GOP senators dodge on treatment of White House protesters MORE (R-Fla.)  @marcorubio Community bank First National Bank of Moose Lake in #Minnesota funded 69 #PPPloans valued over $8.1 million, saving 948 local jobs. #PPPworks  ACROSS THE NATION  Meat shortages could worsen as infections multiply at U.S. processing plants. For many Americans, Memorial Day marks the start of barbecue season. But the ripple effects of the coronavirus pandemic are likely to cause meat shortages to worsen as the virus spreads through America’s meatpacking plants. (Washington Post)  California church going to Supreme Court over in-person restrictions. A church in California is petitioning the Supreme Court to block California Gov. Gavin NewsomGavin NewsomChief Justice Roberts wisely defers to California governor in church challenge  Senior citizens deserve better than to be left in isolation Supreme Court denies California church's challenge to state restrictions MORE's (D) order restricting in-person services amid the coronavirus pandemic. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW   WHO warns of “immediate second peak” if countries reopen too soon. The World Health Organization is warning that countries with declining coronavirus cases could face a second wave of the outbreak if they lift restrictions too soon. (The Hill)   Brazil records world's highest daily coronavirus death toll for first time. Brazil for the first time has surpassed the U.S. with the most reported coronavirus fatalities over a 24-hour period Monday, Reuters reported. Brazil confirmed 807 deaths, while the U.S. reported 620, according to the news service. (The Hill)  SCIENCE  Novavax is beginning clinical trials of its coronavirus vaccine. Novavax, a biotech company focused on developing vaccines against infectious diseases, announced Monday that it is beginning a phase one clinical trial of its COVID-19 vaccine candidate in Australia. Results of the trial are expected in July. (Forbes)  Merck in collaboration to develop coronavirus vaccine. U.S. drugmaker Merck on Tuesday said it plans to work alongside nonprofit scientific research organization IAVI to develop a potential vaccine against the coronavirus. The news helped send Merck shares up about 3 percent during the premarket. (CNBC)   BUSINESS        Cuomo rings bell as NYSE reopens to big gains. A masked Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) rang the opening bell Tuesday as the New York Stock Exchange trading floor opened for the first time in two months. The markets opened to a surge of optimism following Memorial Day weekend as the country began to reopen and news of additional potential vaccine candidates has surfaced. (The Hill)    Women suffering steeper job losses in COVID-19 economy. The economic devastation caused by the coronavirus has hit women particularly hard, a contrast to the 2009 downturn that was known as "the men's recession." The latest employment figures show that women, by a 10-point margin, have seen the majority of the job losses as large parts of the economy have shut down. (The Hill)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS  Craig Fugate: Emergency communications will be the next challenge of COVID-19. During my time as President Obama's administrator at the Federal Emergency Management Agency, we coordinated the response to multiple record-breaking disasters. But the COVID-19 crisis is challenging the United States' emergency response resources in a much more profound way. Never have our federal and state agencies faced a national crisis of this scale, affecting all 50 states simultaneously for a period of several months. (Craig Fugate for The Hill)    No “dole” for America: How to recover from COVID-19. Getting America to full employment again won’t be easy. As a recent study by the University of Chicago’s Becker-Friedman Institute shows, the COVID-19 lockdown has changed the dynamic of working. Some workers are now collecting more dollars under the CARES Act, the law that funds payroll protection, than they did when they worked. Those workers may not be eager to return to jobs. (Thomas D. Lehrman and Amity Shlaes for The Hill)  Frustrated and struggling, New Yorkers contemplate abandoning the city they love. New York City is a shadow of its pre-pandemic normal. Many residents are out of work, out of money, out of patience and out of sorts. Reassessments are happening throughout the country, but nowhere else are they as sharply focused as here, in the nation’s most populated, most dense, most diverse metropolis — where more than 21,000 have died. (Washington Post)   GENEROUS SPIRITS Facebook is giving $20 million to women, minority, veteran-owned businesses. Sheryl Sandberg, the chief operating officer at Facebook, announced Wednesday that the social networking giant is giving $20 million to small businesses owned by women, minorities and veterans across the U.S. (The Hill)  651 vehicles show up for surprise birthday of 8-year-old fighting cancer. A surprise birthday parade for an 8-year-old boy had a massive, 651-vehicle turnout on Saturday. Leesport, Pa., resident Riley Rejniak, who is battling neuroblastoma a second time, waved as hundreds of cars, motorcycles and first responders arrived in waves."He waved to every single car and had the biggest smile face," mom Ashley Rejniak told "Good Morning America." "For me, I got emotional multiple times. We know he's loved by our community but the amount of gifts, balloons ... it was amazing." (Good Morning America)   ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  > Steve interviews Mastercard CEO AJAY BANGA  > Steve interviews Teva USA President and CEO BRENDAN O’GRADY  > Steve interviews US Surgeon General JEROME ADAMS   Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.  Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report.  Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus       VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Gregory Treverton.   Read excerpts from the interview below.   Clemons: When you were basically the CIA's chief organizer of threats, where was pandemics on your list of possible problems for us? Treverton: It's been on the list for a very long time, I think. And, you know, I remember before I was in the government, when I was out of government, running a center at the Rand Corporation, and this was early 2000s, we ranked threats to the United States as nuisance, serious or existential. And the only threat in the existential category was pandemics. My predecessors of the National Intelligence Council in their 2004 report, Global Trends, they painted almost exactly the scenario we are in, unfortunately, with globalization reversing, global travel stopping, huge economic hits, so strategically, in terms of strategic warning, this has been on our list for a very long time. The problem is it hasn't always been as salient as it should have been. We have an episode, and then we kind of forget it. We've gone back to business as usual several times, even after SARS, even after 12,000 people died in 2001 from H1N1.   Clemons: The leadership of both political parties saw something like this coming. Why did we fail? What was the real reason for the breakdown in preparing for this? Treverton: It goes way back I think and as always there are so many causes that are intertwined. Plainly, we haven't been investing in public health in general. Budgets of CDC and FDA have been going down, not up. But we've had these previous episodes, and then we tended to say, “Well, now we're through that," and we'll go back to business as usual, not recognizing that this is something that's gonna be continually there and that we have to be prepared for. So, the infrastructure wasn't really there. And then we got this combination of the Chinese ... hiding. So, we lost time there. But even when we got warning in mid-January. In mid-January, we should have known that if there was something going on in China, it was gonna be here, right? We knew globalization was gonna bring it here. And at that point, we really should have done what the Germans did, begun stockpiling tests and preparing. But we didn’t. And that I think a lot of that probably does lie at Mr. Trump's door, since he continued to say, "nothing much here, no big deal, it will be over quickly." But there was also, it seems to me, challenges from bureaucracy. The CDC and FDA look a little bit to me like the FBI and the CIA before 9/11, not really cooperating as closely as they needed to and maybe a little bit overconfident thinking, “Well, we can handle this.” Well, it turns out they couldn't.   Clemons: I think the big question is, what do we do for the future? And how do we look at that decisionmaking and action behavior that we saw from various parts and move forward and in the pages of The Hill you made a suggestion. So, what did you suggest? Treverton: Well, it seems to me that first we need to have a thorough investigation I think, and really lay out all the facts, something like the 9/11 panel. That seems to be inevitable and a good thing to do. The big questions for me there are do you want to try and do the usual bureaucratic solution. As after 9/11 we created the Department of Homeland Security. Do you want to create a Department of Health Security? Not sure that's the best idea, but that is certainly gonna be on the agenda I would think. At least I hope it's on the agenda because this is in terms of needless loss of American lives, this, I think, is going to rank as the biggest government failure in the history of the republic. You can talk about 1918. But in 1918 we really didn't know what to do. This time around we knew what to do. We just didn't do it. So, I think the first instinct will be do we need to create some special government agency? The real challenge is making the interface between public and private work better. What didn't happen here was early enough the, I suppose being cautious when your commander in chief is saying no big deal, then people at CDC and FDA are not gonna take risks. They're not going to circumvent procedures. They're not going to say OK labs, go ahead and start making these tests without prior permission. That just wasn't gonna happen. So, that's to me the critical challenge is working better across that public-private interface since really all the capacity, much of the capacity, once the labs are turned loose, they could do a lot, but they weren't turned loose until way late, way late in the game.    Clemons: Were you surprised at the reports from states that they were having to compete against one another sort of a law of the jungle and trying to secure PPE equipment and testing equipment, and that there just seemed to be an absence of direction and an absence of organizing platform?  Treverton: I mean, it was a terrible spectacle to behold, right? Here's a time when you really want national leadership, right? This is the nation's problem. It's not individual states. And we have not basically, we had this kind of free for all, as you describe, just amazing. Some of the state leaders, like my governor, like Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE came through looking like real leaders. But they had to be. But what we really needed was a concerted, organized, national plan. The problem there is who exactly should lead it. You know in that case, FEMA is not the strongest of government agencies. This is not something you can easily put the Pentagon on, but there needed really be an organizing principle and a strategy, we didn't really have a strategy, as you say, that resulted in this incredible free-for-all with states competing for masks and PPE. And then, as you say, having FEMA hijack some of them for purposes we are not quite clear about. It was exactly a sort of textbook in how not to manage a crisis.   Clemons: How do you achieve bipartisan approval in setting up the kind of commission you talked about? And do you have confidence that such a commission could be pursued given what you see in the Senate and the House today?  Treverton: I'm not sure. I mean, it is a terrible time, and so far the pandemic seems to if anything, sharpened, intensified our gridlock, not diluted it. So, I am not optimistic. Not the simple passage of time, who knows what's gonna happen in November, but with the simple passage of time, I hope that some of the shots that the intelligence community has taken will go down, will not persist and that they will continue to be looked at. This is an awkward one because pandemics are obviously something of interest to intelligence, but they are primarily a medical matter. And so part of the problem here may have been that we had a little bit of a gap between what the medical pieces of the government are doing and what the intelligence community was doing. We now know that the intelligence community was giving warnings, but those ... weren't necessarily connected to anything operational.   Clemons: Is it long overdue that we begin looking at the fact that no matter where this virus came from, and I should say most every legitimate person I know believes that it evolved naturally, but it raises the question of is this now something where people begin to try to look at copycat possibilities? And what will this do to our intelligence establishment? Treverton: Biological threats have been high on everybody's list. They haven't gotten as much attention as other things, like nuclear or terrorism, but I think they've been high on the intelligence community’s list for a long, long time. We'd written in the past that one of the challenges is if something like this happened, you wouldn't immediately know whether it was naturally occurring, or accident, or somebody doing it on purpose, and that will continue to be true. It does seem to me that as we re-think what to do after [COVID-19], we really need to rethink what we mean by national security. We are spending lots of money on the military, lots and lots of money on the military, and not very much on public health. But now we find that the biggest threat we’ve faced, probably in a very long time is this, a pandemic, not an aggressive foe.   Clemons: Are there any other blind spots to our national conversation or thinking about our security today that you think should be on the table?  Treverton: I don't think there are great blind spots. We've been for so long, so mesmerized by terrorism. I used to make audiences angry after 9/11 by saying that their chances of being killed by a terrorist were slightly less than being killed by lightning. But we did spend an awful lot of time and effort and money on terrorism. I think one of the things that was a blind spot was this, has been a blind spot, is biological issues and particularly, naturally occurring. This wasn’t exactly naturally, may have been an accident, but certainly was a bad thing happening. ... But that was a major, major blind spot in our continuing thinking. We kept raising it, but we didn't really do anything to act on it. We actually drew down the reserves of PPE, protective equipment, not built them up. So, it really did catch us by surprise when it shouldn't have.Alabama has reported more than 4,900 confirmed cases of the COVID-19 disease in the past two weeks as it has gradually allowed businesses to reopen.  The majority of the new cases have come from Alabama's two most populated counties: Jefferson and Mobile. Jefferson County — home to Birmingham, the state's most populous city — has reported 1,638 cases, while Mobile has confirmed 2,044. Montgomery County, the third most populous county in Alabama, also has more than 1,000 cases.  Alabama overall has reported more than 15,300 confirmed cases of COVID-19 during the pandemic. At least 573 people in the state have died from the virus. Montgomery Mayor Steve Reed (D) pushed back against the state's reopening strategy in an interview Monday with CNN, saying that the state has moved away from following social distancing guidelines. “I think certainly people have decided that the pandemic is over, that there's not a risk out there," Reed said on the network's "New Day." "They are ready to get back to their normal way of doing things, and that’s a mistake that we’ve been making over the last few weeks, is we have kind of eased restrictions in this community and across the state. We’re still in the middle of a crisis. We’re still battling this pandemic,” Reed said. Montgomery, Alabama, Mayor Steve Reed says he isn't comfortable with the governor’s plan for reopening the state.https://t.co/7wgm0B3Arw pic.twitter.com/cBFUEXjHBC Alabama's rate of positive tests, another important statistic used to determine how a community is handling the pandemic, has been slowly rising. According to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University, at the beginning of the month, Alabama's average positivity rate was hovering around 5 percent. Now, the average is roughly 8 percent. Alabama's stay-at-home order expired on April 30. It is now under a "safer-at-home" order issued by Gov. Kay Ivey, a Republican.  At first, retail stores were allowed to reopen at 50 percent capacity, with beaches, restaurants and bars being allowed to resume dine-in operations, as long as they kept to social distancing guidelines. Ivey amended her order last week, allowing for even more of Alabama to resume business. Now, entertainment venues — bowling alleys, arcades, theaters — can be open as long as safety guidelines are followed. Child care facilities and summer camps were also green-lighted, and athletic practices resumed Saturday. Moreover, educational institutions are slated to reopen June 1. This safer-at-home phase of Ivey's reopening strategy is set to go until July 3, when the situation in the state will be reevaluated again.The prison advocacy group founded by rappers Meek Mill and Jay-Z is partnering with the National Sheriffs’ Association to deliver protective gear to every jail in the country in an effort to curb the spread of coronavirus among incarcerated people. The Reform Alliance, which recently received a $10 million donation from Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey, will partner with the sheriffs’ association to distribute masks and other equipment to prison staff. “America’s sheriffs are grateful to the REFORM Alliance for providing the scarcely available life-saving equipment that are vital to the maintaining their jails during the pandemic,” said incoming National Sheriffs’ Association President Dave Mahoney. “These masks will ensure sheriffs are able to keep their jails as safe and healthy as possible. We look forward to partnering with REFORM on areas as we move forward.” The Reform Alliance, which is run by Van Jones, has already sent more than 100,000 surgical masks to Rikers Island and other prison facilities. The group has been warning about the spread of coronavirus through the prison system; there have been hundreds of cases at Rikers Island alone. The Reform Alliance has urged federal and state lawmakers to reduce incarcerations during the outbreak by sending elderly and nonviolent criminals to home confinement or by suspending jail sentences for technical violations. “Law enforcement officers put their lives on the line every day to keep our communities safe," said Reform Alliance chief advocacy officer Jessica Jackson. "We’re proud to partner with the National Sheriffs Association to help protect them and vulnerable populations in our jails from the coronavirus. We’ve seen how rapidly the virus can spread through jails and how failure to stop the spread behind bars puts local communities at risk. We've also seen sheriffs throughout the country adopt evidence-based solutions to get incarcerated people out of harm's way and remain in contact with loved ones. We hope this is one of many opportunities to work with sheriffs across the nation.”WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Hydroxychloroquine linked to increased death, heart conditions in COVID-19 patients  > Fauci says it is ‘conceivable’ that US could deploy vaccine by December  > Biden says he would make coronavirus vaccine free for everyone in US  > COVID toe? The virus’s weirdest symptoms are only emerging now  > On Memorial Day weekend, beach towns tell New Yorkers to stay away > The pandemic may forever change cities > Surgeon General Jerome Adams says we must invest much more in public health infrastructure in underserved communities, during and after Covid  THE INTERVIEW  Vice Adm. Jerome Adams, U.S. Surgeon General  Jerome Adams stresses surveillance, separation, cleaning and coverage in fight against coronavirus; adds investing in public health infrastructure in underserved communities will be better for everyone, before and after Covid          Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT   Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Friday, May 22.  Editor’s Note.    One of the courses I had in school long ago was titled “Freedom and Responsibility” that focused on how to balance liberty with responsibilities to one’s community and to other citizens. All civilized democracies have some kind of compact, usually a constitution but often a much more complex array of arrangements that define where freedoms become burdens on others, and become abuses, infractions or crimes. In the U.S. we don’t force people to vote in a democracy though most of us — sadly not all — “hope” people do. We do require driver’s licenses before people can get behind the wheel. We do have a minimum age for drinking alcohol and for the purchase of cigarettes. But vaccines are optional; and in fact, there are a lot of folks out there who actively campaign against vaccines. We have seen measles – once essentially eradicated for the most part from the United States – pop again in communities where children were not vaccinated.   In my conversion with Surgeon General of the United States Vice Admiral Jerome Adams (see the link here), he outlined how vital it is for the health of the nation to get the level of “vaccine confidence” higher in the nation — or in my bottom line terms, how to get more folks vaccinated. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Robert Redfield mentioned to me just days ago that less than 50 percent of Americans are getting flu shots in a season. He said this low level of participation in vaccine programs, combined with a predicted and likely resurgence of COVID-19 in the fall, could lead to new waves of tragedy and shock in the nation as the two simultaneous attacks could once again overwhelm our public health system.   Vaccines are optional. Some years I’ve had the shots — and others not. I admit to free-riding on others in the past, knowing that in my circles for the most part, there was a higher chance of so-called herd immunity, or protection. But that is not a responsible stance. And I hope that folks understand that in the battle with the disease we have today, that spreads so easily between people, that we safeguard our freedoms while not embarking simultaneously on courses that harm others. That means getting vaccinated, that means not going to large scale events without masks where one could be infected or infect others casually, that means not turning hygiene into an issue that divides Americans but rather one we can approach constructively and together.   We are having a struggle throughout the country today on how to balance freedoms and responsibilities. This debate won’t be solved easily or quickly. But one can hope for constructive and magnanimous approaches. When it comes to vaccines, seriously — there is only one responsible answer for the flu. And when we finally get a COVID-19 vaccine, everyone who is eligible should want it.    – Steve Clemons Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE   ICYMI: catch up on this week's programs        On Thursday, The Hill hosted “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy anchored by Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE.  Watch the full program video here.   On Wednesday, The Hill hosted “The Vir[Tech]tual World of Tomorrow.”    Watch the full program video here.  We want to hear from you! Follow us @TheHillEvents and keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE  There are 5,159,674 reported cases of COVID-19 around the world and 335,418 recorded deaths as of the time of this newsletter.    The U.S. is reporting 1,588,322 cases and 95,276 deaths. Russia’s 326,448 cases are the second most in the world. Brazil is reporting 310,087 cases. 255,533 in the U.K. 234,824 in Spain. 228,658 in Italy. 181,951 in France. 179,278 in Germany. 153,548 in Turkey. 131,652 in Iran. India is reporting 124,073 cases. China 84,081. Canada 82,798. Saudi Arabia 67,719. Mexico 59,567. Belgium 56,511. Pakistan 50,694. Sweden 32,809 Singapore 30,426. South Korea 11,142. Czechia 8,757. Azerbaijan 3,855. Sudan 3,138. Bulgaria 2,372.    New York is reporting 358,154 cases. New Jersey 152,581. Illinois 102,688. Massachusetts 90,084. California 88,480. Pennsylvania is reporting 69,902 cases. 53,510 in Michigan. 53,061 in Texas. 44,424 in Maryland. 30,411 in Indiana. 30,167 in Ohio. 23,191 in Colorado. 19,117 in Washington. 19,019 in Minnesota. 18,961 in Tennessee. 13,885 in Wisconsin. 12,625 in Mississippi. 11,697 in Missouri. 7,893 in the District of Columbia. 7,874 in Utah.  The U.S. has conducted 13,056,206 COVID-19 tests – yes, the most in the world but whether that’s “a badge of honor” as the president said is up for debate. 298,418 full recoveries from the coronavirus have been reported in the U.S.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Trump lashes out at scientists whose findings contradict him. “A Trump enemy statement,” he said of one study. “A political hit job,” he said of another. As President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE pushes to reopen the country despite warnings from doctors about the consequences of moving too quickly during the coronavirus crisis, he has been lashing out at scientists whose conclusions he doesn’t like. Twice this week, Trump has not only dismissed the findings of studies but suggested — without evidence — that their authors were motivated by politics and out to undermine his efforts to roll back coronavirus restrictions. (Associated Press)    Fauci says media will be “seeing more” of him, coronavirus task force after press hiatus. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE, the nation's top infectious disease expert, said the public will begin “seeing more” of him and other public health officials after weeks without making official press appearances. During a CNN global town hall, network anchor Anderson Cooper said that many Americans want to hear from Fauci, Deborah Birx and others on the White House coronavirus task force every day. The last time Fauci was at the podium at the White House was April 22. (The Hill)    Congress headed toward unemployment showdown. With the national unemployment rate expected to creep toward 20 percent in the months ahead, the fight over whether to boost benefits for Americans who lose their jobs or to keep benefits lean to motivate laid-off employees to rejoin the workforce is set to become a defining issue ahead of the election. (The Hill)    Biden says he would make COVID-19 vaccine free for everyone in U.S. Presumptive 2020 Democratic presidential nominee Joe BidenJoe BidenOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Davis: 72 hours cementing the real choice for November OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump signs order removing environmental reviews for major projects | New Trump air rule will limit future pollution regulations, critics say | DNC climate group calls for larger federal investment on climate than Biden plan MORE said on CNBC that if he were president, a coronavirus vaccine would be free for everyone in the United States. “I tell you what, if one is found, I would make sure that every single person in America is able to get a vaccine, period, without any cost,” Biden told “Squawk Box.” (CNBC)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Senate Minority Leader Charles SchumerCharles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerGOP lawmaker calls on Senate to confirm Michael Pack as head of US media agency McConnell blocks resolution condemning Trump over treatment of protesters House Democrat demands answers from Secret Service about role breaking up White House protests MORE (D-N.Y.)  @SenSchumer It’s May 22nd, and President Trump still doesn’t have an adequate national testing strategy.    Sen. Susan CollinsSusan Margaret CollinsOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump GOP Sen. Murkowski 'struggling' with whether to vote for Trump  MORE (R-Maine)  @SenatorCollins The announcement of another COVID-19 outbreak at a long-term care facility in Maine is a tragic reminder that the residents & staff at nursing homes are at the highest risk to this virus. It is imperative that we implement universal COVID-19 testing at nursing homes.   Sen. Joe ManchinJoseph (Joe) ManchinDemocratic unity starts to crack in coronavirus liability reform fight Stakes high for Collins in coronavirus relief standoff The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Surgeon General stresses need to invest much more in public health infrastructure, during and after COVID-19; Fauci hopeful vaccine could be deployed in December  MORE (D-W.Va.)  @Sen_JoeManchin I again urge the state to distribute a portion of the $1.25B it has received from Congress through the CARES Act to cover these eligible expenses for West Virginians before it is too late, and to do this without burdening local governments with additional bureaucratic hurdles.  ACROSS THE NATION        My colleagues Alicia Cohn and Justine Coleman have a great piece in The Hill breaking down where every state falls in the reopening process. See where your state stands here.   The pandemic may forever change the world’s cities. In most cities, life is a shadow of what it once was, with streets empty, arenas abandoned, businesses shuttered. Well-heeled residents have skipped town to country abodes and seaside getaways. Most of those who remain have slipped into an atomized existence — their movements curtailed, their social circles exponentially shrunk — that’s anathema to the whole point of living in a bustling, vibrant city. (Washington Post)    Beach towns have a message for New York City residents: go away. Since the coronavirus pandemic began, tensions have repeatedly flared over whether too many New York City residents have decamped to outlying vacation areas, potentially taking the virus with them. But now the region appears on the brink of a full-fledged (and nasty) battle over beaches, touched off by the city’s decision to keep its shoreline closed. (New York Times)  States, companies set up their own COVID-19 legal shields. States and some companies aren’t waiting for Congress and the White House to work out a possible liability shield and are instead taking steps to insulate businesses on their own from lawsuits in the coronavirus era. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW         Battered by coronavirus, China maps out an economic reality check for a new era. The calamitous economic impact of the virus was laid bare Friday when the party declined to set a growth target for 2020, for the first time since it began setting such a goal in 1994. “I would like to point out that we have not set a specific target for economic growth this year,” Premier Li Keqiang when delivering his “work report” at the grandiose opening of the National People’s Congress in Beijing. “This is because our country will face some factors that are difficult to predict in its development due to the great uncertainty regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and the world economic and trade environment.” (Washington Post)   Madrid and Barcelona shops and outdoor restaurants to open Monday. After 2½ months of strict lockdown to stem the spread of the coronavirus, Madrid and Barcelona will be allowed to take the first steps to loosen restrictions next week, Spain’s government announced Friday, authorizing the cities to move to phase one of an official deconfinement plan. (Washington Post)   SCIENCE  Anti-malaria drug touted by President Trump has high death risk in COVID-19 patients, new study shows. Hospitalized COVID-19 patients who were treated with hydroxychloroquine, an anti-malaria drug touted by President Trump, had a much higher risk of death than those who were not, according to a new study of 96,000 patients. The study, published Friday in the medical journal The Lancet, found that patients who were treated with hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine also faced a much higher risk of abnormal heartbeats, called arrhythmias, which could result in cardiac arrest. (The Hill)    Fauci is confident U.S. could have coronavirus vaccine by December. It is “conceivable” that the U.S. could begin to roll out a coronavirus vaccine by December, the White House’s top infectious disease expert said Friday. “I think it is conceivable, if we don’t run into things that are, as they say, unanticipated setbacks, that we could have a vaccine that we could be beginning to deploy at the end of this calendar year,” Anthony Fauci said. (CNBC)    Inflamed brains, toe rashes, strokes: Why COVID-19’s weirdest symptoms are only emerging. As the pandemic continues to ravage the world, case reports have emerged of more unusual damage ranging from hundreds of tiny blood clots to strokes in young people, and even mysterious inflammatory responses, such as full-body rashes in children and the red lesions that have come to be known unofficially as COVID toe. (National Geographic)   BUSINESS  Stimulus checks worked, many retailers say, but the bump may be short lived. During Walmart’s earnings call on Tuesday, CEO Doug McMillon said the big-box retailer has seen different phases of shopping during the coronavirus pandemic. In the final weeks of April, another trend emerged: Customers were buying more TVs, clothing, sporting goods and toys with money they got in stimulus checks from the U.S. government. (CNBC)  Royal Carribean aims for tentative Aug. 1 set-sail date. Royal Caribbean has further suspended most cruises through July, with voyages set to begin on Aug. 1 as the travel company plans for business after the novel coronavirus pandemic, the company announced. Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd, which earlier in the week announced a loss of $1.4 billion in the first quarter after the virus forced its entire fleet to port, will extend the suspension of all fleets, except ships traveling from China, the company said in a Wednesday press release. (Fox Business)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS  Digital contact tracing: The Trojan horse in the battle over data. Both in the U.S. and in the global context, the patchy data governance landscape — diverging political priorities and technical issues such interoperability to guarantee systems can work across borders — means interstate and international cooperation is paramount to ensure efficiency and gain trust. (Sophia Ignatidou for The Hill)  The age of handshakes may be over — so how to seal the deal now? Maintain eye contact, smile warmly, and use your voice tone to politely and enthusiastically greet them along with a slight nod of your head. As you do this, you have some options: Keep your arms firmly down by your side, or keep your hands clasped behind your back; hold your right hand over your heart and add a slight bow; or hold something in your right hand like a clutch, briefcase, iPad or even your other hand, so it is otherwise preoccupied and less apt to automatically pop out for that handshake. (Catherine C. Wallace for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS Tooth Fairy thanks “considerate” girl who gifted her mask to protect from COVID-19. After losing a tooth, one Michigan girl wanted to make sure the Tooth Fairy was following proper coronavirus safety measures. The girl, Evolette, didn't want to leave the tooth under her pillow unless she knew the Tooth Fairy would be properly protected with a mask of her own. With help from her mom, Evolette sewed a tiny mask for the tooth fairy and left it on her nightstand with a note to the tooth fairy. (Good Morning America)  Melania TrumpMelania TrumpTrump was rushed to White House bunker due to breach of temporary barricades: report The Memo: Nation nears a breaking point Washington archbishop criticizes Trump visit to Catholic shrine MORE thanks students in video message during CNN town hall. First lady Melania Trump in a video message Thursday evening recognized the changes America’s students have had to make in their lives during the coronavirus pandemic and commended them for their “determination." “We will only get through this with patience, compassion and care,” the first lady said. “Tonight, please know that the president and I are with you during these challenging times and we continue to do everything we can to support you.” (The Hill)   ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. LEE ZELDIN (R-N.Y.)  > Steve interviews former Maryland Lt. Gov. and ex-RNC Chairman MICHAEL STEELE  > Steve interviews former U.S. Energy Secretary ERNEST MONIZ  > Steve interviews Sen. JOE MANCHIN (D-W.Va.)  > Steve interviews Mylan CEO HEATHER BRESCH  > Steve interviews Wilson Center President and CEO JANE HARMAN  > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  > Steve interviews Mastercard CEO AJAY BANGA  > Steve interviews Teva USA President and CEO BRENDAN O’GRADY  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.    VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVE The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Surgeon General Jerome Adams. Read excerpts from the interview below  Adams: We need to make sure we're reopening in a way that is can data driven. That takes into account the assets and the deficits and challenges that take place in different communities. And I think that's one of the things that's hard for people to really wrap their heads around is just how big and how different the United States is. What you're going to do in Idaho is going to be very different than what you're going to do in New York. But I tell people, just as we have an epidemic of virus, we also have an epidemic of misinformation. So the most important thing for people to take away is to go to coronavirus.gov. Go to whitehouse.gov/openingamerica. ... Now to get more specific: From my perspective, I try to make things easily digestible. I talked about the two "S"s and the two "C"s. The two "S"s are surveillance and separation and the two "C"s are cleaning and coverage. It's important to know from a surveillance perspective what is going on in your community. And we’re working with states to make sure they have dashboards that show hospitalizations and show case counts and show who's dying and where, so people understand what the burden is in their communities because we know humans are more vigilant when the threat level is higher. ... Separation: We know the disease travels and lives by going person to person. So, the most important thing we can do it maintained 6 feet of physical distance between ourselves and others. From a cleaning point of view, we've got to be better than we've ever been about frequent and thorough hygiene and hand-washing, soap and water for 20 seconds. And then from a coverage perspective: If you go out in public, please, please wear a face covering to protect other people from the virus, who might be unknowingly spreading. And please cover your cough or sneeze with a tissue.   Clemons: How confident are you that we're getting all of the elements in place, including personal protective equipment, contact tracing and testing? That we're going to be able to reopen the economy responsibly? Adams: We've learned a lot about this virus in the last several weeks. We've also increased capacity on a federal on a state and on a local level. Thank you to America for really doing your part and helping us flatten the curve. Remember, flattening the curve wasn't about saying we're going to get rid of the virus. The virus is going to be here for a while. Flattening the curve wasn't about saying that the virus is not going to be as contagious or as deadly. It was really about making sure we didn't overwhelm our health care capacity and that we continue to build up our health care capacity to respond. And most places across the country have successfully done that. But we still have to figure out how we live with the virus. And, so, we know now, again, more about spread and we have take precautions. ... We also know that hospitals have better personal protective equipment, have more ventilators, have more capability to be able to respond. And so, while we're not saying it is without risk to reopen — we certainly feel like we have more tools available at the local and at the state levels and at the federal level when you look at the national stockpile to be able to respond quickly if we see a resurgence and to not have as high of a peak as we had previously.   Clemons: What are those rosters of things that you think we need to stop looking at as boutique, silly things that other people do, that we're all going to have to become much more comfortable with, that we have to begin building in to our social interactions. Adams: Well, everyone asks: "When are we going to get back to normal?" I think it's important for people to start wrapping their heads around the fact that we aren't going to go back to the way things were. And we really, quite frankly, shouldn't go back to the way things were. There are some silver linings to this and things that we've learned that will help us move forward in the future. For instance, things that protect you from COVID-19 also protect you from flu. And people forget that two years ago, we had a flu season that killed 80,000 people. And so, if we continue to practice good hygiene that will help us on help us prevent flu deaths in the future, even if we are able to overcome COVID-19. We also know that we saw a big decrease in many communities in vaccine confidence over the past several years. And that really concerns me. If we get a vaccine for COVID-19, it is still not going to help out if we don't get people to embrace it. I’m hopeful that as more people are talking about vaccinations that we're going to improve vaccine confidence. Telehealth — we've rapidly expanded access to telehealth services across the nation. ... And even little things, like staying in touch with people, virtually. There are family and friends that I haven't seeing in person in years and who I otherwise wouldn't talk to because culturally, we just think, wait until you see them in person. But that said, we've been in touch with them virtually now because COVID-19 has really increased people's utilization of Zoom of Skype of FaceTime with some of these technologies out there that can promote connectedness and togetherness and that ultimately has an impact on our mental health.    Clemons: How do we even out disparities with vulnerable communities and tell me about your community health and economic prosperity initiative? Adams: My Community Health and Economic Prosperity initiative is all about making the case that we can't be successful as businesses, as communities, economically if we don't pay attention to poor health. We know that the number two expense for most companies out there is health care. And we know that the United States have some of the highest health care costs in the world, but we aren't getting value on our investment. We still see infant mortality rates, maternal mortality rates, obesity rates, hypertension rates that are well above the average in a bad way, despite spending more per capita on health care than anyone else in the world. And so my initiative is really ... about helping businesses and communities understand that when you ... invest in clean air laws and when you invest in things that we know give people the opportunity and the environment where they could more easily make healthy choices, that it benefits not just them individually, but it creates a healthier workforce. ... Unemployment numbers coming out today, showing again that when you have a health issue, it ultimately turns into an economic issue. ... We know that when we don't pay attention to these things, that the vulnerable communities, particularly communities of color, suffer disproportionately. And that's not just COVID-19 that has to do with flu, it has to do with cancer, with diabetes with heart disease. And my hope, my true hope from all this is that as we shine a light on these disparities, we can start to dig into some of these underlying causes of disease and really help people not just survive COVID, but help them survive in the long run from chronic diseases, from noncommunicable diseases like high blood pressure, like diabetes and like cancer.   Clemons: One of the issues that's begun to percolate out there is will that vaccine be able to reach those people who can't afford it? Are you confident that we're going to solve the cost problem and access problem once a vaccine is achieved? Adams: Well, I can only speak for me, but to answer your question, yes. Based on my conversations with the task force and throughout HHS and with the secretary, I personally feel confident we will be able to solve the cost and price problem. This is an issue where again people have seen it is far too important — and I've worked for most of my life trying to help people understand why it's important to make the flu vaccine available to people at low or no cost. Because if a person gets the flu, it impacts not just them, but their family and their entire community. We see the same thing with COVID-19. We will not be able to reopen, even if we have a vaccine, if we don't have vaccine uptake. And I know there's a commitment on the part of the federal government and on the part of the business community to making sure vaccines are available for COVID-19 when they become developed at no cost or at extremely low cost. Now, reimbursement and cost is not the same of access. Access still has to be built on a foundation of trust. And so it's important that we make sure we're bringing in vulnerable communities, communities of color and involving them in these studies and also doing outreach to those communities right now to make sure if we do have a vaccine and even if it is free, that they'll come in and get it, or that they will actually take the vaccine.    Clemons: What do you want Americans to hear right now on what they can do on the mental health front? Adams: These problems existed well before the virus came to our doorsteps. They just have been really amplified because of the virus. And what I say to people is that social distancing and physical distancing does not have to mean social disengagement. Again, there's new technologies, new opportunities for people to communicate in ways they never have before. There's really a focus on mental health and a destigmatization of mental health. I'm actually working with the NBA. And with the Prevents task force on veteran suicide prevention to really help people who have traditionally held a lot of stigma in regards to mental health. When you talk about athletes, when you talk about people in the military and to really help them understand that mental health is just as important and should be held in just as high regard as your physical health. And we're really seeing that start to gain some traction now with COVID. One of the things I’d say to people is if you find yourself struggling or just want someone to talk to, remember, you're not alone. There is a help line. Call (800)-273-8255 for free and for support.   Adams: And parents get your kids vaccinated. Critically important. We know that vaccination rates and in recent MMWR are trending down, but it's important to reach out to your physician. ... This time last year, we were fighting outbreaks of measles and we’re set up for them again after COVID-19. We want to make sure we're protecting our most vulnerable, particularly from diseases, for which there is a vaccine. Measles, whooping cough. Please, talk to your provider make an appointment. Figure out how to get your child vaccinated today.WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > 2.4M more Americans jobless, 38.6M unemployed since lockdown began > Lay off the Lysol? CDC now says virus ‘does not spread easily’ via infected surfaces  > Several GOP senators push for more stimulus payments  > Michigan AG: Trump has ‘legal’ and ‘moral responsibility’ to wear mask in Ford plant  > DC could begin phased reopening on May 29, if data continues to show improvements > Sound familiar? 30 years ago today, Fauci took heat from AIDS protesters > Mnuchin tells The Hill’s Bob CusackRobert (Bob) CusackThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Mnuchin: More COVID-19 congressional action ahead On The Money: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | 2.4 million more Americans file new jobless claims | Top bank regulator abruptly announces resignation Overnight Health Care: Trump says US won't close over second COVID-19 wave | Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | Why the US has the most reported coronavirus cases in the world MORE he sees ‘strong likelihood’ of another COVID-19 relief package        THE INTERVIEW U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE anchors The Hill’s Advancing America’s Economy summit  Mnuchin sees “strong likelihood” of needing another COVID-19 relief bill; adds Congress must act to make key PPP change.            Watch this space for the full program video following the conclusion of the summit and watch the full interview with Secretary Mnuchin here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Thursday, May 21.  Editor’s Note.   If you live in Wyoming or San Antonio, Texas, and you are going back to work as a gym attendant or grocery store clerk, a beautician or a lawyer, you are lucky. These places seem to have a surplus of tests for the antibodies if you were previously infected — and are welcoming the public to come in and be tested. But in most of the rest of the nation, testing is not where it needs to be. It shouldn’t require a doctor’s referral, and it shouldn’t require the manifestation of symptoms. We are all hopefully past the point of thinking that one must be coughing or sneezing to infect others with the coronavirus.   While progress is being made, we really are at a sort of standstill when it comes to opening the economy nationwide. Many states are proceeding with opening and doing so according to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines and their own health task force advisers on how to do phased reopenings of public places and business. Stay-at-home orders are shifting, as they have in Maryland, to “safer-at-home” guidance.    We are all in a sort of wait and see period. Will infections spike with reopening? That’s already happening in some places — but not in all. The state of Georgia seems to be faring far better than many expected. We are all feeling our way forward on this. Today I’m interviewing quite a few folks that have perspectives on this knot between assuring public health and getting our economic health moving off life support. The program will be mostly finished by the time you read this note, but it will be available on The Hill’s website and posted on the Coronavirus Report on Friday. Among those I’ll be connecting with are Surgeon General Jerome Adams on what are the vital best practices we all must make mainstream. I’ll be talking to Topeka, Kan., Mayor Michelle De La Isla who has fewer cases than many cities. But we saw what one patient zero in Wuhan a few months ago was able to unleash. I’ll have some time with AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka on how to think about the safety of workers in the workplace, and Sen. Mark WarnerMark Robert WarnerVirginia senator calls for Barr to resign over order to clear protests Trump asserts his power over Republicans Expanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support MORE (D-Va.) on rebalancing the economy and his efforts to put in place paycheck protection guarantees for the next six months. There are going to be private sector CEOs from Mozilla, Siemens North America, Wells Fargo, Citizen, GoDaddy and others. And also the tireless chef Tom Colicchio who has been moving heaven and earth to support struggling restaurants and their workers.   I hope you’ll check in on some of these. No one has all of the answers. We are all experimenting, trying to figure out how to survive and live with the virus — until we can kill it or contain it. Time for all of us to pause, including myself, and learn what we can from smart folks thinking about how to move forward again.   – Steve Clemons Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE  ICYMI: catch up on this week's programs        On Thursday, The Hill hosted “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy anchored by Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin.   Watch this space for the full program video following the conclusion of the summit.    On Wednesday, The Hill hosted “The Vir[Tech]tual World of Tomorrow.”    Watch the full program video here.  We want to hear from you! Follow us @TheHillEvents and keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE  There are 5,047,377 reported cases of COVID-19 and 329,816 reported deaths across the globe as of the time of this newsletter.    The U.S. is reporting 1,562,714 cases and 93,863 deaths. Congressional democratic leaders are asking President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE to fly flags at half-staff once the country reaches 100,000 confirmed deaths, another grim milestone we are likely to surpass within the next few days. Russia is reporting 317,554 cases. Brazil 291,579. 252,234 in the U.K. Spain 233,037. Italy 228,006. France 181,700. Germany 178,748. Turkey 153,548. Iran 129,341. India 115,572. 104,020 reported cases in Peru. 84,063 in China (although that number has met with a great deal of skepticism). 81,617 cases in Canada. 65,077 in Saudi Arabia. 56,594 in Mexico. 38,651 in Qatar. 32,172 in Sweden. 30,694 in Switzerland. 24,315 in Ireland. 20,162 in Indonesia. 19,706 in Ukraine. 19,137 in South Africa. 11,122 in South Korea. 8,743 in Czechia. 1,908 in Cuba. 1,573 in Somalia.    New York is reporting 356,458 cases. New Jersey 150,776. Illinois 100,418. Massachusetts 88,970. Pennsylvania reported 68,911. Michigan, where President Trump will visit a Ford plant Thursday, is reporting 53,009 cases. Texas 51,974. Maryland 43,531. Georgia 40,164. Virginia 34,143. Indiana 29,936. Ohio 29,436. Missouri 11,595. South Carolina 9,175. 8,539 in Kansas. 7,788 in Washington, D.C.    The U.S. has recorded 12,647,791 COVID-19 test results and 294,312 have reported full recoveries from the coronavirus.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Several GOP senators press for more stimulus payments during coronavirus crisis. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE (R-Ky.) has sought to hit pause on the government’s massive spending for coronavirus-related relief packages, but several of his Republican colleagues are pushing for additional stimulus measures during the economic crisis. GOP Sens. Susan CollinsSusan Margaret CollinsOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump GOP Sen. Murkowski 'struggling' with whether to vote for Trump  MORE (Maine), Cory GardnerCory Scott GardnerSenate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion John Hickenlooper defies subpoena to appear for virtual hearing on ethics complaint Senate Republicans urge Trump to tone down rhetoric on protests MORE (Colo) and Josh HawleyJoshua (Josh) David HawleyGOP shifting on unemployment benefits as jobless numbers swell Rosenstein takes fire from Republicans in heated testimony Republicans turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks MORE (Mo.) are all pushing for the Senate to stay in session and take more action to help offset the collapse of the nation’s economy. (Fox News)    Pelosi, Schumer ask Trump to fly flags at half-staff when U.S. reaches 100,000 coronavirus deaths. The top Democrats in Congress are calling on President Trump to order that flags be flown at half-staff at all public buildings on the day the U.S. reaches 100,000 deaths caused by the novel coronavirus. In a letter sent to the president Thursday, Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE (D-Calif.) and Senate Minority Leader Charles SchumerCharles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerGOP lawmaker calls on Senate to confirm Michael Pack as head of US media agency McConnell blocks resolution condemning Trump over treatment of protesters House Democrat demands answers from Secret Service about role breaking up White House protests MORE (D-N.Y.) wrote that the tribute would serve as a "national expression of grief so needed by everyone." (The Hill)  Trump takes pandemic fight to Michigan. President Trump on Thursday is visiting 2020 battleground state Michigan as he seeks to contrast his handling of the pandemic with that of the state’s Democratic leaders. Trump’s visit to a Ford plant manufacturing ventilators in Ypsilanti will mark his third trip to a critical swing state in as many weeks. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. John KennedyJohn Neely KennedyMORE (R-La.)  @SenJohnkennedy The #PaycheckProtectionProgram wasn’t made to funnel taxpayer money to Planned Parenthood, but its affiliates asked for about $80M in PPP dollars—and reportedly got the money. How did this happen, and how can it be made right? We’re asking AG Barr to investigate.   Sen. Jacky RosenJacklyn (Jacky) Sheryl RosenThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of another relief package; Warner says some businesses 'may not come back' at The Hill's Advancing America's Economy summit  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: CDC Director Redfield responds to Navarro criticism; Mnuchin and Powell brief Senate panel Hillicon Valley: Experts raise security concerns about online voting | Musk finds supporter in Trump | Officials warn that Chinese hackers targeting COVID-19 research groups MORE (D-Nev.)  @SenJackyRosen Latino communities have been disproportionately affected by lack of health care, affordable housing, & employment for generations. #COVID19 is showing us how life-threatening these disparities can be.    Rep. Andy Biggs (R-Ariz.)  @RepAndyBiggsAz .@realDonaldTrump has expressed a desire to restore our economic greatness and the positives that come w/ it — including better public health — by opening up our communities. We must forge ahead even as Fauci tries to brush away the optimism.  ACROSS THE NATION  Why does the U.S have the most coronavirus cases in the world? President said Tuesday the fact that the United States has the most coronavirus cases in the world is a “badge of honor” because it shows how much testing the country is doing. While there are many factors at play when comparing how countries have fared in the coronavirus pandemic, public health experts say Trump’s explanation left out a key factor: The U.S. has so many cases because it was initially slow to respond to the outbreak and ramp up testing and other containment tools. (The Hill)    D.C. could begin phased reopening as early as May 29, mayor says. D.C. Mayor Muriel Bowser says the district could begin a phased reopening May 29 if data continues to show improvements. “We are going to monitor throughout the weekend the trends that we see,” Bowser said. “And if those trends hold next week, by the end of next week, we will be able to communicate the start of our phased reopening.” (WTOP)  Michigan barbers cut hair on Capitol lawn to protest coronavirus shutdown. A protest in Lansing, Mich., against stay-at-home orders focused on what has become a rallying cry for such demonstrations — haircuts. The Capitol lawn was turned into a barber shop. At least a dozen barbers and stylists, highlighting the damage to their shuttered businesses, set up card tables and generators to power the clippers, and people lined up. (NPR)    Michigan AG: If Trump “fails to wear a mask, he’s going to be asked not to return to any enclosed facility inside our state.” Michigan will ask President Trump to stay out of “enclosed facilities” in the state if he refuses to wear a mask during his Thursday visit to a Ford plant in Ypsilanti, says state Attorney General Dana Nessel. “Obviously here in Michigan we’ve been particularly hard-hit by the COVID-19," Nessel said Thursday on CNN’s “New Day,” noting that auto manufacturing facilities have only recently reopened amid the coronavirus pandemic. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW   Living through a pandemic when your access to water is difficult. The most basic ingredient for mankind’s survival is also a critical weapon against the novel coronavirus. Wash your hands with soap and water for 30 seconds, scientists say. Drink eight glasses of water a day. Stay hydrated and hygienic. But access to clean water is dramatically uneven across the world. About a third of Nigeria’s population — 60 million people — must leave home to find it, according to aid groups and government statistics. (Washington Post)     ‘We’re expendable’: Russian doctors face hostility, mistrust. There are no daily public displays of gratitude for Russian doctors and nurses during the coronavirus crisis like there are in the West. Instead of applause, they face mistrust, low pay and even open hostility. (Associated Press)      Juncker: EU internal border closures “nonsense.” Former European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker voiced his opposition to internal border closures across the EU, branding them as “nonsense” in an interview with German broadcaster Deutsche Welle. (Politico)   SCIENCE  Lay off the Lysol? CDC says coronavirus primarily spreads through person-to-person contact and “does not spread easily on contaminated surfaces.” While touching infected surfaces has always been part of the messaging on how the virus spreads, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recently shifted its stance online. The CDC now says that COVID-19 spreads from person-to-person contact, and then lists touching infected surfaces under a section titled, "The virus does not spread easily in other ways."    Read the full CDC report on the spread of the virus here.   BUSINESS  2.4 million more Americans file new jobless claims. 2.4 million Americans filed new claims for unemployment insurance last week as the U.S. suffers through the highest level of joblessness since the Great Depression, according to data released Thursday by the Labor Department. The new wave of applications brings the total number of initial unemployment claims since the week ending March 22 to 38.6 million. (The Hill)  Home sales dropped nearly 18 percent in April, while decline in inventory pushed prices to a record high. The economic fallout from the coronavirus hit the housing market hard in April. Sales of existing homes fell 17.8 percent month-to-month, and were 17.2 percent lower than April 2019, seasonally adjusted, according to the National Association of Realtors. That puts the annualized pace at 4.33 million units, the slowest sales pace since September 2011. (CNBC)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS  What Congress needs to include for the next economic relief legislation. Policymakers have rightly focused on public health needs and minimizing the economic blow of this crisis by sending Americans stimulus payments and starting the new Paycheck Protection Program. These need to be the priorities for the government. (Director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Kathy Kraninger for The Hill)    Hydroxychloroquine-gate and Trump’s war on medical science. Trump has turned the pandemic into a zero-sum game. If he wins his battle against medical science, the coronavirus will win its battle against us. (Gregory J. Wallance for The Hill)  Three decades before coronavirus, Fauci took heat from AIDS protesters. “Act Up, Fight Back, Fight AIDS!” The angry chanting grew louder as hundreds of protesters wove through the usually placid campus of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., on May 21, 1990. For months, the AIDS Coalition Unleash Power (ACT UP), had been urging Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE formally to include their members in the government’s development process for AIDS drugs. Fauci, now under attack by some Trump supporters for his response to the coronavirus pandemic, was in favor of the group’s participation. But he met increasing resistance from the scientific community, who were put off by ACT UP’s tactics. (Washington Post)   GENEROUS SPIRITS Twitter’s Jack Dorsey to donate $5 million to Andrew YangAndrew YangGeorge Floyd protests show corporations must support racial and economic equality Andrew Yang discusses his universal basic income pilot program Andrew Yang on the George Floyd protests in Minneapolis MORE’s foundation. Twitter founder and CEO Jack Dorsey is donating $5 million to businessman and former Democratic presidential candidate Andrew Yang’s group Humanity Forward as a foundation to build a universal basic income (UBI). Rolling Stone reports that Dorsey plans to give $1 billion of his wealth through a fund called Start Small. The official announcement was reportedly made on Yang’s podcast, “Yang Speaks.” (The Hill)   ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. LEE ZELDIN (R-N.Y.)  > Steve interviews former Maryland Lt. Gov. and ex-RNC Chairman MICHAEL STEELE  > Steve interviews former U.S. Energy Secretary ERNEST MONIZ  > Steve interviews Sen. JOE MANCHIN (D-W.Va.)  > Steve interviews Mylan CEO HEATHER BRESCH  > Steve interviews Wilson Center President and CEO JANE HARMAN  > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  > Steve interviews Mastercard CEO AJAY BANGA  > Steve interviews Teva USA President and CEO BRENDAN O’GRADY  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.   VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Bob CusackRobert (Bob) CusackThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Mnuchin: More COVID-19 congressional action ahead On The Money: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | 2.4 million more Americans file new jobless claims | Top bank regulator abruptly announces resignation Overnight Health Care: Trump says US won't close over second COVID-19 wave | Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | Why the US has the most reported coronavirus cases in the world MORE interviews Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE. Read excerpts from the interview below. Cusack: Several Senate Republicans said yesterday they want to see some action now on the next relief package. Is another package necessary? And if so, when?    Cusack: When is the last time you've communicated with the Speaker about a possible next package? Mnuchin: Well, I spoke to the Speaker last week. Our conversation was really more about the execution of the current CARES Act and was not focused on the next steps. What I would say is, I'm very pleased that the last two bills that were passed were 96-0 and 100-0 in the Senate. They had overwhelming bipartisan support. I mean, this is really extraordinary times. The whole Senate came together and I would hope that the next bill we do has overwhelming bipartisan support and the Speaker's bill obviously is a partisan bill, so that's not something we're focusing on at the moment.   Cusack: A lot of Americans are angry, and they're angry at China. Is China going to be held accountable in any way? Mnuchin: Well, I understand why Americans are angry, and I think they have the right to be angry. And it's not just Americans, it's the rest of the world. And I would start with people, want information. People want to know what went on with the virus. And I think that China should be held accountable first by at least giving information and understanding what went on and how to combat this.   Cusack: President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE has talked about a transportation bill, the possibility of it being a stimulus down the road. Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE, the Senate majority leader, is not a big fan of that approach. Should Congress, at some point this year, for another stimulus, pass some type of transportation bill? Mnuchin: Well, I think as you know, the president's been very focused on infrastructure, going back to the campaign, and that was part of the president's platform: to rebuild our roads, our bridges, our dams and the nation's infrastructure, as well as cutting-edge infrastructure such as rural broadband. So, I think that's something that Congress is going to need to look at. I'd say whether we do it is part of the coronavirus bill or whether we do it separately. That's something that is on the president's agenda.   Cusack: How many jobs has the PPP program saved to this date? Mnuchin: I think it's about 50 million jobs, and I think by the time we get through this it will be 60 million jobs and it's, you know, it wasn't perfect getting up and running. But what was important was we developed a program from scratch. We knew that if it took four months to get up and running, it wasn't going to help it all. It was unprecedented. We got this up in a few weeks, we got money out the door and this is a major part of the U.S. economy — is small and medium sized businesses. And we wanted to protect the workers and, just as important, we wanted to keep those workers attached to the business so that when the businesses could safely open, they had the workers attached to them.   Cusack: As you know, Congress has replenished the PPP. When will the PPP need to be replenished again? How much time do we have? Mnuchin: Well, right now we have over $100 billion left in it. One of the things we are working with Congress on — and there is bipartisan support — is lengthening the eight-week period. One of the things that companies are having an issue with is because they have been closed and they're rehiring workers. I know there's bipartisan support to extend that to 10 or 12 weeks. I know the restaurants had asked for 24 weeks, but that's something we definitely want to fix. Doesn't cost us any more money. And there is bipartisan support.   Cusack: As far as that eight-week provision, as you mentioned Congress is talking about that. There are some that say that you could do that administratively. Can you do that administratively as well as a 75-25 provision or does that have to be done by Congress — both of them? Mnuchin: Well, the eight weeks I wish I could do administratively, if I could, we’d already do it. Now let me just comment on the 75-25, because I think there's been a little bit of confusion on this issue. So, when the program was designed and again, let me just remind people it’s called the Paycheck Protection Program, it's not called the overhead protection program. It was designed that you got eight weeks of payroll plus 25 percent for overhead, which we thought was a reasonable amount. But the real purpose here was to get people back to work. When we came up with the 75 percent test, it was just a belt and suspender test — as we thought is how the program was designed, which again, was the eight weeks plus the 25 percent. We did not think the intent to the program was to have 50 percent spent on workers and 50 percent spent on overhead, and obviously we're somewhat concerned. I mean, we realized people do have more overhead. They can go out and take an idle loan, which is a 30-year SBA loan, to pay back. But we want most of this money to go to workers and we believe that the 75 percent was exactly consistent with the way the program was designed.   Cusack: There are roughly around 30 companies — public companies — that say they won't return the money that they received in this loan-grant program. They say that the goal posts have been changed. Will you go after these companies? And why, if it is saving jobs after all? Mnuchin: Well, let me just comment that there was a certification that was in the application, that the funds were necessary. And, as I've said before, there were a few companies that kind of became the poster child for the public being upset. I've said this before. I'm a big fan of the Los Angeles Lakers. They're one of my favorite teams. We did not envision this was a program for the Los Angeles Lakers. They obviously have the financial means to pay their players and pay their support staff. Also, as you look at Shake Shack, which was a large public company. Again, they have the financial means. Whether they want to pay their people or not is completely up to them. But I don't think those were the types of companies that we thought could make the certification. So, I came out early in defending the program, and again it was a small number of companies in, you know, what's over 4 1/2 million loans. This is a small number of companies that jeopardize the program, and we did say that we would review and hold accountable anybody who has a loan over $2 million. Now, I think some legitimate companies got very concerned about the liability, so we toned that down and we said, "OK, well, if you go through your review and you pay back the money, the SBA will not refer you to any other further enforcement actions." But yes, the bigger loans will be reviewed — they’ll be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. Companies can make their arguments, no different than you go through any review.   Cusack: There's a lawsuit pending about the nonpublic companies. Media organizations have said they deserve the right to see who is getting this taxpayer money. Do you agree with that? That the public deserves to know who's getting the money, whether they're public or not public? Mnuchin: Well, let me just comment. I very much support oversight and transparency. And when we negotiate this bipartisan bill, we added in unprecedented oversight and transparency. We created a new inspector general or various parts of this. We created an oversight committee that is bipartisan. And in the Fed programs, we specifically agreed within fourteen days to release the names of companies. And that was something there was interest in. I think in the PPP, it does not require disclosure. And I think the concern was that there is proprietary information because it's tied off of payroll, that that should not be in the public domain. But again, that's something that will be discussed.   Cusack: The House has set up a special panel that congressional Republicans oppose. They say it's not necessary to oversee this specific committee because there's a lot of other oversight built into the law. If you were asked to testify before this House panel, would you? Mnuchin: I can't comment on that. I haven't really reviewed it one way or another with my internal legal team and others. What I would say is I testified this week at the Senate Banking Committee with [Federal Reserve] Chairman Jay Powell that is required on a quarterly basis. We absolutely plan on doing that. And again, I would just emphasize there's a specific oversight committee that was set up that consists of Republicans and Democrats. I'm not exactly sure why the House needs to set up another committee. And again, there are other committees that that the House does have jurisdiction that Chair Powell and I will testify before.   Cusack: CBO recently has predicted that unemployment will be 10 percent-plus this year into next. Do you agree with that prediction? Mnuchin: Well, let me just comment, and this is nothing against CBO, and this is nothing against the rest of the economic models. We're in an unprecedented situation. This unemployment was not a result of bad economic issues. This is result of medical issues. So, I think it's very hard to predict. A lot of it depends on the reopening of the economy. A lot of it depends on as we make advances in virals, vaccines and testing, and people feel comfortable. So I think the economic models, quite frankly, follow the medical models, and I think it's too premature to predict those things. What I do think is the second quarter is obviously going to be a dreadful quarter because literally, it's like we took the water faucet and we turned it off, so nothing came through. And now we're slowly reopening the economy. So I think we will bottom out in the second quarter. I think the third and fourth quarter will be better. And as the president has said and I have said, with the great advancement in medical progress in killing this virus, we expect our economy will be great again next year.   Cusack: You said this spring that the fourth quarter would be gigantic. Are you tempering expectations? Mnuchin: Again, I'm not tempering. What I'm saying is, when you come off of a low number of closing down the economy, you're going to have very, very big increases. So, yes, I think you're going to see a very large — call it a gigantic increase — in the fourth quarter.   Cusack: Regarding production, some have called the administration to use more of the Defense Production Act, which the administration has employed, but does the administration plan to do more of that as far as manufacturing? Mnuchin: Well, it's a very important tool. It should be used carefully. I know the president is very much willing to use it if we need to use it. I got an update on vaccines yesterday in the investments that BARDA is making, which I think is really terrific. And in many cases, they have commitments to take over large amounts of the vaccines. But the Defense Protection Act is a very important tool to protect the American workers, and if the president needs to use it, he will.   Cusack: The president has said the Postal Service should charge more for carriers like Amazon and others. Do you think that should be looked at? And maybe the Postal Service should charge Amazon more? Mnuchin: Well, we've already looked at this, so let me just give you the history here. I chaired the federal financing bank. The post office is the largest creditor of the federal financing bank. So last year, I asked my team to give me a financial update. I was shocked at how bad it was. I updated the president on that. As a result of that, he asked me to chair a task force, and we've put together a complete plan to fix the post office. Let me also just say, when we came into office, there were no governors. Again, this is just outrageous. This is kind of corporate 101. There was no oversight on the post office. So the postal board of governors didn't have anybody. We now have a fully functioning governance board. People appointed by Congress, both sides of the aisle. I think that's extremely important. They ran a search. They've just hired a new postmaster general, someone with terrific business experience. And during the last bill, people thought the post office was going to run out of money, so they wanted to throw the post office $10 billion. I said, "that's not fair. Let's give them a loan if they need more money." The good news is, as of now, the package deliveries are up over 50 percent to offset the mail. As of now, they don't need to use the loan. So, I absolutely think the president is right. We want transparency on these agreements. ... Right now, the post office is doing amazing job delivering things to people as they're at home. An amazing job. We just want to make sure that the post office is paid fairly and isn't subsidizing that business. The first-class mail business is a business that should be subsidized. The package business, and again, what I'm talking about is the overnight package business. I'm not talking about if you take your package to the post office and send it cross-country, what I'm talking about is overnight business that services Amazon, eBay and others — that shouldn't be subsidized by taxpayers.   Cusack: An unusual program has come out of the State Department. It's been reported — it’s called the Eagle Plan, where Social Security recipients could get a $5,000 or $10,000 payment in exchange for reducing their retirement benefits down the road. It's very odd this is coming out of the State Department. Is this something that's going to come out from the administration? Mnuchin: No, it's not something that we're considering at this point. It did come out of the economics group. And we look at lots of things. I think, as you know, Social Security is very important to the president, and, we’ll look at other options if people need money.   Cusack: The president and vice president have been tested regularly. Have you been tested, and will you continue to be tested in the weeks ahead? Mnuchin: I am also tested on a regular basis because I am in pretty much daily contact with the president, the vice president and others. The White House has thought it prudent. And [with] these Abbott machines, it’s a very easy process. I hope we can get more and more of these Abbott machines into the workforce. I think in many places, if people could go into work and could get tested, they'd be much more confident in going to work. But yes, just as a precaution. Because I'm around the president on a regular basis, I do get tested. I’m happy to report I don’t have it.WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > ‘We’ve been muzzled’: CDC sources say White House putting politics ahead of science > CDC quietly released more detailed guidelines for reopening   > Navajo Nation, under strict lockdown, surpasses New York for highest infection rate per capita in US  > Coca-Cola CEO: Economic impact of pandemic ‘just starting to begin’  > Prototype vaccine protects monkeys from COVID-19, a promising sign that a human vaccine is possible  > Scientists propose a 50 days on, 30 days off lockdown strategy to combat virus          The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is dominating headlines today. In my interview with CDC Director Robert Redfield yesterday, he said that the U.S. is ready to reopen and predicted hiring tens of thousands more contact tracers.     See my colleague Brett Samuels’ write-up of the interview here. And watch the full video here.    CNN is reporting that CDC officials say they have been “muzzled” and the White House is putting politics ahead of science. In interviews with the network, CDC officials say their agency's efforts to mount a coordinated response to the COVID-19 pandemic have been hamstrung by a White House whose decisions are driven by politics rather than science. The result has worsened the effects of the crisis, sources inside the CDC say, relegating the 73-year-old agency that has traditionally led the nation's response to infectious disease to a supporting role. In other news, the CDC quietly released more detailed guidance for reopening schools, businesses, transit systems and other industries after fears that the White House had shelved the guidelines. The 60-page document, which a CDC spokesman said was uploaded over the weekend, but which received little notice, adds great detail to six charts that the CDC released last week. (New York Times)   THE INTERVIEW Double Header!  Ajay Banga, President and CEO of Mastercard, says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now, adds Digital I.D. distributed system is way to enhance security and move economy forward post-COVID, says we need ethical innovation framework that puts citizen and customer first.        Watch the full interview here.      Brendan O’Grady, President and CEO, Teva USA says globalized drug supply chain a strength, says repatriation of production would require price stability commitments, says US produces almost no drug active ingredients (API), says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like it does with the Strategic Oil Reserve.        Watch the full interview here.     THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Wednesday, May 20.  Editor’s Note.  What will the future look like? And will you and I fit in it or not? That is what I discussed today in a meeting organized by The Hill titled “The Vir-tech-ual World,” underwritten by Nokia, with Rep. Suzan DelBeneSuzan Kay DelBeneExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support House Democrats press Treasury on debit cards used for coronavirus relief payments Hillicon Valley: Trump threatens Michigan, Nevada over mail-in voting | Officials call for broadband expansion during pandemic | Democrats call for investigation into Uber-Grubhub deal MORE (D-Wash.) as well as Federal Communications Commission Commissioner Michael O’Rielly and others. We are barreling head first into an internet of things world, gadgets connected to people, which are in turn sending data to other sensors, which are connected to other gadgets. Trillions of “things” — animate and inanimate — are about to become tied together. That requires some degree of trust, but it also requires competence and literacy.    But trust and literacy take time — and the coronavirus has robbed us all of that. We may have talked about the shift from analog to digital these past many years — but the analog world is now like the Oklahoma Dust Bowl of the 1930s with everyone rushing to California’s orange groves for their future and jobs. Like John Steinbeck painted in “The Grapes of Wrath,” there are going to be major problems in this new digital ecosystem that COVID-19 has shoved both the willing and unwilling into. And there are many that won’t be connected, and haven’t been connected even before we got to an IoT and 5G world.     The COVID-19 crisis has laid bare many of the inequities in our society as my panelists Francella Ochillo of Next Century Cities, Superintendent Michael Hinojosa of the Dallas Independent School District, and Jason Oxman of the Information Technology Industry Council made clear and which Nokia’s Brian Hendricks pondered as we race to modernize and add more technology and connectivity into the mix. What was clear in a world ravaged by COVID-19, there is an ever greater urgency to solve these problems of the past that haunt society — and to just fix them. Some are doing that, but it takes money — and lots of money is churning out of Washington. But it takes political will and steady focus. That may be the toughest part.   Watch the full program here.    – Steve Clemons   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.  THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE  Thursday, 11 a.m. EDT | Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE to join The Hill’s Editor in Chief Bob CusackRobert (Bob) CusackThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Mnuchin: More COVID-19 congressional action ahead On The Money: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | 2.4 million more Americans file new jobless claims | Top bank regulator abruptly announces resignation Overnight Health Care: Trump says US won't close over second COVID-19 wave | Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | Why the US has the most reported coronavirus cases in the world MORE        On Thursday, The Hill will host “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy. The summit will feature three one-hour segments, beginning at 11 a.m. EDT.    Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin joins The Hill’s Editor in Chief Bob Cusack for a keynote interview followed by an afternoon of discussion with leading CEOs and national health experts including:    > U.S. Surgeon General Jerome Adams  > Sen. Mark WarnerMark Robert WarnerVirginia senator calls for Barr to resign over order to clear protests Trump asserts his power over Republicans Expanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support MORE (D-Va.) > Sen. Ben CardinBenjamin (Ben) Louis CardinOn The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility GOP senator blocks bill giving flexibility to small-business loans but says deal near With capital, communities of color can lead our economic revival MORE (D-Md.)  > Rep. Will HurdWilliam Ballard HurdScaled-back Pride Month poses challenges for fundraising, outreach The Hill's Morning Report - Protesters' defiance met with calls to listen GOP Rep. Will Hurd marches with protesters in Houston MORE (R-Texas) > Rep. Rodney DavisRodney Lee DavisThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump visits a ventilator plant in a battleground state The Hill to interview Mnuchin today and many other speakers  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mastercard CEO Ajay Banga says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now; Teva's Brendan O'Grady says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like Strategic Oil Reserve MORE (R-Ill.)  > Topeka, Kan., Mayor Michelle De La Isla > AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka  > Mozilla CEO Mitchell Baker  > GoDaddy CEO Aman Bhutani  > Teva USA President and CEO Brendan O’Grady > Citizen Founder and CEO Andrew Frame  > Chef and Crafted Hospitality owner Tom Colicchio   > AOL Founder and Revolution Chairman Steve Case > Chester River and Cheese Co. co-proprietor Jennifer Laucik Baker  > Siemens USA President & CEO Barbara Humpton > Wells Fargo CEO and President Charles W. Scharf REGISTER HERE! And join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE  There are 4,947,929 reported cases of COVID-19 in the world and 324,776 deaths have been recorded as of the time of this newsletter.    The U.S. is reporting 1,537,584 cases and 92,149 coronavirus deaths. Russia’s cases continue to rise dramatically and now stand at a reported 308,705. Brazil, with its 271,628 cases recorded its largest single-day spike in cases Tuesday. 250,141 in the U.K. 232,555 in Spain 227,364 in Italy. 180,934 in France. 178,170 in Germany. 152,587 in Turkey. 126,949 in Iran. 111,602 in India. 99,438 in Peru. Sweden’s lax lockdown measures and hopes of building herd immunity have resulted in 31,523 reported cases. Switzerland 30,658. Singapore 29,364. Bangladesh 26,738. United Arab Emirates 25,063. 17,200 in South Africa. 3,034 cases in Thailand. 2,927 in Uzbekistan. 1,503 in New Zealand.    New York’s 354,370 reported cases are still higher than any other country in the world. New Jersey is reporting 149,356 cases. Illinois 98,030. Massachusetts 87,925. California 83,865. Pennsylvania 67,311. Michigan 52,350. Texas 50,579. 29,276 cases in Indiana. 17,670 in Minnesota. 14,906 in Arizona. 9,056 in South Carolina. 8,364 in Kansas. 8,069 in Kentucky. 1,545 in West Virginia.    12,233,987 COVID-19 test results have been recorded and 289,392 full recoveries from the virus are being reported in the U.S.  WASHINGTON WATCH  Pelosi, Trump slide further into the muck. While tensions between the two have been heightened for months, the relationship took an especially nasty turn Monday after the Democratic leader characterized the famously image-conscious president as “morbidly obese” while panning his decision to take an unproven treatment for the coronavirus. President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE at first dismissed Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE’s (D-Calif.) comments about his weight, telling reporters Tuesday after a lunch on Capitol Hill with GOP senators, “I don’t respond to her. I think she’s a waste of time.” (The Hill)    Trump threatens to withhold Michigan, Nevada funding over mail-in voting. President Trump on Wednesday threatened to withhold federal funding to Michigan after its secretary of state, Jocelyn Benson (D), announced all of the state’s registered voters would receive applications for absentee ballots in the mail this year. Trump charged that the step was done “illegally” and threatened to withhold funding if the state did not reverse course, suggesting the move would encourage voter fraud. (The Hill)    House GOP to launch China probes beyond COVID-19. Members of a new House GOP task force on China are vowing their investigation will go beyond COVID-19 and include probes into a host of issues creating tensions between Washington and Beijing. The fledgling task force — led by Rep. Michael McCaulMichael Thomas McCaulOusted watchdog says he told top State aides about Pompeo probe US to slap restrictions on more Chinese media outlets: report Top GOP lawmakers invite Blue Dogs to meet with China Task Force MORE (R-Texas), the ranking member of the Foreign Affairs Committee — will look into topics ranging from supply chain and national security concerns to human rights violations and China’s growing influence on the world stage. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Senate Minority Whip Dick DurbinRichard (Dick)  Joseph DurbinGraham postpones Russia probe subpoena vote as tensions boil over Senate panel sends Trump appeals court pick to floor in party-line vote Democrats aim to amend Graham subpoena to include Trump allies MORE (D-Ill.)  @SenatorDurbin Our next @USNavy Secretary must prioritize the well-being of our sailors, including those at @navstaglakes, & take steps toward mitigating health risks brought on by #COVID19. Spoke with Amb. Kenneth Braithwaite, @USNavy Secretary nominee, about his thoughts on these issues.   Rep. Elise StefanikElise Marie StefanikBipartisan House bill seeks to improve pandemic preparedness The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mastercard CEO Ajay Banga says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now; Teva's Brendan O'Grady says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like Strategic Oil Reserve House GOP to launch China probes beyond COVID-19 MORE (R-N.Y.)  @EliseStefanik #NY21 is so eager to get back to work safely. Thank you for everyone’s team effort to get all three of our regions in #NY21 to phase one of NY’s reopening process. There are brighter days ahead!     Sen. Martin HeinrichMartin Trevor HeinrichDemocratic senators kneel during moment of silence for George Floyd Democrats call for green energy relief in next stimulus package OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump rule limits states from blocking pipeline projects | EPA finalizes rule to regulate cancer-linked chemical | Democrats want Congress to help plug 'orphan' oil and gas wells MORE (D-N.M.)  @MartinHeinrich Tribal communities are being disproportionately impacted by the pandemic. At the same time, the need for internet access in these communities now could not be more apparent. That's why I am calling on the @FCC to ensure rural Tribal communities have equal access to internet.  ACROSS THE NATION  Navajo Nation under strict lockdown with highest coronavirus infection rate in the country. With only a fraction of the population, the Navajo Nation is now reporting more coronavirus cases per capita than New York, one of the initial epicenters of the outbreak in the United States. The 27,000-square-mile territory spans three states and had a population of 173,667 people as of the last census. As of May 18, there were 4,071 positive cases of COVID-19 and 142 deaths in the region stretching across northeastern Arizona, northwestern New Mexico and southeastern Utah. (The Hill)    California is finally winning coronavirus battle, even as deaths keep rising. Three months into California’s battle with the coronavirus, there are growing signs that the outbreak is ebbing even as the state death toll continues to climb, passing 3,400. While deaths remain a stubborn challenge, other metrics analyzed by the Los Angeles Times show significant progress — enough that even some of the most cautious local health officials have agreed to begin reopening the economy. (Los Angeles Times)   DOJ warns Newsom that order discriminates against California churches. The Department of Justice warned California Gov. Gavin NewsomGavin NewsomChief Justice Roberts wisely defers to California governor in church challenge  Senior citizens deserve better than to be left in isolation Supreme Court denies California church's challenge to state restrictions MORE (D) in a Tuesday letter that his reopening plan for the state discriminates against churches. Eric S. Dreiband, the head of the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division, said in the letter that the governor should permit in-person worship gatherings in the second phase of his four-part reopening. Currently, Newsom’s plan indicates churches can reopen in the third phase. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW   Why Cape Town has 10 percent of Africa’s confirmed coronavirus cases. This city at Africa's southwestern-most tip stands out for a number of reasons — its extreme economic inequality and remarkable scenery among them — but burgeoning hot spots of coronavirus cases have distinguished it anew. (Washington Post)     UAE minister of state: Coronavirus crisis “could help ease Gulf tensions.” Countries in the Gulf region — Iran and the six Gulf Arab states — will emerge "weaker, poorer and damaged" from the coronavirus pandemic, according to UAE Minister of State Anwar Gargash. Speaking to the BBC from Abu Dhabi, he said the answer was for the whole region to try to de-escalate its tensions. (BBC)   SCIENCE  A prototype vaccine has protected monkeys from the coronavirus. A prototype vaccine has protected monkeys from the coronavirus, researchers reported Wednesday, a finding that offers new hope for effective human vaccines. “To me, this is convincing that a vaccine is possible,” said Nelson Michael, the director of the Center for Infectious Diseases Research at Walter Reed Army Institute of Research. (New York Times)  Cycle of 50 days of shutdown followed by 30 days relaxation is best way to tackle pandemic, study finds. As countries start to reopen their economies, public health experts are putting the situation in context by warning that more waves of the coronavirus are likely. A European Union-backed study released Wednesday outlines what a response to that reality could look like: Fifty days of shutdown followed by 30 days of relative relaxation. Repeat until pandemic-free. (Washington Post)   BUSINESS  Weekly mortgage applications point to a remarkable recovery in homebuying. If mortgage demand is an indicator, buyers are coming back to the housing market far faster than anticipated, despite coronavirus shutdowns and job losses. Mortgage applications to purchase a home rose 6 percent last week from the previous week, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association’s seasonally adjusted index. (CNBC)  Coca-Cola CEO says economic impact of lockdown is “just starting to begin.” Coca-Cola CEO James Quincey delivered a grim forecast Wednesday for the global economy’s recovery from the impact of the coronavirus pandemic. “The economic impact of the lockdown is just starting to begin,” Quincey said on CNBC’s “Squawk Box.” (CNBC)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS  Why I have to break up with Florida. Dear Florida, breaking up is hard to do, but another man has come between us. It was going so well with that overpowering desire to see you when that first flake of snow wafted in a stiff December wind, those moonlit jogs on the Miami Beach boardwalk, the butterflies in our stomachs when we committed to spend the rest of our lives with you in retirement homes in Boca and Naples. But now, your United States senator, Rick Scott, is opposing federal aid to New York and other states impacted by the coronavirus. (Former Rep. Steve IsraelSteven (Steve) J. IsraelThe Hill's Campaign Report: Biden on the cusp of formally grasping the Democratic nomination  Biden savors Trump's latest attacks The Hill's Campaign Report: Trump ramps up attacks against Twitter MORE for The Hill) Will government mandate COVID-19 vaccinations? When a COVID-19 vaccine becomes available, I will be one of the first in line. But the fact is U.S. adults tend to have low vaccination rates. If the government determines that vaccinations are essential to stemming the spread of the disease, would it — could it — mandate vaccination compliance? Apparently, it can — and it might. (Merrill Matthews for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS Florida girl adopted by family over Zoom after 700 days in foster care. One Florida family is celebrating the adoption of the 2-year-old girl who has lived with them in foster care since she was 7 days old. As the local county courthouse remains closed during the coronavirus pandemic, the toddler’s adoption hearing commenced over Zoom and was followed by a sweet car parade by members of their foster care community. (Fox News)   ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. LEE ZELDIN (R-N.Y.)  > Steve interviews former Maryland Lt. Gov. and ex-RNC Chairman MICHAEL STEELE  > Steve interviews former U.S. Energy Secretary ERNEST MONIZ  > Steve interviews Sen. JOE MANCHIN (D-W.Va.)  > Steve interviews Mylan CEO HEATHER BRESCH  > Steve interviews Wilson Center President and CEO JANE HARMAN  > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.     VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Brendan O'Grady, president and CEO of Teva Pharmaceuticals USA. Read excerpts from the interview below. Clemons: How do you look at the issue of supply chains right now? O’Grady: I think before this started nobody really cared about supply chains. Nobody even really thought much about it. But Teva is the largest generic producer of medications for the world. We serve almost 200 million patients on a daily basis. We have the largest, most complex supply chain in the world. But to some degree, that's an asset force. You know, we have 60 manufacturing sites scattered, really, throughout the world. The vast majority of our supply chain for the U.S. relies on Europe. We have quite a significant presence here in the United States — about a third of the medicines we supply from the United States are actually manufactured here. And then we rely on a third — a mix between India, Israel and just a small portion from China. No finished goods from manufacturing in China, at all, just some API. So, we're much more diverse than other manufacturers, and as a result, we've been able to keep the supply chain going and we haven't had any shortages, we continue to provide needed medications, but it is a concern as to where our medicines come from and how we continue to supply the US market, not just Teva, but the industry as a whole.   Clemons: How do you get a system to better prepare for something that it doesn't know is coming? O’Grady: We forecast demand months out ahead of time for different seasonal events, whether it be flu, whether it be allergy season — even asthma exacerbates during allergy season. So all of these things go into our regular forecasting process, and we've actually ramped up production of products like azithromycin, albuterol — products that are in high demand — propofol, other things that are in high demand as a result of COVID, and are now trying to build a strategic stockpile our ourselves. But I think one of the things that government could also do is build their own strategic stockpile of critical medicines, not only that are needed for COVID, but other things that get impacted, such as insulin and heart medications and other things. So I think there's things that manufacturers are doing. I know there's things that we’re certainly doing, and certainly talking to the government about how we can help again as the largest manufacturer of generic medicines in the world — and, you know, a 10 percent share here in the United States, one out of every 10 medications distributed or received by a patient here in the U.S. is a Teva medication. So, we feel a huge responsibility to make sure that our supply chain keeps going.   Clemons: What do you think the United States can do that it's not doing now to strengthen the supply chain? O’Grady: Well, I think to some degree, having a diversified global supply chain like we have is a benefit. I mean, if you think about things like geopolitical events, natural disasters, regional or local labor disruptions, having a supply chain located in different parts of the world can actually be a strategic advantage. It was odd about several weeks ago, we had an earthquake in Salt Lake City [Utah] and we had an earthquake in in Croatia, both big plants for the United States. Fortunately, neither one of those plants had disruptions. But having a supply system or supply chain that’s located around the world allows you to kind of minimize the impact of those type of events. But, if I were a politician and not the head of Teva North America, I think I would be thinking about the most critical medicines that we need, and I don't know if it's a list of 100 or 150, but whatever that list of critical medicines is, I would look at working with manufacturers to make sure that we had stability in supply. So it could be strategic agreements or treaties like we have with other nations as far as defense or other critical materials and products. It could be building a strategic stockpile. We keep a strategic reserve of oil. There's no reason why we shouldn't keep a strategic reserve of medication. So long term, if the goal is to repatriate some manufacturing back to the United States, I think there's ways to do that with current manufacturers with incentives and so forth, because at the end of the day you have to be competitive. You have to be market competitive with products that you're making. And part of that is long term price stability, which we don't have here in the United States. As you know, generic medications — the price tends to erode between the high single digits, 6 percent in a good year. And it could be upward in the high teens. So pricing stability, long term manufacturing commitments are all things that could be done to stabilize the supply and assure of the security supply here in the United States.   Clemons: Teva does not produce vaccines, but when you look at the manufacturing capacity that will be needed, what role do you see Teva playing when we come to either antivirals or vaccines? O’Grady: Again, as the largest generic manufacturer, one of the things that we’re proud of and one of things that we really focus on is making medicines affordable and accessible in the United States and across the world. So you're right, we’re not a vaccine producer, and, we're not sure how long the vaccine will take. I'm sure and confident that a vaccine will come, but it could take months. It could take years before we get one. So I think the important thing is finding what other treatments may alleviate symptoms or even help knock the virus out. And, of course, you mentioned hydroxychloroquine — that’s one. Azithromycin has been used and is being studied in a trial that we that we supported with the NIH in a combination, if that helps. Remdesivir is another product. So there's multiple products that are that are out there. So we're supporting the clinical research of the existing products that are there. And of course, we have numerous manufacturing capabilities. So if we need to partner with somebody to help manufacture a treatment to make it broadly available we’re certainly open to that as well.   Clemons: What sorts of elements would you like to see on the back end of this of this crisis that we could improve the way we think about both how drugs are provisioned and think about health costs in America? O’Grady: I have a personal example. So, the first thing I'll say is that I think the U.S. health care system is extremely complex. It is very difficult to understand and there are times — and I've been in the pharmaceutical industry, in the health care industry for nearly 30 years — and there's times when even I have challenges understanding it. So it's extremely complex, but it's also a very high quality system. And if you look at it, people from other parts of the world, they actually come to the United States many times to seek treatment because they know the quality that we have here. And I had an opportunity to live in Europe for part of my career and participated in the European health care systems which are much more government run than ours. And I'm not going to say that they're low quality, but there is certainly a difference in the access to the treatments that that you have, and the access to the drugs that you have and when you have those. So I think those are tenets that we want to preserve in the U.S. health care system. But I do think, and we largely don't have a problem with drug pricing in this country, and I know that the narrative has been prices are too expensive. I think part of the problem is people don't have visibility to what they're paying and we have benefit designs that have been created, whether they're high deductible or Medicare doughnut hole, where people pay $25 in December and then January they go to get their medication and it's $200 or $300, and they don't understand why. So I think we have benefit design reform. I think we have an opportunity to really simplify the system as it works today, and I think we need to find a way that health care, including medicines, is accessible to all. I don't believe that a government run system, a single-payer system, is the answer. I think private industry is the answer. And I think that we can tweak the system to make it more transparent, simplified, and not as complex for for people to access.   Clemons: How do you look at how you're investing in restoring trust in this time? O’Grady: I think you know one of the things that I find personally frustrating is that there's probably not an industry, in the history of humans on the planet, that has had a greater impact to the longevity and human health than the pharmaceutical industry. And so it always perplexes me as to why it has such a low perception out there with the public. And I think some of that, the industry has done to itself, but I think that one of the things that I hope in this pandemic — one of the outcomes of this pandemic — is that people will realize that the pharmaceutical industry is essential to national security. It's essential to our public health, and that we need to work together to make sure it's sustainable. But we also have to build trust. And I think one of the things that we're focused on at Teva is really building trust with the public is making sure that we continue our supply chain. And we've done a great job of making sure that people can come to work, in our manufacturing and our R&D sites, making sure that it's a safe environment to deliver medications at an affordable price and do it in a very responsible way. And I think if we do that long term and continue to do that, then we'll build trust with the public. And hopefully, we’ll be seen as an asset as we go forward in the future and really something essential to the health of the American public.The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Ajay Banga, Mastercard president and CEO. Read excerpts from the interview below. Clemons: How does what's happening globally like from your perspective? Banga: I would say that this is truly a public health crisis and I think there's a lot of work going on that front, but don't forget that the authorities have moved really well on fiscal and monetary policy in most countries around the world. I think we’ve all learned our lesson from prior financial crises and have applied at least a good lexicon out of those. Now how well all that gets implemented and executed over a period of time will determine how well we come out of this over the next period. But the fact is the playbook is operating. Now the way we've defined the stages of this crisis for the company and for our investors and every employee. It is said that there are four stages. The first stage is containment. That's kind of borders getting shut, schools getting shut, restaurants shutting, everything shutting, people, getting locked into their homes. Obviously, consumer spending falls off a cliff during that period. The second phase is stabilization, and stabilization is basically the bottoming out of the prior phase. It's almost like we're turning the corner and the curve of new cases and hospitalizations, and ICU admissions are beginning to bend down, and people are beginning to buy not just everyday groceries, but also adding on a few things like home improvement and the like. And so, I would say that a couple to three weeks ago, the United States and Europe are more or less operating through that bottom, that stabilization phase. China, on the other hand, which entered containment before all of us — was coming into the third phase which, for want of a better word, we call normalization. It's not really normal in the sense that not everything will go back to pre-COVID kind of level. It's actually lower than pre-COVID-19, but it's coming off the bottom, and you probably won't get the same recovery in long-distance travel or in mass entertainment. But you will in pent up demand for certain things. And it could be something as simple as hair and beauty pigments or gym memberships. Or like I said, home improvement. And maybe intraregional travel or domestic travel. Or as I say recently, "rural is the new urban" for tourism, in the U.S. as well. People will drive to nearby hotels to give themselves that weekend treat that they have wanted. So you'll see that now in the U.S. and Europe we feel like for the last few weeks we're entering into that normalization phase. And then the fourth phase, called growth, which will come pre-COVID kind of levels. I think that's going to need a vaccine, things that build back consumer confidence and business confidence to what it felt like prior to COVID-19. I would say nobody's back at that phase. Obviously and it's not linear. Some countries have moved from containment to normalization and have gone backwards. That has happened for a little while for Japan and Singapore, when there was a resurgence of the virus in those countries. That's kind of how we're looking at it.   Clemons: How can a financial instrument help contribute to returning to high trust environments? Banga: I would say, let’s break that down into two portions. Let's first break it down into trust, per se. Then let's talk about how do you manage trust in this digital-first kind of environment? So let's talk trust first. Trust, let’s discuss economic, different economies around the world and the trust they had with each other. The fact is, even before the crisis, multilateral institutions that had been created in the last century were created to enable economies to operate on a platform that generated trust by the outside interpretation of those rules by third parties who were meant to be impartial. Now we’ve seen those very multilateral institutions over the last decade or two slowly begin to break down from their level of operation prior to that. So I would argue that they’ve already worn down the trust environment of big economies on a number of the issues. I think this thing has just exacerbated that. And so to me, at the end of the day, coming out of this, you look at the United States, what’s our strength? Our strength is human capital and our strength is our innovation and ingenuity and economies of scale, which allow us to benefit from an open trading environment. If you don’t manage and nurture our human capital, if you don’t manage and nurture an open trading environment. Level playing field — not an open trading environment where we operate with both hands tied behind our back, but a level playing field, open trading environment, then I think we can be leaders in the space of helping to rebuild this trust across the quality of nations to make sure that we can keep an open trading system going. The fact is, the last 20, 30 years, the growth in the world's economies would not have happened. The reduction in poverty would not have happened without an open trading environment. And so the United States is vested in that and in leadership in human capital. That's the point I'm trying to make here. I think we shouldn’t back off that completely. Now in the digital space, trust is a very much more interesting conversation. I think it starts with being careful about your identity, about individual consumers feeling safe about their identity online. And that leads to the whole conversation about digital identities that are secure with distributed platforms, cybersecurity efforts, that whole space. But I think way beyond that is the whole issue of ethical innovation. If you're going to use artificial intelligence, if you're going to use data for the right purposes of giving consumers and businesses better service, it is really important that we put the consumer and the business first. It's really important that you say to a consumer: "This is your data. You deserve to benefit from it. You have the right to be forgotten. You have the right to have it deleted, and you must be able to feel safe when your data has been used by others."   I think that kind of principle, simple principles on data, something we call our "data responsibility principles," our data imperative, that we issued a short little while ago — I think we really need to embrace all that when we go forward in this world of 5G and IoT and interconnected devices to rebuild the trust that's going to be important in this coming decade.   Clemons: I've been fascinated by digital IDs and that question of how to get there for a long time. And how to make it safe and also make it something that can’t be exploited. What do you need to have to make that happen? Banga: The fact is that if you have a digital ID where the government controls every aspect of that identity, most economies like ours will feel uncomfortable with that situation. Citizens in a country like ours and parts of Europe and a number of other countries around the world are uncomfortable having the government be the be-all and the end-all of everything to do with you. Yet, the government gives your driving license. They give you a passport. Your banks have information about you when you open an account with them. Or "know your customer" for anti-money laundering. Your cellphone companies have information of where you are because of me having a GPS tracker. So, the best form of digital identity to me is a distributive platform where companies do not keep all that information with them. Neither does the government. Instead, you the consumer empower this trusted identity system to say, "Hey, can you prove to so and so I am Steve; or I am above the age of 18; or I am male," or whatever it is you wish to prove. And that trusted player can go into those distributed identity records and only bring back that information, which is necessary to answer the limited question that you wanted to have answered. So, let me expand on that with an example. Let's say you're buying alcohol on the web. And today a lot of people are doing that in coronavirus times, right? Home purchases of alcohol are much higher than they used to be. When they get delivered to your house, they have to make sure that you're adult and you are the person who ordered the alcohol. You either got to sign for something, give them proof of identity. In some countries, you have to give them a driving license. And this young kid from a delivery company, take’s the photograph of your driving license. Now, on their phone, is your photograph, your full name, your exact date of birth, of course, your address. They knew that. But sometimes also the vehicle you're allowed to drive. And, of course, your driving license number. In a number of countries, that is enough information to open a bank account in your name. I'm saying don't do that. You only needed proof you’re above the legal age of drinking. You could do that by going into the driving license authority and bringing back the fact that Steve’s above 21. Going to the bank and having a second place to check it from. And then going to your cellphone operator and bringing back the fact that you are physically where you claim to be. Put those three points together and you can tell the delivery company, "Go ahead and deliver the booze, this is the guy who bought it." In fact, I give you back your privacy. I give you back your identity. But I proved to everybody in the ecosystem that you are who you are. That, to me, is the form of digital identity — distributed databases, not centralized, no honey pot which people are going to break into. And create a cooperative system where nobody owns everything, but you kind of go in and work on this together. We've actually built this and launched this in Australia already.   Clemons: What are you seeing in sort of the cash flow in the commerce side of small businesses and what your sense is. Banga: I think first of all, small business is the engine of growth of economies around the world, including in the U.S. I think supporting them and finding ways to make them come out of this the right way is the single best thing we can all do for the economic vitality and, frankly, the social vitality of our economy. So, I'm all-in for that one. I would say they are also suffering. There is no doubt that a number of them have struggled and are struggling right now through this period. But there are those who are being innovative and creative, and they will come out in the natural process, they will probably come out stronger. And it ranges from restaurants in Brooklyn who, being unable to be open, have now repositioned themselves. They are selling everything from wine out of their cellars to actually their own menus prepackaged and sold to people. They have changed who they are. There are others who are trying to find "omni channel" experiences and they were only physical earlier and they've learned very quickly to go online and become digital as well. And people like us are helping them. Not just us. There are many companies helping them in the space. I think the whole idea of small business, being alive and innovative is definitely correct. But there are those who was being very challenged. And there are those who are managing better through this process. We shouldn't forget either of them as we come out of this. And, you know, Steve we set up a $250 million fund to help small businesses globally over these next few years. And part of that is by giving them free tools for cyber securities scanning, through education and how to use credit — to different kinds of aspects. And others are philanthropic donations to them, to help them manage through this period. And a lot of companies are doing good things for small businesses, for all the reasons we just talked about. The head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said Tuesday that he believes the U.S. is ready to begin reopening, even as he acknowledged the need to invest further in the nation's public health infrastructure and expand contact tracing to avoid sustained outbreaks. "I want to clarify that the community-based transmission, the community-to-community transmission that overwhelmed the public health departments in late February, March, April, that's really coming down," Redfield said in an interview with Steve Clemons, author of The Hill's daily Coronavirus Report. Redfield told The Hill that the CDC is working with state public health agencies to contain outbreaks in nursing homes, among homeless populations, in meatpacking facilities and in other areas. He signaled states will have sufficient testing and contact tracing to follow the White House's guidelines for reopening. The challenge, he said, will be ensuring the country has enough testing and contact tracing for a potential second wave of the virus in the fall and winter months, which would coincide with the annual influenza season. Redfield said the CDC is looking to expand the contact tracing workforce by between 30,000 and 100,000 people. Experts have said hundreds of thousands of contact tracers will be needed nationwide to identify those who have been infected with the coronavirus and those with whom the infected person has come into contact. "Ultimately, that number [of contact tracers] is going to be decided by the efforts that we have with the local health departments," Redfield said. "But that's ongoing now, and it needs to be in place, operationally ready by October of this year." The Trump administration announced in late April that it would be deploying roughly a dozen contact tracers from the CDC to each state, but many states have been ramping up their own recruiting efforts in the weeks since. The number of volunteers in each state varies. For example, 400 people have volunteered in Kansas, while 1,200 have come forward to help in Utah. Redfield cited financial investments in state and local health departments, an increase in flu vaccinations among the American public, and an overhaul of public health data systems as key to ensuring the country is prepared to combat the pandemic in the months ahead. He acknowledged those investments will come with a hefty price tag — he estimated it could end up costing between $3 trillion and $6 trillion — but said preparations should be made sooner rather than later. "It's a small price to pay finally, once and for all, to stop talking about building the public health infrastructure this nation needs and, more importantly, deserves," he said. The CDC has come under criticism for its antiquated data collection and reporting system. Redfield earlier this month went back and forth with Deborah Birx, the coordinator of the White House coronavirus response, about the flaws in the system. A CDC spokesperson said the two were in agreement on the need to improve the system, but the episode reflects the frustrations of some at the White House with the agency’s approach. The CDC has faced criticism for its limited public visibility as states move to lift restrictions intended to slow the spread of the coronavirus. The agency last week released broad recommendations for businesses to use when reopening after the White House reportedly buried more detailed guidance. By the time the scaled-down version was released, dozens of states had already allowed or were close to allowing businesses to reopen. Redfield denied on Tuesday that politics influenced the final guidelines. "This outbreak has gone from a CDC to an all-of-government response," he said, saying the guidelines went through an inter-agency review process. "One of the things that became clear at the task force when we put up our initial guidelines is a number of people criticized, and I think appropriately, that a lot of our guidelines are written in what they called CDC-eze, meaning that they're not easy for the American public to actually get through," he said. "And so the decision was, why don't you guys do some decision trees that are simple one-pagers. You've probably seen them targeting the American public. And we released those six decision trees last week."WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Treasury Secretary Mnuchin and Fed Chair Powell testify before Senate Banking Committee on pandemic response programs  > President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE says he has been taking hydroxychloroquine despite risks > In scathing letter, Trump threatens to leave WHO if changes aren’t made within 30 days  > Children’s hospitals are experiencing ‘catastrophic losses’  > Greenhouse gas emissions have plunged an unprecedented 17 percent  > CDC Director Redfield says CDC agency took first action on COVID-19 in late December and notified White House Jan. 1         These days, it may take a lot for news from Washington to shock anyone. In just the past 3½ years, the American public has witnessed one of the nastiest presidential campaigns in history, a sexual assault allegation against a Supreme Court justice nominee and now a Democratic presidential nominee, the impeachment of President Trump and — to top it all off — a once in a generation global pandemic that has locked down the world and pushed economies to the brink of collapse.    Nevertheless, at an informal press event at the White House, President Trump shocked reporters when he said he’s been dosing up on hydroxychloroquine for more than a week in hopes it will prevent him from contracting the coronavirus. Let’s keep in mind that the drug is highly controversial and there is no body of empirical evidence to suggest the drug wards off the virus or is even safe to take at all. In April, the Food and Drug Administration issued a safety warning on the anti-malaria drug. But the president said he did consult with the White House physician about taking the drug and — to quell concerns that the president was either lying or feeding the press a distraction — the White House released a memo last night detailing the commander in chief’s decision to preventively take hydroxychloroquine. It is rather ironic that Trump has continued to downplay the severity of COVID-19 and relentlessly push for the country to reopen, but he seems concerned enough to take his own preventive measures against the virus.    Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE (D-Calif.) responded, telling CNN’s Anderson Cooper "I would rather he not be taking something that has not been approved by the scientists, especially in his age group and in his, shall we say, weight group, morbidly obese, they say. So, I think that it’s not a good idea.” (The Hill)    Trump has not yet responded to Pelosi, but a fiery response is likely. Today, more than 90,000 are dead in America. More than 36 million are unemployed since the virus took hold. The daily lives of us all have been turned on their heads. And the leader of the free world is taking a risky drug with no proof of effectiveness. And the most powerful woman in American politics responds by calling him fat. Welcome to 2020.   THE INTERVIEW Robert Redfield, Director, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  CDC Director Robert Redfield says agency has been underinvested for decades and must up public health infrastructure before Covid/flu combo hits in the fall, says CDC took first action on COVID-19 in late December and notified White House Jan. 1, and adds he doesn’t know why Trump administration official Peter Navarro said what he did when the facts are otherwise.         * Interview transcript and full footage will be available shortly. Watch this space for updates.  THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Tuesday, May 19.  Editor’s Note.    One of the TV shows I used to watch when no one was looking was “The Weakest Link.” It was a BBC production that celebrated sharp-edged wit and general knowledge, praising those who knew all the answers, and publicly, somewhat viciously shaming those who didn’t succeed and couldn’t keep up. It was a terrible show, but it portrayed what many think is possible — that the strong or like-minded or most intellectual can become a tribe by casting out inferiors, or those who are different, or bring a different set of talents to the scene that don’t quite align with others.   Amid the global devastation of this virus, we can’t look at lesser developed nations as “weak links” that can be expelled or walled off. In a global pandemic with a virus that doesn’t pay attention to borders and nationalism, the weak links — whether inside our own society or abroad — must be cared for and made strong and resilient. Today, in my discussion with Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Robert Redfield, he said that we may need to greatly widen our contact tracing in America, and we need to find ways to care for and quarantine people who have no homes and are infected. He also said, very slowly and forcefully, that the CDC had global assets to work with and that America needed to invest much more in global health infrastructure, not walk away from it.   From the sheer number of cases and deaths, COVID-19 is hitting America harder than any other nation in the world. But it is virtually everywhere in the world. Not containing it abroad increases the chances that this virus becomes not just a one wave or two waves crisis, but the kind of threat to mankind that continues to work around the world in a wave, always coming back to harm and kill inside the United States as well. And that’s a challenge even if a virus is discovered. Redfield said that even with a virulent flu — about which Americans are educated and know can be lethal — the vaccination rate is only 15 percent. He said we need more Americans to lean in on flu vaccinations so that society is less vulnerable to so-called weak links.   – Steve Clemons   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.     THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE  Thursday, 11 a.m. EDT | Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE to join The Hill’s Editor in Chief Bob CusackRobert (Bob) CusackThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Mnuchin: More COVID-19 congressional action ahead On The Money: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | 2.4 million more Americans file new jobless claims | Top bank regulator abruptly announces resignation Overnight Health Care: Trump says US won't close over second COVID-19 wave | Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | Why the US has the most reported coronavirus cases in the world MORE        On Thursday, The Hill will host “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy. The summit will feature three one-hour segments, beginning at 11 a.m. EDT.    Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin joins The Hill’s Editor in Chief Bob Cusack for a keynote interview followed by an afternoon of discussion with leading CEOs and national health experts including:    > U.S. Surgeon General Jerome Adams  > Sen. Mark WarnerMark Robert WarnerVirginia senator calls for Barr to resign over order to clear protests Trump asserts his power over Republicans Expanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support MORE (D-Va.) > Sen. Ben CardinBenjamin (Ben) Louis CardinOn The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility GOP senator blocks bill giving flexibility to small-business loans but says deal near With capital, communities of color can lead our economic revival MORE (D-Md.)  > Rep. Will HurdWilliam Ballard HurdScaled-back Pride Month poses challenges for fundraising, outreach The Hill's Morning Report - Protesters' defiance met with calls to listen GOP Rep. Will Hurd marches with protesters in Houston MORE (R-Texas) > Rep. Rodney DavisRodney Lee DavisThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump visits a ventilator plant in a battleground state The Hill to interview Mnuchin today and many other speakers  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mastercard CEO Ajay Banga says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now; Teva's Brendan O'Grady says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like Strategic Oil Reserve MORE (R-Ill.)  > Mayor Michelle De La Isla, city of Topeka > Teva North America President and CEO Brendan O'Grady  > Mozilla CEO Mitchell Baker  > GoDaddy CEO Aman Bhutani  > Citizen Founder and CEO Andrew Frame  > Independent Restaurant Coalition Founder chef Tom Colicchio   > AOL Founder and Revolution Chairman Steve Case > Chester River and Cheese Co. co-proprietor Jennifer Laucik Baker  > Siemens USA President & CEO Barbara Humpton > Wells Fargo CEO and President Charles W. Scharf   *Additional speakers to be announced  REGISTER HERE! And join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.          Wednesday at 1 p.m. EDT, The Hill will host “The Vir [tech] tual World Ahead,” a virtual program focusing on our dramatic shift to a digital ecosystem at a time when digital literacy continues to be uneven, much as basic access to the internet can be.    Steve Clemons, The Hill’s editor-at-large, will be speaking with:    > FCC Commissioner Michael O’Rielly  > Rep. Suzan DelBeneSuzan Kay DelBeneExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support House Democrats press Treasury on debit cards used for coronavirus relief payments Hillicon Valley: Trump threatens Michigan, Nevada over mail-in voting | Officials call for broadband expansion during pandemic | Democrats call for investigation into Uber-Grubhub deal MORE (D-Wash.)  > Superintendent of the Dallas Independent School District Michael Hinojosa > Next Century Cities Executive Director Francella Ochillo  > Information Technology Industry Council President and CEO Jason Oxman  REGISTER HERE! And join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE  There are 4,867,515 reported cases of COVID-19 throughout the world and 321,459 deaths as of the time of this newsletter.    The U.S. is reporting 1,519,986 cases of coronavirus and 91,179 deaths. Russia is reporting 299,941 cases. Brazil’s 262,545 cases are now third most in the world. The U.K. is reporting 250,121 cases. 232,037 in Spain. 226,699 in Italy. 180,933 in France. 177,574 in Germany. 151,615 in Turkey. Iran 124,603. India 106,453. Peru 94,933. Saudi Arabia is reporting 59,854 cases. 51,633 in Mexico. 30,799 in Sweden. 28,794 in Singapore. 18,876 in Ukraine. 18,496 in Indonesia. South Africa 16,433. Egypt 13,484. South Korea 11,078. Cameroon 3,529.   New York is reporting 352,845 cases. New Jersey 149,356. Illinois 96,485. Massachusetts 87,052. California is reporting 81,904 cases. 67,311 in Pennsylvania. 51,915 in Michigan. 49,308 in Texas – where cases are increasing as the state begins to reopen. 46,944 in Florida. 38,116 in Connecticut. 28,956 in Ohio. 28,704 in Indiana. 19,239 in North Carolina. Iowa 15,296. Arizona 14,576. Rhode Island 12,951. 10,625 in Nebraska. 8,942 in South Carolina. 4,085 in South Dakota. 3,687 in Oregon. 640 in Hawaii.    11,834,508 COVID-19 test results have been recorded in the U.S. and 283,178 have reported full recoveries from the virus.  WASHINGTON WATCH  Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin and Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell testify before the Senate Banking Committee. During the hearing, Sen. Sherrod BrownSherrod Campbell BrownDemocratic senators say police crackdowns undermine US response to Hong Kong Democratic senators kneel during moment of silence for George Floyd 21 senators urge Pentagon against military use to curb nationwide protests MORE (Ohio) and Mnuchin had a tense exchange when the top Democrat on the committee asked whether people were being pushed to go back to work amid a pandemic to boost stock markets. Brown argued that people were being pushed “back into the workplace” with “no national program to provide worker safety.” (The Hill)    Trump threatens to permanently cut WHO funding, leave body if changes aren’t made. President Trump threatened Monday to permanently halt U.S. funding to the World Health Organization and “reconsider” the country’s membership in the United Nations body if it does not “commit to major substantive improvements” within the next 30 days. In a letter to the WHO posted in a late-night tweet, Trump said the global health agency floundered in its early responses to the coronavirus outbreak. (Washington Post)     Read the president’s “self explanatory” letter here.    White House, CDC rift spills into the open. The rift between the White House and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has spilled out into the open as one of the nation's top public health agencies finds itself on the margins of the response to a once-in-a-generation pandemic. “To allude that we’re sort of taking a backseat to this response just because we haven’t had such a forward-facing presence with the news media really does disservice to what we have actually done as far as leading the public health response to this,” a CDC spokesperson said. (The Hill)    Congress eyes changes to small-business pandemic aid. Lawmakers are pushing for changes to a key program that provides aid to small businesses impacted by the coronavirus. Talks about “fixes”— from tweaks to an overhaul of the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) to changes to other programs — come as Congress remains divided over a so-called Phase Four relief bill, which would actually be the fifth agreement reached on the coronavirus response since early March. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. Jacky RosenJacklyn (Jacky) Sheryl RosenThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of another relief package; Warner says some businesses 'may not come back' at The Hill's Advancing America's Economy summit  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: CDC Director Redfield responds to Navarro criticism; Mnuchin and Powell brief Senate panel Hillicon Valley: Experts raise security concerns about online voting | Musk finds supporter in Trump | Officials warn that Chinese hackers targeting COVID-19 research groups MORE (D-Nev.)  @SenJackyRosen .@SenCortezMasto and I are calling for ramping up #COVID19 testing.  Our public health, government, and business leaders need information about who has COVID-19, who needs to be isolated or quarantined, and who may have already had the virus.   Sen. Joni ErnstJoni Kay ErnstGOP lawmakers say Steve King's loss could help them in November The Hill's Campaign Report: Biden on the cusp of formally grasping the Democratic nomination  The Hill's Morning Report - Protesters' defiance met with calls to listen MORE (R-Iowa)  @SenJoniErnst In the bipartisan #COVID19 relief packages, we worked to ensure states like Iowa received funding to increase testing capabilities. Last week,  @CDCgov announced that Iowa will receive over $114 million to enhance testing in our communities.   Rep. Debbie Mucarsel-PowellDebbie Mucarsel-PowellThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Former Rep. Delaney says Trump is spewing venom when he should be leading; Protests roil the nation as fears of new virus outbreaks grow  Gun control group rolls out House endorsements  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: CDC Director Redfield responds to Navarro criticism; Mnuchin and Powell brief Senate panel MORE (D-Fla.)  @RepDMP The GOP Senate has to get to work to help those hurting in this crisis instead of appointing right wing conservative judges. They need to work for the people and bring the #HeroesAct to the floor. Americans are hurting. They need this assistance and there’s no time to waste.  ACROSS THE NATION  Texas, North Carolina, Alabama see rising cases as they reopen. North Carolina and Arizona are among the states seeing rising numbers of coronavirus cases, intensifying concerns as they seek to reopen shuttered economies. Texas saw its largest one-day increase in cases on Saturday, with 1,801 new cases. North Carolina also saw its largest single-day jump on Saturday with 853 new cases. And Arizona reported 462 new cases that day, close to a record high. (The Hill)   Chicago blocks church parking lots to enforce stay-at-home order. The city of Chicago blocked parking at some churches’ lots Sunday in order to enforce Illinois’s stay-at-home order. (The Hill)  Coronavirus having “catastrophic” impact on children’s hospitals. Children's hospitals across the country are experiencing "catastrophic losses" after stepping up to help in the COVID-19 fight, Fox News has learned, and they are calling on the Department of Health and Human Services for urgent help. In a letter Tuesday to HHS Secretary Alex Azar, the leaders of some 76 children's hospitals across the country are suggesting that "failure to provide immediate relief to children’s hospitals will weaken our infrastructure and risk our current capability to care for all the nation’s children." (Fox News)   WORLD VIEW   China hits back, in words and aid pledges, as America goes at it alone. The World Health Organization’s annual meeting entered a second day on Tuesday, after an opening dominated by feuding as the United States escalated threats of isolationism and China bit back against criticism. “The United States has made a miscalculation and found the wrong target when it picks on China, shirks its responsibilities and bargains on how to fulfill its international obligations to the World Health Organization,” Zhao Lijian, a Chinese foreign ministry spokesman, told reporters. (New York Times)    ️ A super cyclone racing toward India and Bangladesh threatens coronavirus response. A crushing cyclone barreled up the Bay of Bengal on Tuesday, heading for a swampy stretch along the border of India and Bangladesh and threatening to unleash 165-mile-an-hour winds and massive floods when it makes landfall Wednesday. The power of the storm is not the only threat, as the cyclone, Amphan, nears coastal areas. It also poses a risk to the coronavirus response as hundreds of thousands of people begin moving toward emergency shelters. (New York Times)   SCIENCE  Trump administration picks U.S. firm to manufacture COVID-19 drugs now made overseas. The Trump administration is awarding a $354 million, four-year contract to a Virginia-based company to manufacture generic medicines and pharmaceutical ingredients needed to treat COVID-19, federal officials and the company announced Tuesday. Phlow Corp. said in a release it was awarded the federal contract to create “essential medicines at risk of shortage,” including medicines for the COVID-19 pandemic response. (The Hill)    Global emissions plunged unprecedented 17 percent during coronavirus pandemic. The wave of lockdowns and shuttered economies caused by the coronavirus pandemic fueled a momentous decline in global greenhouse gas emissions, although one unlikely to last, a group of scientists reported Tuesday. (Washington Post)   BUSINESS  Top execs for Netflix, Disney, Salesforce and others call on Congress to provide $1T in coronavirus relief to local governments. Top business leaders in California are urging Congress to approve an additional $1 trillion in spending to head off massive budget cuts facing state and local governments due to COVID-19. In a letter to Congress, members of California Gov. Gavin NewsomGavin NewsomChief Justice Roberts wisely defers to California governor in church challenge  Senior citizens deserve better than to be left in isolation Supreme Court denies California church's challenge to state restrictions MORE’s task force on business and jobs recovery wrote, “the worst of the economic impact [is] likely still to come.” The letter, sent Friday, was signed by nearly 100 business leaders. (CNBC)    “Way too late”: Inside Amazon’s biggest outbreak. An Amazon warehouse in the foothills of the Pocono Mountains of northeastern Pennsylvania has become Amazon’s biggest COVID-19 hot spot. (New York Times)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS  House Democrats’ HEROES Act is a giant political scam. When House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) said on Thursday that the current coronavirus crisis “is really quite an exciting time for us,” she meant it. On Friday, House Democrats passed a gargantuan $3 trillion COVID-19 bill — the HEROES Act — that will serve as a starting point for negotiations with Senate Republicans and the White House over the next round of coronavirus “relief” legislation. In addition to bailing out numerous irresponsible state and local governments and the Postal Service, the legislation is chock full of radical, wildly irresponsible provisions that clearly show that congressional Democrats are more concerned with expanding their power and pleasing their allies than they are fixing our broken economy. (Justin Haskins for The Hill)    Fighting vulnerable workers instead of the virus. Everyone wants to get tough on the coronavirus, but so far that has proven difficult. Unfortunately, rather than redoubling efforts in that fight, some are seeking an easier target: vulnerable low-wage workers.Cynical politicians are threatening the workers most at risk of infection, many of whom face heightened risks of serious illness or death. Some of these threats are fraudulent, ugly bluffs. The very fact that they are being made, however, tells us something ugly about how we are responding to this crisis. (David Super for The Hill)  GENEROUS SPIRITS Magic Johnson pledges $100M to help minority businesses. The NBA Hall of Famer joined “Good Morning America” on Tuesday to discuss the new program he’s creating to provide loans to mostly minority and women-owned businesses struggling to get PPP assistance.   ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. LEE ZELDIN (R-N.Y.)  > Steve interviews former Maryland Lt. Gov. and ex-RNC Chairman MICHAEL STEELE  > Steve interviews former U.S. Energy Secretary ERNEST MONIZ  > Steve interviews Sen. JOE MANCHIN (D-W.Va.)  > Steve interviews Mylan CEO HEATHER BRESCH  > Steve interviews Wilson Center President and CEO JANE HARMAN  > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.   CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.        VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill’s Steve Clemons interviewed Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Robert Redfield.  Read excerpts from the interview below.  CDC Director Robert Redfield: Steve, I think it's really one of the important awakenings for a broad aspect of our society is that the public health infrastructure of this nation has been under-invested in for decades. And so when you really look at it now, there are certain capabilities that we really need to have in place. And we need to have them in place for the fall and winter as we confront both COVID and flu. That's data, data analytics, modernization of our data system. We're using a data system that's decades old, and we don't have an integrated public health system for this nation. We need to get that correct. Laboratory resilience. We need to have multiple laboratory platforms in the public health lab, so there's really remarkable redundancy and surge capacity. We need a public health workforce — and the public health workforce that we're going to need to do the contact tracing and vaccine distribution, both for influenza and for the coronavirus vaccine when it's completed is substantial. And, of course, we need to have a concentration, we’ll come back to later on our global health security, to make sure that we have the capacity around the globe to detect, prevent, respond to new pathogen at their source.   Clemons: Many people were worried that a global pandemic was coming this way. So why is public health infrastructure in such antiquated condition? Redfield: You know, I think a lot of people have discussed it.  And I think I saw some clips the other night about President Obama in 2014. I've seen it go way back. But unfortunately, no one's really gone beyond to do the action required to rebuild our public health infrastructure to where it needs to be. I'm of the point of view, now is the time. If the experience that we just went through so far with the coronavirus can’t awaken all of us, that we can't afford not to be over prepared and over invest. I kind of say it's time for our nation to have the public health infrastructure capacity not only that our nation needs, but that our nation deserves, and it's going to take a sizable investment. But I'm going to say the lack of that public health infrastructure —. Very rapidly this outbreak when it started as that outbreak started in the nursing home in Seattle, one of the best public health departments in this country, King County in the state of Washington. They rapidly were overwhelmed so they could no longer stay in what we call containment mode. Early diagnosis, contact tracing, isolation and quarantine. And I even deployed about 40 people there to help them in those early weeks. And the bottom line is the public health system was overwhelmed, and they went then to full mitigation. And that full mitigation led to the economic shutdown that we've seen. We can't go back there. We need to get the public health infrastructure in this nation that we can operationalize containment. That's early diagnosis. And that means rapidly, readily available testing wherever we need it, and getting timely results. We need to have contact tracing. And that means those contacts have to be all identified and traced and evaluated and tested within a day or so. They need to have capacity to isolate people, and, you know, there are a number of people that are going to need isolation that don't have homes or they live in multigenerational houses. That has to be developed. And then again, this is part of the critical component so we can do this. And then you put on top of it what I said — why I said this fall/winter is going to be difficult. I didn't say it was going to be worse. I didn't say it was going to be more deadly, as some quoted, I said it's going to be more difficult because we're going to be getting the second experience with coronavirus as it expands in the fall and winter at the same time we're getting influenza. This time, we were lucky in one sense that the coronavirus became active after the second wave of influenza A basically went back to baseline. But this fall it's going to be coronavirus and flu. And then when you asked me, what else can we do? What we can do is get the American public to a point that they'll embrace flu vaccine with confidence. Right now, less than 50 percent of the American public take advantage of the flu vaccine, and many people don't realize — sadly were over 90,000 deaths from coronavirus so far this year — but over the last decade, we lost 360,000 people who died in this country from flu. And we have a vaccine that more than half of the people in this country decide not to take. So, we're going to be working hard to get people to accept flu vaccine with confidence. We're going to be working hard to expand testing capabilities all across this country. Congress just appropriated another $11 billion to help states, local territorial travel health departments to get that up to speed. And we're working with them. We're going to expand the contact tracing public health workforce. And when I say expand, I'm talking about increasing it by 30,000 to 100,000 people.   Clemons: We don't have those thousands of people in place. We don't have the testing and the contract tracing and the public health infrastructure to the point where you think it should be. Is the nation ready to go through this reopening phase right now? Redfield: CDC is putting out guidance. We put out a lot over the weekend again about you know how to reopen safely. I want to clarify that the community-based transmission, the community to community transmission that overwhelmed the public health departments in late February, March, April — that's really coming down. Right now, what CDC and the state public health systems are doing is we're fighting outbreaks. We have nursing home outbreaks, and we're going in and containing them. We are having meatpacking plants — containing them. Prison — Homeless — containing them. Certain social events from a wedding or a funeral — containing them. And we're going to continue to do that over the summer. And as we do that, we're going to be expanding what I just told you, but we have the capability and as part of the guidance that we gave — that the president gave — for the states to open up, it was important that they could test people that have flu like illness and or syndromic disease. They could set up surveillance. They had the contact tracers that they needed right now. But in the fall/winter, we're going to need a much more robust workforce because we're going to make the mission that we're going to stay in containment. We can’t get to the point that we have to retreat from containment. I believe we're going to get there. The testing has to be readily available, and it's increasing. I think yesterday there were 400,000 tests done in a day. You know where that exact number needs to be is being defined. But Congress really helped enormously, where they released $11 billion for the states to begin to really concretize that testing and contact tracing and isolation. Clearly from the testing point of view, the states are required to have a plan that CDC and Admiral Giroir at HHS, we're all working together to help them with their plan which will be due at the end of May for at least June and July, and then by middle of June for the rest of the year. So there's going to be a robust plan. In that plan, it's also going to incur aggressive surveillance. One of the complexities about the coronavirus, unlike flu, is that a substantial amount of the human-human transmission is occurring from people who don't even have symptoms. So that makes it harder. How do I know who's infected if there's no symptoms? So, we are establishing really a robust surveillance program, which is going to be very intensive on testing. … We're expanding the nursing home testing so that every individual resident of a nursing home will be tested so we can make sure. We're going to be developing similar surveillances in inner city clinics and homeless populations and meat packing things, that other parts of society to try to figure out what the best way is. But I want to be confident and give — I'm confident that if we make this investment, we're going to get the infrastructure in place, and we have every intent of sustaining containment. The public health capacity of this country is great, but the challenge has been we haven't had a sustained investment in data modernization. We have some health departments that are still using pen and pencil. We've got to get an integrated data system for the whole nation and actually have that data system and its analytics be so effective that it actually can do predictive data analysis so you can predict what's going to happen in the next day or two so you're going to be on top of it. We need that laboratory resilience — and with multiple platforms in these laboratories, we're going to have to make that investment and the workforce. Now I'm just going to say one last thing and I’ll go back to your question. It's going to cost money.   Clemons: Is there a gap between what the White House released and what the CDC internal guidelines were? Redfield: Well, I’m going to say politics didn't push us there, Steve. First and foremost, when this outbreak started, it was a CDC task force within one of my centers — on the 7th of January. And then it became on the 17th an operationalized emergency response center there for all the CDC. And then on January 27th, it became HHS and the task force, and then it became the vice president. So this outbreak has gone from a CDC to an all of government response. As a consequence, there are guidances that we come up that have significant interagency implications and say they go up through an interagency review. And the interagencies make different comments and they come back to us not as mandates, but as comments. And then we have to integrate them. One of the things that became clear at the task force when we put up our initial guidelines is the number of people criticized, and I think, appropriately, that a lot of our guidelines are written in what they called CDC-eze, meaning that they're not easy for the American public to actually get through. And so the decision was, why don't you guys do some decision trees that are simple, one-pagers. You've probably seen them targeting the American public. And we released those six decision trees last week. But behind those decision trees are the regular specific CDC documents that we have for the public health community. They went back through the interagency review — good comments, and they were also all released. In addition, all of our documents on reopening America again related to surveillance, the surveillance in hospitals, our contact tracing guidance, testing, and these specific business issues and opening your business, bars, and restaurants, camps and youth schools, day care centers. All of those now are out on our website   Clemons: What is your take on the strengths or weaknesses of our own “global” public health network right now? Redfield: I think it's a really important and, truthfully, Steve, I think it is the most critical. This nation is going to need a health security capacity as long as we're a nation. And if this didn't remind people, and I'm in the process of restructuring, it's actually one of my top-top priorities. As you know, I spent 23 years in the armed forces. I think I've got a good handle on this to put in place the global health security structure that this nation needs for 2030, 2050 and beyond. And we're in the process of trying to strategically decide where that is. Right now, I have people in over 60 countries with offices in over 45 and around the country. I'm trying to really consolidate it, so I have full capacity, kind of in a regional strategy, maybe eight to 12 regional capacity, they’re full CDC capacity strategically placed around the world. Think of it no different than what the Defense Department does when it sets up its bases. CDC is not a health development organization. We can do health development. We help in it like PEPFAR and the malaria programs, but we have a health development corporation — it's called USAID. I argue that CDC is a health security organization. It's a core responsibility and needs to be built as a core capability of CDC. We’re the tip of the spear so that we can diagnose, prevent and respond to outbreaks at their source, as we're doing right now.   Clemons: Share your own insights into the CDC and institution and respond to those who have been public with their criticisms. Redfield: I would say CDC has never been stronger. We have tens of thousands of the finest dedicated individuals that are data-driven and grounded in science. And the thing that really — I didn't realize how much I missed it after I left the military and went into academia — these men and women are service individuals. They're committed to public service, and CDC as jumped out on this outbreak from the beginning. The first notification from CDC of the unspecified pneumonias that occurred in Wuhan, I had on Dec. 31. All right, the first sitrep [situation report] we did over this was on Jan. 1. We notified the National Security Council on Jan. 2. We activated our emergency incident commander system within the Center for Immunizations and Respiratory Diseases back on Jan. 7. I activated all the CDC. I've only done it, I've only done it two other times since I've been CDC director, one for Ebola and one for EVALI [e-cigarette, or vaping, associated lung injury]. We activated our entire agency for emergency response on Jan. 17. And again, obviously, the secretary called a public health emergency I think on Jan. 27. And so an enormously aggressive response. Dr. Birx and I, we go back a long way. We worked together in the military for over a decade. … She was articulating what I'm articulating. There was no, you know, despite the press, there was no space between us. She was articulating that the data system that we currently rely on is archaic. Well, I've been arguing that before Congress for two years. That's why Congress stepped up to give us originally $50 million for the data modernization. We need to have modernized the data system, and we need to have one public health data system for the whole nation, not every single state having it. So we're actually saying the same thing. The conversation that was going back and forth was we’re in the process of getting that operationalized over the next 12 months or so. And Dr. Birx was making an argument, which I totally agree with. It would benefit this nation for us to get it done soon. ... And Peter Navarro. I don't know where his comments from, they were highly inaccurate, unfortunately. The CDC developed a test for this virus within 10 days of the sequence being published. I don't think anyone's ever developed one that quick in the history of mankind, and we actually were able to use that test to diagnose the original cases Jan. 21. … It's not faulty, it's not flawed, it works perfectly. It's a great test. Many people have developed their test after it, since we've published exactly how to do it. Where the complication and that test was available at CDC then, it's available today. It's never been not available. The only complexity was you had to send the sample to CDC in Atlanta. We, our team tried to then manufacture and scale-up so that we could get that test in all the public health labs in the country. And in that production process, one of the re-agents got contaminated and didn't perform reliably. Nobody was told they were positive or negative incorrectly, but it just didn't work. But we figured out what it was, really within days. … And what I want to emphasize, because this gets lost, is there wasn't a moment in this nation's history with COVID that we didn't have the availability of the public health testing at CDC. … But I will tell you that rather than being criticized, and I go back to something I read every day now from Teddy Roosevelt. Never mind the critic, and I paraphrase, credit goes to the men or women that are in the arena all bloodied and scarred and marred, but at least we’re out there, and failing, failing and going better, failing and going better. And at the end of the day, we either know the triumph of high achievement, or we end up falling short and failing. But at least we failed while daring greatly.WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > US stocks jump after Moderna reports ‘positive’ results from early data on vaccine > WHO holds first global assembly since outbreak, China insists it acted transparently  > Trump officials deflect blame for US death toll, escalate push to reopen country  > Fed chair says full economic recovery may not happen without a vaccine  > Brazil emerges as new virus hotspot amid political turmoil > Dr. Tom Inglesby says society will have to learn to live with virus until vaccine emerges, calls on US to invest now in vaccine preparedness for ‘next pandemic’ and applauds Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan (R) for listening to scientists and hospitals and demonstrating himself importance of wearing a mask         The World Health Organization (WHO) held its annual assembly virtually Monday, the first large gathering of the body since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. Amid growing calls for an independent investigation into the novel coronavirus pandemic, Chinese President Xi Jinping told the annual assembly via video that he supports an international review led by the WHO — once the health emergency ends. President Xi also called on the world to rally behind the WHO and support developing countries. Xi’s speech, delivered over video at the invitation of WHO Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, signaled a growing sense of assuredness from China. (Washington Post)    US, China tensions threaten to dominate Monday’s meeting as President Xi double downs on China’s handling of the pandemic. “We have done everything in our power to support and assist countries in need,” he said. The meeting — which  WHO Director General Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said was perhaps the most important for the world since the organization was founded in 1948 — comes amid rising tension between the U.S. and China over the origin of the coronavirus and China’s alleged delay in alerting the WHO of the severity of the Wuhan outbreak. (New York Times)     THE INTERVIEW Dr. Tom Inglesby, Director, Johns Hopkins Center for Health & Security  Johns Hopkins’s Dr. Tom Inglesby says society will have to learn to ‘live with virus’ until vaccine achieved, says US should be investing now in vaccine preparedness for ‘next pandemic,’ says it’s unacceptable to have to wait 12-18 months to react to virus, says supply chain can’t have just a few nations providing gloves, masks, gowns, and eye protection; applauds Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan for listening to scientists and hospitals and demonstrating himself importance of wearing a mask         Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Monday, May 18.  Editor’s Note.    One book that has sat far too long on my pile of procrastinated must read books is Michael Lewis’s “The Fifth Risk” It was published in 2018, but at the time I got it I had every intention of jumping into it, like so many other things. As Carlos Lozada wrote about the book in The Washington Post, “The Fifth Risk” is Michael Lewis’s love letter to federal workers, an appreciation for the vital work of countless, mostly anonymous, citizens. It highlights what they do to advance the nation’s interests and to keep unbelievable calamities from happening — from safeguarding the nation’s nuclear stockpile and warheads, to managing an incredible array of national assets like federal lands, inspecting meat packing and pharmaceutical manufacturing facilities and so much more.   One of the interview subjects of Lewis’s book laid out a series of risks he had hoped to outline for his Trump administration successors, but they never showed up for any of the briefings.  They never got the outline of high consequence events that could rock the nation. This willful disinterest is relevant today amid reports that the Trump administration never seriously looked at the global pandemic playbook that the Obama administration had drafted for the incoming president and his team. Lewis illustrates time after time — at the Department of Energy, the Department of State, the Department of Agriculture — how federal employees in departments throughout the government expected Trump personnel to show up the day after he was elected and begin the process of government transfer to a new team. But they didn’t show up.   Not to ruin the book for those of you who should get it on your own must read pile, but “The Fifth Risk” is “project management.” It’s when low-level malfunctions can have enormous consequences. When the CIA and FBI failed to communicate key information to each other in a regularized way, terrorists were able to exploit the dysfunction and attack America by turning its own airplanes on the World Trade Center and Pentagon. It’s sort of like if Boeing, which makes one of the most complex products in the world, were to get an element in their systems integration wrong and compound the issue with a sales department that put a price tag on safety. That’s a project management foul.   And what Lewis documents is that the Trump administration brought in a number of people into government positions who had high marks in Trump loyalty but not as high marks in knowing much about the positions they would be occupying, nor interest in learning from their predecessors. This is not a partisan statement — it’s one of observations that rings mostly true with what we have seen unfold in Washington. There are exceptions to this. There are outstanding personnel whom the Trump administration has brought in and who have worked hard to get to know their buildings and teams and to steer policy in a direction consistent with what the president has outlined. That’s the way it should happen. But there are gaps — and today the issue of project management of the world’s most complex organization is being tested in a defining manner.   Time will tell how the administration does. If a vaccine is quickly secured, much of the memory of missteps and slowness to act may fade away — but if the numbers of dead surge from the current 90,000 to 200,000 or 500,000 over time — then “The Fifth Risk” of project management challenges will be identified as one of the villains of this time.   – Steve Clemons    Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE  Thursday, 11 a.m. EDT | Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE to join The Hill’s Editor in Chief Bob CusackRobert (Bob) CusackThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Mnuchin: More COVID-19 congressional action ahead On The Money: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | 2.4 million more Americans file new jobless claims | Top bank regulator abruptly announces resignation Overnight Health Care: Trump says US won't close over second COVID-19 wave | Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | Why the US has the most reported coronavirus cases in the world MORE          On Thursday, May 21, The Hill will host “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy. The summit will feature three one-hour segments, beginning at 11 a.m. EDT.   > Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin joins The Hill’s Editor in Chief Bob Cusack for a keynote interview followed by an afternoon of discussion with leading CEOs and national health experts. > U.S. Surgeon General Jerome Adams  > Sen. Mark WarnerMark Robert WarnerVirginia senator calls for Barr to resign over order to clear protests Trump asserts his power over Republicans Expanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support MORE (D-Va.) > Sen. Ben CardinBenjamin (Ben) Louis CardinOn The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility GOP senator blocks bill giving flexibility to small-business loans but says deal near With capital, communities of color can lead our economic revival MORE (D-Md.)  > Mayor Michelle De La Isla, City of Topeka, Kansas  > Gramercy Tavern co-founder and master chef Tom Colicchio > AOL Founder and Revolution Chairman Steve Case > Siemens North America CEO Barbara Humpton > Wells Fargo CEO Charles Scharf   *Additional speakers to be announced  REGISTER HERE! And join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.            Wednesday, May 20 at 1 p.m. EDT, The Hill will host “The Vir [tech] tual World Ahead,” a virtual program focusing on our dramatic shift to a digital ecosystem at a time when digital literacy continues to be uneven, much as basic access to the internet can be.    Steve Clemons, The Hill’s editor-at-large, will be speaking with:    > FCC Commissioner Michael O’Rielly  > Rep. Suzan DelBeneSuzan Kay DelBeneExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support House Democrats press Treasury on debit cards used for coronavirus relief payments Hillicon Valley: Trump threatens Michigan, Nevada over mail-in voting | Officials call for broadband expansion during pandemic | Democrats call for investigation into Uber-Grubhub deal MORE (D-Wash.)  > Superintendent of the Dallas Independent School District Michael Hinojosa > Next Century Cities Executive Director Francella Ochillo  > Information Technology Industry Council President and CEO Jason Oxman  REGISTER HERE! And join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE  There are 4,758,937 reported cases of COVID-19 throughout the world and the virus has claimed 316,898 lives.    The U.S. is reporting 1,496,509 reported cases and 89,874 deaths. Russia’s cases continue to skyrocket and the country is now reporting 290,678 cases with most experts in agreement that Russia’s caseload is likely being underreported. The U.K. is reporting 247,706 cases. 245,595 in Brazil where the resignation of yet another health minister is muddying the waters for the government’s response to the pandemic. 231,606 cases in Spain. 225,886 in Italy. 179,693 in France, 176,551 in Germany. 150,593 in Turkey. 122,492 in Iran. 100,340 in India. 92,273 in Peru. 16,643 in Israel. 16,285 in Japan. Kuwait 15,691. South Africa 15,515. 12,764 in Egypt. 12,725 in the Dominican Republic. 912 in Kenya.    New York is reporting 351,371 cases as of the time of this newsletter. 148,128 reported cases in New Jersey. 94,191 in illinois. 86,010 in Massachusetts. 80,314 in California. 65,700 in Pennsylvania. 51,142 in Michigan. Texas 48,416. Maryland 39,762. 21,938 in Colorado. 18,433 in Washington. 12,543 in Wisconsin. 12,052 in Alabama. 11,439 in Mississippi. 7,270 in the District of Columbia. 5,938 in New Mexico. Oklahoma 5,398. 4,027 in South Dakota. 2,710 in Puerto Rico. 940 in Vermont. 754 in Wyoming.    11,499,203 COVID-19 test results have been recorded and 272,265 have reported full recoveries from the coronavirus in the U.S.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Top official: Navarro is criticizing Trump with shots at CDC. A senior official for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said that White House trade adviser Peter Navarro’s criticism of the agency's initial coronavirus testing response is actually a denunciation of President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE. "We should remind Mr. Navarro that the CDC is a federal agency part of the administration. The CDC director is an appointed position, and Dr. [Robert] Redfield was appointed by President  Trump," the unidentified CDC official told CNN on Sunday. (The Hill)    Trump officials deflect blame for U.S. death to escalate reopening push. Two of President Trump's top officials are now pointing the finger at the administration's own scientists and Americans' pre-existing health conditions to explain the country's world-leading COVID-19 death toll. Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar suggested Sunday that underlying health conditions, including among minorities, were one reason for the high American death toll — nearly 90,000 as of Sunday evening. And Trump trade adviser Peter Navarro added the government's own Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to its list of scapegoats alongside China and the Obama administration. (CNN report)   Critics say Trump, Congress fumbling economic response to COVID-19. Ten weeks after President Trump signed the first coronavirus relief bill into law, many economists, business groups, lawmakers and labor advocates contend the multitrillion-dollar response has been insufficient, misguided or both. (The Hill)    Gottlieb calls for CDC to have “elevated” role in coronavirus fight. Former Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Scott Gottlieb called on the Trump administration to avoid sidelining the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in an op-ed in The Wall Street Journal published Sunday evening. Gottlieb wrote in his column that the CDC has released less information than is customary during public health emergencies and argued that information about the coronavirus is not being shared with the public in an adequate fashion. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Rep. Sharice DavidsSharice DavidsMinority caucuses call for quick action on police reform Gun control group rolls out House endorsements  Minority lawmakers gain unprecedented clout amid pandemic MORE (D-Kan.)  @RepDavids I have championed the need for state and local aid. I think it MUST be included in any deal made. But the 1800 page bill passed on Friday included things that had very little to do with the crisis at hand. Kansas needs real help and both parties need to work together on that now.   Sen. John KennedyJohn Neely KennedyMORE (R-La.) @SenJohnKennedy Despite Speaker Pelosi’s $3 TRILLION gambit, Congress can't appropriate enough money to buy the U.S. economy. Only 1 thing is going to lift us out of the #coronavirus economy: the American people and private sector. We have to open up safely and soon.   Senate Minority Whip Dick DurbinRichard (Dick)  Joseph DurbinGraham postpones Russia probe subpoena vote as tensions boil over Senate panel sends Trump appeals court pick to floor in party-line vote Democrats aim to amend Graham subpoena to include Trump allies MORE (D-Ill)  @SenatorDurbin Our hospitals & health care workers could use all the help we can give them. That’s why @SenBrianSchatz, @SenatorBaldwin, @ChrisVanHollen, @SenatorTester, & I are urging President Trump to finally do what he should have months ago & fully invoke the DPA.  ACROSS THE NATION  “Hang Fauci, Hang Gates” sign held at Open New York protest. A protestor at an Open New York rally last week that was praised by President Trump held up a sign reading “Hang Fauci, Hang Gates.” The sign seemingly refers to the nation’s top infectious disease expert Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE, a member of the White House coronavirus task force, and Bill Gates, a billionaire philanthropist donating funds to aid coronavirus research and issuing warnings about the global pandemic. (The Hill)   “This feels great.” A preview from Georgia about how America might reemerge from the coronavirus. In this grand gamble, Georgia has gone first, with Gov. Brian Kemp (R) dismissing public health experts who’ve warned that opening too soon could cause a catastrophic surge of deaths, placing his faith instead in the residents of Georgia to make up their own minds about what risks and sacrifices they were willing to accept. (Washington Post)   Illinois business owners could face fine, jail time for reopening. Business owners in Illinois could now face a Class A misdemeanor charge for opening their establishments in defiance of the state's stay-at-home order. Gov. J.B. Pritzker (D) on Friday filed an emergency rule that would penalize owners of restaurants, bars, gyms, barbershops and other businesses for reopening before coronavirus restrictions are lifted, according to The New York Times. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW   Brazil, once a leader, struggles to contain virus amid political turmoil. Brazil’s national confusion — compounded by the resignation of the second health minister since the pandemic began — has helped fuel the spread of the disease and contributed to making Brazil an emerging center of the pandemic, with a daily death rate second only to that of the United States. Public health experts say the disorderly approach has further saturated intensive care units and morgues and contributed to the deaths of scores of medical professionals as Latin America’s largest economy plunges into what may be its steepest recession in history. (New York Times)  Lessons from Slovakia — where leaders wear masks. Within 10 days of identifying its first case, Slovakia went into lockdown: Its borders were sealed, schools and restaurants were closed, and face masks were made mandatory in public places, with some of the country’s most visible public figures, including its president and prime minister, sporting them to set an example. Today, life in Slovakia is slowly returning to its usual rhythm. (The Atlantic)   SCIENCE  Moderna reports “positive” results from early data on coronavirus vaccine. The biotech company Moderna on Monday reported “positive” data on its potential coronavirus vaccine from an early clinical trial, raising hopes about the effort. The company said early data from a phase one clinical trial showed that people given the potential vaccine generated an immune response similar to that in people who had recovered from the disease. (The Hill)    And some more promising news on the vaccine front . . .  Large-scale vaccine testing expected by July, NIH director says. National Institutes of Health Director Francis Collins said at least four to five COVID-19 vaccines “look pretty promising” and wide-scale testing could begin with one or two by July, according to The Associated Press. (The Hill)  BUSINESS  U.S. stocks jump amid vaccine, reopening optimism. Stocks jumped to the highest levels in almost three weeks after promising early results for an experimental vaccine sparked speculation economies could snap back quickly. Crude oil advanced and yields on Treasuries rose. The S&P 500 surged more than 2.5 percent after Moderna Inc. said its vaccine tests yielded signs it can create an immune-system response in the body. (CNBC)   Powell says a full economic recovery may not happen without a vaccine. The U.S. economy will claw its way back from the current downturn but may need a coronavirus vaccine before that is complete, Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell said. “In the long run and even in the medium run, you wouldn’t want to bet against the American economy. The American economy will recover,” Powell said in an interview with CBS’s “60 Minutes.” (CNBC)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS  Judd Gregg: The world’s hope is America. Even if our leaders do not seem to be capable of getting past their own personal prejudices, it is clear the world expects our people to excel, to take on this crisis and handle it with strength and purpose. The world is betting on America. They are betting that we the people will pull ourselves through and bring much of the world with us. It is a good bet. (Judd Gregg for The Hill)    Adding to Fauci’s diagnosis: The critical case for ending our shutdown. The total lockdown may have been justified at the start of this pandemic, but it must now end — smartly, without irrational, unnecessary requirements contrary to medical science, common sense and logic. (Dr. Scott W. Atlas for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS Bon Jovi launches Long Island food bank amid coronavirus shutdowns. Jon Bon Jovi and his wife, Dorothea Bongiovi, are launching a food bank on Long Island amid the spike in unemployment that has come with the coronavirus pandemic. The Jon Bon Jovi Soul Foundation says it started distributing food Monday to help organizations combat food insecurity throughout the summer. (The Hill)  ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. LEE ZELDIN (R-N.Y.)  > Steve interviews former Maryland Lt. Gov. and ex-RNC Chairman MICHAEL STEELE  > Steve interviews former U.S. Energy Secretary ERNEST MONIZ  > Steve interviews Sen. JOE MANCHIN (D-W.Va.)  > Steve interviews Mylan CEO HEATHER BRESCH  > Steve interviews Wilson Center President and CEO JANE HARMAN    Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.   CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.     VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Tom Inglesby, director of the Center for Health Security of the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.  Read excerpts from the interview below.  Tom Inglesby: Well, I think what's going well is that the messages around physical distancing, and masks, and avoiding gatherings, and telecommuting, I think people are hearing those messages and largely responsive to them. Obviously, it's not universal, and there are some people in the country who are not necessarily persuaded of those actions. But I think overall, collectively we should be happy as a country that we've been able to change the trajectory of the epidemic. We continue to have the largest epidemic in the world, but we've been able to change that trajectory. ... What I’m more worried about is, that there is a sense by some that this may be over in, you know, in June or that this may end soon, and that will be completely back to where we were before. That's not going to happen. This virus is still circulating in our country. It's still circulating the world. It's causing terrible damage in countries around the world. In some places, many, many countries have increasing numbers of cases on a day-to-day basis that are rising pretty sharply. So, we're going to have to find a way to live with this virus until we have a vaccine. And I think that the measures that we've been talking about are the most important ones even as we reopen.   Clemons: Do you sense from your colleagues that they think this is going to be a shorter road than we would normally have?  Inglesby: Well, yeah. I didn't mean to imply on the discussion with Chuck ToddCharles (Chuck) David ToddDemings: 'We are long overdue for every law enforcement agency in our nation to review itself' DC mayor: 'I think that the president has a responsibility to help calm the nation' Atlanta mayor: 'We know the frustration is still there' despite calmer Saturday protests MORE yesterday that it's going to be a short road. Even if we do have a vaccine at the end of the year or the beginning of next year that still needs to be produced on a large scale, it still needs to be distributed to places around the world. It would not all be ready at the same time. So even if we do have a vaccine at the end of this year or the beginning of next year, there will be a lot of work to do both in the U.S. and around the world to get it to people, to figure out who's at highest risk, who should be the highest priority for getting the vaccine. I do think everything would have to go in the right direction for us to have a vaccine by the end of this year, the beginning of next year. There are lots of ways that it might not work, in the event that the vaccine doesn't prove to be as safe as we hope it would be or as effective.   Clemons: What are the best insights you have on how to resolve the tension between scientists and the politics of just giving people what they want? Inglesby: I do think it needs to be a partnership between political leadership, and public health input, and scientific input. I think one without the other won't work. But we’ve seen that in countries around the world, some of the countries that have great success, like New Zealand, there's a very close partnership between political leadership and public health leadership, and it's a model that's worked before, and I think it's going to continue to be important throughout our response in the United States. We're going to need to have the input of scientific and public health leaders because things are going to keep evolving. Different challenges will emerge both with our public health response, with new therapies, with new clinical developments that we learned about with this virus. Even in the last month, we've seen this virus could do things that we didn't anticipate as recently as April. So, there will need to be very close partnership between scientific leaders and political leaders. And, I think the role of CDC is very important, and we should make sure that CDC continues to have a strong voice in the country they have in all past outbreaks, since I can remember, and they should continue to bring their expertise to bear. We have thousands of people working at CDC on epidemic response, and they're very important. We also have amazing federal agencies like NIH, FDA, BARDA, ASPR, and a really strong research community in this country. So hopefully, those voices will be able to help usefully shape the response and bring political leaders the input they need to make good decisions.   Clemons: How do we go from this moment of fighting the current pandemic to being much smarter about the future and the next pandemic? Inglesby: Yeah, there has been definitely a cycle in public health response to infectious disease emergencies. There's a lot of attention at the moment of an event and then in the years that follow there's a period of kind of loss of attention, people move on, political leaders have other priorities that emerge. So hopefully, the traumatic nature of this event is so compelling that there is a bipartisan consensus that we need strong public health programs in this country. We need to spend more money on vaccine development which could change everything. There has been a dramatic shortening of the timeline of vaccine development around the world in the last 15 years because of loss of investment. But, waiting a year or 18 months to have a new vaccine with this kind of pandemic ravaging the world, we should just all collectively say that's unacceptable and we will spend the money needed to shorten vaccine timelines dramatically before we have another pandemic that's on top of us. So, we need to make big investments in vaccine development that are sustained. We need to change the way we think about our supply chain. We can't be in a position where only a few countries were providing masks, gowns, gloves, eye protection and everyone needs them at the same time in the world. We saw our doctors and nurses in March having to go take care of COVID patients without the proper equipment. We can't let that happen again. We have to prepare our health care systems better.   Clemons: Gov. Larry Hogan of Maryland seems balanced. What do you think a successful governor looks like in the era of coronavirus? What can they get right, and what can they get wrong?  Inglesby: Yes, I have been very impressed with Gov. Hogan's approach to this. Right from the beginning, I think he was asking for scientific advice, public health input, hospital-based input as he was making decisions about stay-at-home orders or social distancing measures. And I've also been impressed that he thinks it is very important to wear a mask, for himself personally to wear a mask in public, he's been very clear about the need to wear masks when people are in indoor spaces, outside of their homes. He's been very clear about physical distancing, the importance of avoiding gatherings. So, he's been very clear with his messages and he's been very methodical and seeks the input of outside scientific public health folks, consistently. I think, as a model, I think, for the country I think it's going to be really important for political leaders to continue to communicate how important it is to take individual actions, even as they're opening their own states by various processes, they’re opening businesses or whatever steps people are taking, governors are taking, it's going to be very important for them to continue to say how vital it is to continue individual physical distancing. And I think governors that are doing that well, that's a really important part of leadership right now.WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Trump announces leaders of ‘Warp Speed’ vaccine effort  > House to vote on  $3T relief package today, Senate GOP says its ‘dead on arrival’  > Breaking with Trump, McConnell says Obama administration ‘did leave behind’ pandemic plan > Less than 40 percent of small businesses have received PPP funds  > U.S. retail plunged 16.4 percent in April, largest two-month decline on record  > Could coronavirus render cash useless? Mobile money on the rise throughout pandemic > Former Rep. Jane Harman warns pressure on intelligence community possibly leading to another misguided war, says Russia and other nations trying to exploit America’s distraction at moment > Mylan’s Heather Bresch says U.S. should make strategic reserve in medicines, says no country in world can make all of its own medicines         President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE unveils leaders of “Operation Warp Speed.” Moncef Slaoui, the ex-head of GlaxoSmithKline's vaccines division, and four-star Army General Gustave Perna will lead the administration’s efforts to fasttrack research and development of a vaccine for the coronavirus.   THE INTERVIEWS Double Header!  Former Rep. Jane Harman (D-Calif.) warns pressure on intelligence community possibly leading to another misguided war, says John RatcliffeJohn Lee RatcliffeTrump official criticizes ex-Clinton spokesman over defunding police tweet Trump gives Grenell his Cabinet chair after he steps down Trump asserts his power over Republicans MORE overcommitting to Wuhan Lab virus story needs to follow evidence and not politics and maintains Russia and other nations and failed states trying to exploit America’s distraction at the moment         Watch the full interview here.     Mylan’s Heather Bresch calls on U.S. to make strategic reserve in medicines, says no country in world can make all of its own medicines and maintains U.S. is overly dependent on China for active ingredients and raw materials.         Watch the full interview here.   Sponsored Content Presented by Nokia     THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Friday, May 15 Yesterday in my Editor’s Note, I wrote about the necessity of nightmares and avoiding false illusions and fantasy in this era of coronavirus carnage. But today in an oped for The Hill, I write about green sprouts — or “ventures” — that are being created by people trying to move a cause, sell some oysters or cheesecake online, or help young kids have a good birthday through “Remote Fun.” I write about big new online events companies, about mentors online and bakeries delivering special graduation packages. I did this because I recently became intrigued with a study, called Venture Forward, commissioned by GoDaddy along with the University of Iowa and Arizona State University that looked at the ecosystem of 20 million internet-based ventures that had been created — most businesses but many causes and nonprofits as well.   During the Great Recession of 2008-2009, those counties in the U.S. that had the most online-connected ventures created turned out to be the ones that recovered the fastest. Fascinating insights in the study — which I recommend readers investigate. But public policy officials — mayors, economic planners, governors and members of Congress — need to ask themselves what barriers are there to people building and starting a microenterprise? What regulations can be eased? What literacy in business or cause entrepreneurship can be nudged forward? These businesses cannot offset an unemployment figure greater than 36 million and growing, but they can give hope, help with resilience in a community and create a personal mission or cause for people in a time of nightmares.   – Steve Clemons Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE  Next Week: Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE joins The Hill's Editor-in-Chief Bob CusackRobert (Bob) CusackThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Mnuchin: More COVID-19 congressional action ahead On The Money: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | 2.4 million more Americans file new jobless claims | Top bank regulator abruptly announces resignation Overnight Health Care: Trump says US won't close over second COVID-19 wave | Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | Why the US has the most reported coronavirus cases in the world MORE  U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Steven Mnuchin will join The Hill’s editor-in-chief Bob Cusack for a one-on-one interview next Thursday, May 21, at 11 a.m. EDT. The interview will be part of our larger virtual summit exploring efforts to safely reopen the country and restore the nation’s economy.            Join us for our upcoming virtual event “The Vir-tech-tual World Ahead,” that focuses on our dramatic shift to a digital ecosystem at a time when digital literacy continues to be uneven, much as basic access to the internet.    Steve Clemons, The Hill’s editor-at-large, will be speaking with:    > FCC Commissioner Michael O’Rielly  > Rep. Suzan DelBeneSuzan Kay DelBeneExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support House Democrats press Treasury on debit cards used for coronavirus relief payments Hillicon Valley: Trump threatens Michigan, Nevada over mail-in voting | Officials call for broadband expansion during pandemic | Democrats call for investigation into Uber-Grubhub deal MORE (D-Wash.)  > Superintendent of the Dallas Independent School District Michael Hinojosa > Next Century Cities Executive Director Francella Ochillo  > Information Technology Industry Council President and CEO Jason Oxman    REGISTER HERE. And join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE  There are 4,498,579 reported cases of COVID-19 throughout the world and 303,825 deaths from the virus.    The U.S. is reporting 1,420,299 cases and 86,228 deaths as of the time of this newsletter. Russia is reporting 262,843 cases. 238,001 in the U.K. 230,183 in Spain. 223,096 in Italy. 206,507 in Brazil. Turkey is reporting 144,749 cases. Iran 116,635. Portugal is reporting 28,583 cases, but the number of hospitalized patients in the country has dropped by more than 17 percent since lockdown measures were loosed on May 4. 26,891 cases in Singapore. 13,610 in Colombia. 10,989 cases in Denmark, where Thursday marked the first day since mid-March with no new virus deaths.   From Reid Wilson, The Hill’s National Correspondent: A glimpse into coronavirus case rates throughout the U.S.: Alabama worst day so far on Thursday, +401 cases, up to 11,101. Alaska has gone 32 days without a double-digit case increase. Hawaii's streak is 26 days. Montana's is 28 days. Vermont's is 11. Illinois had its worst day on Tuesday, +4,045 cases, up to 88,081. The state added almost 9,000 new cases in the last three days. New Jersey had two days this week with fewer than 1,000 cases for the first time since March 25. North Carolina had its worst day yet Thursday, +743 cases, up to 16,593 total. Texas had its worst day yet Wednesday, adding 1,474 cases. 45,169 cases in total.  WASHINGTON WATCH  Hope fades for more coronavirus relief before June. Striking a bipartisan deal over a new coronavirus relief bill is becoming increasingly unlikely before June as Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE (R-Ky.) and Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE (D-Calif.) are at odds over additional legislation. (The Hill)    McConnell: “High likelihood” that Congress will need to pass fifth coronavirus bill. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) said Thursday evening that Congress would likely need to pass a fifth coronavirus relief bill, but declined to give a timeline for additional legislation. McConnell, during a Fox News interview, said he did "anticipate" that Congress will need to "act again at some point" but that Republicans first wanted to review the roughly $2.8 trillion already appropriated by Congress. (The Hill)    CDC issues tools to guide reopening of schools, businesses, transit. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) released a set of documents on Thursday designed to provide guidance on how child care centers, schools, restaurants and bars, and other establishments could begin the process of reopening in the face of the coronavirus. The direction comes after calls from lawmakers and state officials mounted for the CDC to weigh in on how regions should reopen their economies.  Senate Majority leader says Obama administration “did leave behind” pandemic plan. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) on Thursday walked back comments made earlier this week that the Obama administration didn't leave behind a "game plan" for a pandemic. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. Mark WarnerMark Robert WarnerVirginia senator calls for Barr to resign over order to clear protests Trump asserts his power over Republicans Expanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support MORE (D-Va.)  @MarkWarner Don’t forget, the Trump administration is going to the Supreme Court in the middle of a pandemic, trying to dismantle coverage and pre-existing conditions protections for millions of Americans.   House Republican Conference Chairwoman Liz CheneyElizabeth (Liz) Lynn CheneyTrump says he believes Scarborough 'got away with murder' Hillicon Valley: House FISA bill in jeopardy | Democrats drop controversial surveillance measure | GOP working on legislation to strip Twitter of federal liability protections The Hill's Campaign Report: Trump ramps up attacks against Twitter MORE (Wyo.)   @Liz_Cheney No, @SpeakerPelosi, holding China accountable for the death and devastation they have caused is not “an interesting diversion.” Maybe you should have been focused on China earlier this year when you were busy handing out fancy impeachment pens.   Rep. Lisa Blunt Rochester (D-Del.)  @RepLBR Today’s a big day. The House is back in session to vote on the #HeroesAct - a bold and necessary step in our fight against #COVID19. From testing, to tracing, to treatment - this package takes the bold action we need now. #ForThePeople.   ACROSS THE NATION  NYC extends stay-at-home order while some upstate areas are allowed to reopen. As parts of upstate New York prepared for a gradual reopening, Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) issued an executive order late Thursday night extending stay-at-home orders for regions, including New York City, that do not meet the state’s criteria. Cuomo had earlier said that Central New York, which includes Syracuse, had joined four other upstate regions where some nonessential businesses — including construction, manufacturing and curbside retail — could restart Friday after meeting seven benchmarks set by the state. (New York Times)    Nation’s largest mall to reopen June 1. The largest mall in the United States, Mall of America, won't open its doors until June 1 despite Minnesota's expiring stay-at-home order this month, according to the Star Tribune, Minnesota Gov. Tim WalzTimothy (Tim) James WalzAl Sharpton, Floyd family announce march on Washington in August Minnesota governor sending National Guard troops to border with North Dakota Derek Chauvin charge upgraded to second-degree murder; other officers charged MORE (D) announced on Wednesday that the state's stay-at-home order would expire Monday, allowing nonessential retail stores and malls to reopen amid the coronavirus pandemic. (The Hill)    City of Pittsburgh says large group events will not be allowed this summer, including July 4 fireworks. The city of Pittsburgh announced how summertime activities will be impacted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on Friday. Officials said that while many activities will be allowed, others will be canceled or postponed. All decisions follow the federal and state guidelines. Large events that cannot comply safely with social distancing guidelines — from July 4 fireworks to the annual Great Race 5K — will not be allowed. (WTAE)    Re-imaging the first LGBTQ+ pride online in the age of coronavirus. “The unprecedented challenges of COVID-19 mean that most Prides will not take place as planned in 2020, but we’re determined that this won’t stop us from coming together as a united, strong LGBTQIA+ community to celebrate who we are and what we stand for,” says Kristine Garina, president of the European Pride Organisers Association. “We need community and connection more than ever.” (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW   The coronavirus is upending cash economies. Mobile money could emerge as the winner. In the United States and elsewhere, mobile money services such as Apple Pay, Google Pay and PayPal, along with its subsidiary Venmo, are rising in popularity by offering mobile wallets that allow users to send money digitally. A similar model has taken off in developing countries, particularly in Africa, targeting those with no or limited access to the banking and financial system. Experts and members of the industry say the pandemic is likely to escalate that trend. (Washington Post)     New coronavirus cases nearly triple in Germany after lockdown loosened. On Monday, it looked like newly reported cases, hospitalizations and fatalities in Germany were decreasing. Just one day later, the number of new cases had almost tripled from the day before. The Robert Koch Institute, the German federal government agency responsible for disease control and prevention, reported an estimated 357 new coronavirus cases on May 11. The next day, that number jumped to 933 new cases. (The Hill)   Yemen, buffeted by war, is now ravaged by pandemic, too. It was just two weeks ago that war-ravaged Yemen, the Arab world’s poorest country, reported its first cluster of coronavirus cases. Since then infections appear to have exploded, realizing the worst fears of aid groups. The five-year war in Yemen and the nine-year one in Syria have combined with the pandemic to create especially dire challenges for vulnerable civilian populations. (New York Times)   SCIENCE  Five recent developments contributing to progress in vaccine R&D. Much attention has been given to the speed at which biopharmaceutical researchers are working to identify and develop safe and effective vaccines against the coronavirus. The first clinical trial for a potential vaccine identified by a biopharmaceutical company was initiated less than three months after the first reported case. See here for five recent developments contributing to the industry’s progress in vaccine research and development. (Innovation.org)   Sponsored Content Presented by Nokia    BUSINESS  Less than 40 percent of small businesses have received emergency coronavirus loans: Census Bureau. Less than 40 percent of small businesses have received support from the Treasury Department and Small Business Administration's (SBA) emergency coronavirus lending initiative, according to Census Bureau data released Thursday. While 74.9 percent of respondents to the Census Bureau’s survey of small businesses applied for a forgivable loan through the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), only 38.1 percent received aid. (The Hill)    J.C. Penny is planning to file for bankruptcy as early as Friday. J.C. Penney is planning to file for bankruptcy protection, people familiar with the matter tell CNBC. Its advisers are currently working on a bankruptcy filing that could Friday. They cautioned there is still a chance that final negotiations between the retailer and its lenders spill into the weekend and delay the filing. (CNBC)    Retail sales fall 16.4 percent in April. The shutdowns across the United States devastated retailers in April, as retail sales plunged a record 16.4 percent, according to government data reported Friday. That followed an 8.3 percent drop in March, producing by far the largest two-month decline on record. (New York Times)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS  While COVID wrecks the economy, US entrepreneurship and new ventures are hopeful green sprouts. These examples of new-venture creation don’t fix the aggregate of massive economic loss in the country. But we do know that ventures help with resiliency, they help their communities recover more quickly and, perhaps most importantly, they empower people, inspire others and generate hope alongside some income. (Steve Clemons for The Hill)    America’s debt threatens our national security. Congress has passed more than $2.7 trillion in stimulus. This includes subsidized loans to businesses, increased unemployment insurance, direct payments to Americans, and funding for hospitals and state and local governments. As a result, the federal deficit will be at least $3.7 trillion for fiscal 2020 — because we already were running a $1 trillion deficit before we added the coronavirus stimulus. (Willis Krumholz for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS These identical twin sisters are nurses working in the same COVID-19 unit. Samantha and Rebecca Silverman are working together for the first time on the job on what will likely be the hardest assignment of their careers. The 25-year-old identical twin sisters are both registered nurses working in the COVID-19 unit at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago. "We really are best friends," Samantha said. "Amidst all the craziness of COVID, to be able to work alongside each other is just so lucky for us." (Good Morning America)  ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. ROSA DELAURO (D-Conn.) > Steve interviews BIO President and CEO JIM GREENWOOD  > Steve interviews former Surgeon General VIVEK MURTHY  > Steve interviews World Central Kitchen founder chef JOSE ANDRES  > Steve interviews Rep. WILL HURD (R-Texas)  > Steve interviews Sen. JOHN BARRASSO (R-Wyo.)  > Steve interviews Rep. LEE ZELDIN (R-N.Y.)  > Steve interviews former Maryland Lt. Gov. and ex-RNC Chair MICHAEL STEELE  > Steve interviews former U.S. Energy Secretary ERNEST MONIZ  > Steve interviews Sen. JOE MANCHIN (D-W.Va.)  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.   CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.      VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews former Rep. Jane Harman (D-Calif.), CEO of the Woodrow Wilson Center. Read excerpts from the interview below.   Clemons: Let’s focus on national security. What most worries you? What do you see out there about those trying to exploit this moment and cause increasing troubles for the United States?      Tell us your thoughts on John RatcliffeJohn Lee RatcliffeTrump official criticizes ex-Clinton spokesman over defunding police tweet Trump gives Grenell his Cabinet chair after he steps down Trump asserts his power over Republicans MORE for the role of the Director of National Intelligence. Harman: Well, I don't know what he's looked at, but my understanding from publicly reported sources is at least 12 presidential daily briefs, briefed the president, this president, in January and February on the possible coronavirus threat to the United States. Those briefings were ignored. So, let's start with that. What I'm talking about is in the run up to war with Iraq, I was there. I was ranking member on the House Intelligence Committee at the time. There was enormous pressure on the intelligence community to produce proof, proof that there were weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. Now everybody knew Saddam wanted to develop WMDs, and he did have certainly a chemical industry going on there. He had gassed his own people, and so we all understood that. But the pressure produced a wrong National Intelligence Estimate. Now, what I see is pressure on the IC [intelligence community] where we've had huge turnover in leadership. Ratcliffe would come in, he's been nominated to be Director of National Intelligence, he hasn't been confirmed yet, but some call it a purge at the top and enormous pressure. And if the pressure is to produce proof, proof that there was a man-made virus developed and distributed in the Wuhan lab, no proof for that that I'm aware of, then we'll come up with another wrong intelligence product that could lead to another misguided war.   Clemons: There almost seems to be a partisan divide over how science and empirical research are dealt with around the president. Do you worry about that? Harman: Sure, I do. I don't know — It's probably a partisan divide in Washington because everything's a partisan divide in Washington. But when you look at what the states are doing and the efforts of governors, both Democrats and Republicans, I don't see that kind of divide. I have a kind of personal heroes list, of course, my own governor’s Gavin NewsomGavin NewsomChief Justice Roberts wisely defers to California governor in church challenge  Senior citizens deserve better than to be left in isolation Supreme Court denies California church's challenge to state restrictions MORE of California. But Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE is doing well. Mike DeWine, who was a friend of mine in Congress, governor of Ohio, a Republican, who is doing great. Larry Hogan, another Republican doing great. These are governors of pretty big states, trying to figure out how to have both, protect the health of their citizens and have an economy that will be able to function in a fairly near term while protecting the health of their citizens. And that's what they're doing. So, I just want to give a shout-out to most of the governors. They all seem to be very sensible to me.   Clemons: What will it take to actually invest in the protection, in the infrastructure, and the investment in science that we need for this pandemic and the next one? Harman: Well, let's start with leadership — leadership that wants to solve the problem, not just blame leadership on the other side for not solving the problem. And it's hard for leaders in Congress to show leadership. I would give my Girl Scout badge to [Speaker] Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE, who worked very closely with Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin on the last big bill, the multitrillion-dollar bill, which is providing some aid for a lot of folks. ... I don't have specific information, but I'm listening to the chairman of the Fed yesterday saying we need more and let's have bipartisan leadership focus on what the next tranche should be. I take seriously the ballooning, exploding deficit. I think it's a real problem for national security, American security going forward. But I also think it won't matter if we have a big deficit, if we have a lot of dead people and no economy.   Clemons: What do you think some of your former colleagues and the Democratic Party haven't gotten right as they've stepped forward?   Harman: Somebody has to say — and a few do and I bet you Joe ManchinJoseph (Joe) ManchinDemocratic unity starts to crack in coronavirus liability reform fight Stakes high for Collins in coronavirus relief standoff The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Surgeon General stresses need to invest much more in public health infrastructure, during and after COVID-19; Fauci hopeful vaccine could be deployed in December  MORE is one of those — I'm gonna put the country first. This is a problem. The COVID virus is an invisible enemy, to quote our president. It doesn't choose us by party affiliation. So, if we don't put the country first here, again, we're gonna have a lot of dead people and a dead economy. And that is just how it is. And so I would say to my constituents, and I had a pretty bipartisan district all those years. I would say to my constituents, this is what I think. I would be willing to talk to any of them, but I would take a risk and do what I thought was the right thing, regardless of which party I was voting with or working with.   Clemons: How prepared or unprepared are we, in your eyes, for the November election and this worry about outside meddling? Harman: Well, I'm worried about it. I think we're better prepared than we were in 2018 for sure, or 2016. And I, you know, shout-out to the Department of Homeland Security, which is working well with all the states. Let's understand the states regulate the time and manner of elections. We don't have a national election. We have 50 state elections. But they are working with the federal government. Just before the end of the Obama administration, election machinery and the election process was declared critical infrastructure, which it is. And so that's good. Also a shout-out to some states, like mine, California, which is going to all mail, M-A-I-L not M-A-L-E voting. And I think that's a good thing. It obviously has to be worked on so that it can't be manipulated. But let's expect that Russia and others will try to be there and let's understand that we have a way to go and we have technology that could go there to make a vote-by-mail election secure. Another reason to do that, by the way, Steve, of course, is if we have COVID-19 in our fall, which is predicted or some permutation, which is even worse. God forbid. People are not gonna go to polling places. And, I heard that Jared KushnerJared Corey KushnerThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump poses for controversial photo op at DC church amid protests Tucker Carlson tees off on Trump, Kushner: 'People will not forgive weakness' Trump's strategy to stay in office MORE — this could be an urban legend — said, well, then maybe we won't have an election. Well, oops! I don't think that's the White House's call. I think our Constitution provides that we have elections for president and other offices every four years, and the states have to regulate that. And I think most of our states, and I would hope all of our states, are up to that.   Clemons: I'd love to get your insights as a sculptor of big legislation in the past. How should we be thinking? Is Ernest MonizErnest Jeffrey MonizThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Surgeon General stresses need to invest much more in public health infrastructure, during and after COVID-19; Fauci hopeful vaccine could be deployed in December  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of another relief package; Warner says some businesses 'may not come back' at The Hill's Advancing America's Economy summit  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mastercard CEO Ajay Banga says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now; Teva's Brendan O'Grady says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like Strategic Oil Reserve MORE on the right track with calling for a TVA or CCC? Where are you on tech and what it can do to sort of rebuild our social contract in America? Harman: Well, I think tech is no longer optional, if it ever was. Even I have learned how to sort of kind of work Zoom and do a few other things that I never thought I could do. But I think the future of work is going to be much more technology based. I think not everyone's going back to an office, so let's start with that. I think that, you know, to quote Rahm Emanuel, "Let's not let a crisis go to waste." This crisis could be an accelerator of bad things, that is, more dictators controlling more of their countries, or it could be an accelerator of good things. And that is using technology to build jobs of the future in the energy sector, certainly, that's one. But you know, climate is a gigantic challenge, but also jobs in the national security sector, and in the health care sector. All of this stuff could benefit from technology. I've just been watching, another shout-out, Ken Burns’s series on the Roosevelts, and how Franklin Roosevelt, at the darkest time, before this time, developed all these new agencies, the ones you were talking about, which jump-started our economy. And then came a war. Let's not start another war. He didn't start World War II. And the defense production business lifted millions out of unemployment. So, I'm not recommending war, but I am recommending taking on the big challenges that we know we face and doing exactly what Ernie Moniz says.The Hill’s Steve Clemons interviews Heather Bresch, CEO of pharmaceutical company Mylan. Read excerpts from the interview below. Clemons: What are the supply chain realities? Are we in trouble or are we secure?    Clemons: How should we deal both competitively with China, but also constructively? Bresch: There's no question there is an over reliance, both on intermediates as well as active pharmaceuticals and some finished dosage forms, on China. I think that the diversification you spoke of, what our supply chain, almost half of our raw materials come from China and India and almost half come from Europe or other countries. So, I think as a country, countries need to look at that same diversification. As I said, You're never gonna be able to say we're going to make everything we need in the United States. What we could do is have a much more strategic approach so there's not an over reliance on any one part of the world, not only from a trade or a relationship perspective, but you never know how a crisis is gonna hit or could take a country offline for some period of time. So, I, you know, I've been in conversations with legislators and regulators thinking about, could we be more strategic about the Western Hemisphere? And thinking about countries that could be natural allies to help build up their capabilities. I think we're gonna have to take a long-term view on this to not only strategically be diversified, but really think about the alliances and how we’re not over reliant on any one country because, as you know, those relationships are going to come and go and have their ups and downs.   Clemons: What is the hydroxychloroquine story? Is it being clinically successful? Is it not? Were the steps that we took to stockpile the drug a misstep? Bresch: Let me start with this, science is important and plays a critical role in giving us information and insight to how drugs are working on treatments, and that is a necessary step. I think that the ups and downs and the surges with hydroxy has been we have not completely let the science vet out. And I think it's gonna be until fall until a lot of these very large, statistically significant clinical studies, until those end points come back. I think obviously we're seeing more anecdotal information that would say, perhaps it's not being as effective as we had hoped. And I think to your point there are many other products, remdesivir being one. I don't know If you saw that yesterday, Gilead announced partnering with companies — Mylan is one of the companies they're partnering with — for us to be able to manufacture and produce the product. And we're going to continue to be working with them to do just that globally. So hopefully given our platform and given the diversification us being able to partner with governments, with other companies that we’re continuing to be able to leverage this platform and be able to work very effectively and efficiently and very quickly to hopefully be able to, as science continues, as clinical trials come in, as we get more data, we're gonna be able to respond to that pretty rapidly.   Clemons: How hopeful are you that we will get some therapies and vaccines at the end of this race? Bresch: I'm very hopeful. I mean, I think if COVID hasn't done anything, it has showed not only the human spirit, the human resiliency and the human ingenuity. And I think as we see globally really coming together scientists from around the world, the best research in the world coming together, there's no question that we're going to, I very much believe, not only have treatment, but hopefully a cure. I think we've got to recognize time. You know, when you think back about HIV and the evolution of our understanding of that virus and how smart it was and how much it could manipulate itself inside the human body, that it would take a cocktail of products, it would take us years to figure out what that cocktail needed to be. When you think about something in the infectious disease, these viruses are smart, and it takes time to figure out how they're going to mutate, how we build an immune response, the best effective way to treat them, whether that's one drug, multiple drugs, ultimately a vaccine. But I absolutely believe that when this world rallies together, as I think we are around COVID, there's no question we're gonna accelerate those timelines. We're gonna accelerate getting to a treatment that works. But unfortunately, the race against the tragedy of this disease and the lives it's taking between now and then is just that — it's tragic. But I totally believe that we're going to absolutely have a treatment, you know, in the near future.   Clemons: There are a lot of skeptics out there that say, at the end of the day, we're not gonna have enough supply. Not everyone's going to get it. And there are gonna be some costs and accessibility issues. I'd love to get your thoughts. Bresch: Look, that, the balancing act of accessibility and affordability is, you know, one that's constant and the responsibility is significant. And I think as companies think about how to balance that act, there’s a lot of work in that area. There's no question. I think Gilead is a great example here just recently. I think they were very upfront about what they were capable of supplying. And that's why bringing on other companies to partner with them, to make sure that as the science develops, and if this product is going to show any hope for treatment, that they can quickly be able to ramp up and have these other companies ramp up production. So, I think as one of the largest generic pharmaceutical companies in the world, our focus and vigilance on reaching as many people as possible, getting medicine into the hands of the people who need it has been our mission for 60 years, and I can assure you that that's front and foremost in our mind. I think that the pharmaceutical industry has cured many diseases over the hundreds of years that it's been in business. It's not only shown treatments and cures and has completely moved the needle on the quality of life that we live. But that's only as good as getting it where it needs to be. So, yes, I think this industry will continue to come together and do the right thing and provide access to this medicine. And I think that obviously the costs that go into developing these products as you look across peoples, pipeline and products, there's no question there's cost and research and development is expensive, but the ability to partner and to lower cost economics and to lower cost countries, our ability to like I said, reach those people is utmost important. We showed we could do that on HIV and I think there's no reason we can't show that on COVID or any other crisis or disease that could be inflicted, you know, as we continue to be part of a very global economy.   Clemons: A lot of policy folks are watching this show. What do you think they most need to know? Bresch: So, I think two parts to that. I think our first discussion around strategic supply, I think here in the very near term, not trying to do something that would have significant unintended consequences. I've seen bills being proposed that talk about having only American produced medicine. I can assure you that would do way more damage than COVID has done to our society. So, to be thoughtful about how we think about supply would be first. I think longer term, to your point, COVID is certainly illuminating the issues and the weaknesses of the drug supply system here in the United States from pricing to access. So, do I think that we hopefully now COVID has certainly brought this front and center, and we should take this opportunity to absolutely study and look at the system, why we are where we are, and some of the fixes that it's going to take. And they're not easy. There's not one magic bullet, but we've continued to, you know, very much believe there is a road map to have a more sustainable, a more transparent system so that people know what they're buying, what the cost for what they're buying is, and how their employer or the government through their health care insurance can help supplement that. And today all of those areas are very, very opaque. There's no transparency, and that's something that I believe very much needs to happen. I think that that's going to take a lot of leadership in Washington. It's going to take people from both sides of the aisle to come together, and hopefully COVID is bringing a very unified look in response to this because that's what it's gonna take to fix the broken system that we're participating in right now.North Carolina saw its largest daily number of new coronavirus cases on Thursday with 743, bringing the Tar Heel State's total to more than 16,500 as it continues with the first phase of its reopening plan. Before Thursday, the largest daily number was May 7, when the state saw 648 new COVID-19 cases. A day later, Gov. Roy Cooper (D) began phase one of the his plan to reopen the state, allowing retailers to reopen at half of their capacity while still following social distancing and other safety protocols. Gatherings of 10 or fewer people outside also became permitted again. Restaurants haven't yet resumed dine-in services, however, and salons, barbers, gyms, movie theaters and other businesses remain closed. North Carolina has gradually ramped up its testing capacity, which could possibly account for the record number of daily cases. Health experts also point to the percentage of positive tests when looking to see if a state is effectively curbing the spread of the virus. The reopening guidelines rolled out by the White House and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention say that a state must demonstrate, among other things, a 14-day downward trajectory in either daily cases or percentage of positive cases before reopening. Since peaking at 17 percent in mid-April, North Carolina's percentage of positive cases comes to around 7 percent. It's stayed between 5 and 9 percent since the beginning of the month. Cooper has said that the state could possibly move on to the second phase of reopening on May 22 if it continues to show progress, but he has cautioned that it's not a guarantee. “Our COVID-19 decisions are guided by the data and science,” Cooper said this week, The News and Observer reported. “We’ll use the time in this phase to keep a careful eye on the indicators before we are ready to announce the start of Phase Two.”Florida Gov. Ron DeSantisRonald Dion DeSantisDeSantis pushing to host Republican National Convention in Florida Florida bars and theaters to reopen starting Friday, DeSantis says DeSantis says he's sending 500 National Guard troops to DC MORE (R) announced that gyms in the state would be allowed to reopen on Monday with the proper social distancing and sanitization efforts.  “Effective Monday, gyms can operate," DeSantis said at a press conference in Jacksonville, Fla., on Friday.  “Don’t we want people to be getting exercise?” he continued. “Don’t we want people to be getting in shape?” DeSantis stressed that gymgoers would need to social distance themselves and continue to sanitize machines after use. He also encouraged outdoor forms of exercise.  The news was a part of DeSantis's announcement that the state would enter a "full" phase one of his three-phase plan reopening on Monday.  “We went to phase one but made clear we’re going smart, safe and step-by-step,” the governor said. “We did an initial phase one. We did not exhaust everything we could have in phase one.” Additionally, the governor announced that restaurants and retailers would be able to operate at 50 percent capacity after operating at 25 percent capacity in the initial phase one process. However, movie theaters in the state will remain closed.  There were 43,210 positive coronavirus cases in the state on Thursday, with a death toll of 1,875, according to the Florida Department of Health.  South Florida has been hit hardest by the virus, with Miami-Dade County accounting for 35 percent of the state's coronavirus cases alone.  DeSantis said Thursday that he approved plans for restaurants and nonessential businesses to reopen in Miami-Dade and Broward counties, including allowing restaurants in Miami-Dade county to operate at 50 percent capacity. President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE's Rose Garden press conference on Friday was scored to the sound of blaring horns as truck drivers nearby protested for fair wages. The horns, which could be heard clearly from Constitution Avenue outside the White House, persisted throughout the president's remarks on his administration's efforts to speed the development and production of a coronavirus vaccine. The horns were audible for close to 30 minutes, prompting Trump to acknowledge them. He claimed they were a "sign of love" for his presidency.  "And you hear that outside, that beautiful sound? Those are truckers that are with us all the way. They’re protesting in favor of President Trump, as opposed to against," he said. "That’s the sign of love, not the sign of your typical protest," Trump added. "So I want to thank our great truckers."  President Trump: "Vaccine or no vaccine, we're back." pic.twitter.com/xJm8VqRmn8  The protest coincided with Trump's press conference to detail Operation Warp Speed, a government-wide initiative to speed the timeline to produce a coronavirus vaccine. White House chief of staff Mark MeadowsMark Randall MeadowsHouse Judiciary to hear whistleblowers on 'politicization' of Justice Dept under Trump How Trump cleared the park around the White House for church photo op Trump visits historic DC church after protesters cleared with tear gas MORE later ventured out to meet with some of the protesters, according to a spokeswoman. The demonstration by truckers mirrored one from earlier this month in which drivers lined the street near the White House and laid on their horns to protest low shipping rates, which drivers say are making it difficult to make a living wage. Truckers are facing economic hardship as the economy contracts due to the pandemic, and The Washington Post reported that freight brokers have imposed low rates, further driving down their wages. Congress has not provided targeted relief for the trucking industry, though Trump hosted truck drivers at a White House event last month to praise drivers for supporting U.S. commerce and supply chains amid the pandemic. Updated at 2:33 p.m.New Jersey, the state with the second most number of confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the country, experienced its first days with less than 1,000 new cases this week for the first time since March 25. The state, which is planning to reopen in phases in the coming weeks, saw 798 new cases of the virus on Tuesday and 817 on Wednesday. On Thursday, however, 1,144 new cases were reported. On March 25, the state reported 727 new cases, bringing its total then to just over 4,400. From there, the Garden State's number of daily COVID-19 cases skyrocketed, staying over 1,000 for roughly the next month and a half. As of Friday, the state has almost 143,000 confirmed cases and nearly 10,000 deaths.  New Jersey's overall number of new cases for the week is down, and the daily number of cases has been trending downward, in general. This time last week the state had reported 9,918 new cases. This week, it's only 5,619. The downward trend of weekly and daily cases is encouraging to state leaders, and this week Gov. Phil Murphy (D) outlined two parts of his phased reopening for the state. On Wednesday, Murphy said that "non-essential construction, curbside pickup at non-essential retail businesses, and car gatherings for the purpose of drive-through and drive-in events," would be permitted to resume this coming Monday. "I've been clear that data will determine dates, and what we are seeing gives us confidence that we can begin the careful restart of our economy," Murphy said. "Over the past eight weeks, New Jerseyans have taken our stay-at-home order seriously and have created the conditions that make this next phase possible. The steps we are taking allow for important standards of social distancing to continue with the return of safe, responsible business operations." The governor further outlined his plan on Thursday, saying that the state's boardwalks, beaches, lakes and lakeshores would reopen next Friday, May 22, just in time for Memorial Day weekend. Social distancing will still be enforced, however, and some parts of the waterfronts such as picnic areas, playgrounds, pavilions and visitor centers will remain closed. "I'm thrilled to announce that the Jersey Shore will be open to families across our state and region in a way that is consistent with protecting the public health of every beachgoer," Murphy said. "This action will ensure that New Jerseyans can enjoy our state's greatest natural resource ahead of the summer months."  New York and Connecticut, which together with New Jersey create a huge tri-state area, also announced that they would also be opening their beaches for Memorial Day with restrictions. The three states, because of their interdependency, have frequently worked together to implement similar policies throughout the pandemic.The Trump administration is still confident in a COVID-19 test used to test President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE and staff despite a new study showing it may be missing nearly 50 percent of infections.  “We still have confidence in the test or we wouldn’t have it on the market,” Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar said Friday on Fox Business. In a new study from New York University, which has not yet been peer-reviewed, the Abbott ID NOW test missed 48 percent of positive cases when using dry nasal swabs.  Abbott has pushed back on the study, saying it’s unclear if the samples were tested correctly. Azar also said Friday the results could have been caused by “user error.”  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued a notice Thursday alerting the public about potential inaccurate results. The FDA is working with Abbott to analyze the information and said negative test results that are not consistent with a patient’s symptoms should be confirmed with another test.  The FDA is also looking into whether the missed positives could be due to the types of swabs and materials used.  "What we're saying is that there are some data to suggest that there may be inaccuracies, false negatives, with the Abbott test. However, there are many users who have contacted us and have not had this problem, so FDA is digging into it, and we're working with Abbott to actually look at what data are available to get the most up to date and accurate information about the test performance," FDA Commissioner Stephen Hahn said on "CBS This Morning" Friday. "That being said, the test is on the market. We continue to recommend its use or to have it available for use," he added.Education Secretary Betsy DeVosElizabeth (Betsy) Dee DeVosGOP lawmaker wants probe of UPenn's Biden Center for Diplomacy and Global Engagement Taking the guesswork out of financial aid appeals  Trump vetoes measure aimed at blocking DeVos student loan rule MORE issued guidance to the country's school districts on how they should allocate funds received from Congress's $2 trillion CARES Act, telling the districts that they should increase the amount of money given to private schools. The New York Times, which published a story about the DeVos guidance on Friday, reported that language included in House Democrats' latest coronavirus stimulus bill would hamstring DeVos's ability to allocate the additional $58 billion in the proposal for K-12 schools to private institutions.  The Hill has reached out to the Education Department for comment. The CARES Act, signed into law by President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE in late March, created the Education Stabilization Fund, a multibillion dollar package aimed at aiding schools around the country that had been thrown into financial disarray by the coronavirus pandemic. The fund earmarked a total of $30.75 billion to schools — roughly $14 billion for higher education and $13.2 billion for elementary and secondary education, with the rest, about $2.9 billion, going to nation's governors.  Per federal education law, when a school district receives federal funding for its poorest students, it is required to fund "equitable services,” such as transportation and tutoring, for low-income students that attend private schools within the district. For example, if 10 percent of a school district's low-income students attend private schools, then 10 percent of the districts funding for low-income students — known as Title I funding — must go to provide "equitable services" to those students. Allocation of the $13.2 billion set aside for elementary and secondary education from the CARES Act worked in the same way, meaning school districts with a higher percentage of low-income students received more money. However, the guidance from DeVos shifted how much of this money private schools could receive. Instead of funding based on how many low-income students private schools have, the allocation method was changed to base funds off of the total percentage of students in the district that private schools educate, regardless of their income level. The secretary's guidance has been met with pushback from states and districts facing large budget shortfalls due to the pandemic. The Council of Chief State School Officers sent DeVos a letter on May 5, asking for clarification on the guidance. "The effect would be that non-public schools would receive an inequitable amount of funding, much more federal support than Congress intended, or [local educational agencies] anticipated based upon the CARES statute," it said. In its letter, the group cites that nonpublic schools in Louisiana would receive "at least 267% more funding under the Department’s suggested approach than they would if [U.S. Education Department] were to interpret equitable services as required under CARES." "In Orleans Parish, Louisiana, at least 77% of its CARES formula allocation would be directed to non-public schools in the area," it added. David Sciarra, the executive director of the Education Law Center, wrote New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy (D) to reject the guidance, saying that Newark Public Schools — the largest school district in the state — would lose $800,000 in emergency funding under the guidance. On Tuesday, Indiana's superintendent of public instruction, Jennifer McCormick (R), said in a tweet that the state wouldn't follow DeVos's guidance. "IN will distribute funds according to Congressional intent and a plain reading of the law," she said. "I will not play political agenda games with COVID relief funds. Our most at-risk students depend on this commitment."  IN will distribute funds according to Congressional intent and a plain reading of the law. I will not play political agenda games with COVID relief funds. Our most at-risk students depend on this commitment. https://t.co/Jrp56vxR1e  Critics of DeVos believe that her new guidance is the latest scheme in the secretary's long-running crusade for private schools and school choice.  Additionally, she has received flak for setting aside $349 million — 2.5 percent of Higher Education Emergency Relief money — to "address the greatest unmet needs related to the coronavirus, giving priority to schools that have not been allocated at least $500,000 from the fund." The department has said that its goal with this is to "ensure that every eligible public and private nonprofit institution will receive at least $500,000 in CARES Act relief funding," but many have questioned if the money is going to where it is needed the most. Specifically, small colleges have received large influxes of aid, despite their tiny enrollments. Inside Higher Ed cited that Massachusetts’s Conway School of Landscape Design is now expected to receive $493,308 in aid from the CARES Act. With an enrollment of 18 students for the 2017-18 academic year, that comes out to more than $27,000 per student. By comparison, New Orleans–based Delgado Community College received $11.3 million in funding from the stimulus package. However, with more than 20,000 students for 2017–18 academic year, the institution received only $550 per student, according to Inside Higher Ed.President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE’s daughter and senior adviser Ivanka TrumpIvana (Ivanka) Marie TrumpThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump poses for controversial photo op at DC church amid protests Trump: food chain 'almost working perfectly again' Lilly Wachowski claps back at Ivanka Trump and Elon Musk's 'red pill' exchange MORE wore a face mask while visiting a produce distributor in Maryland on Friday. She was photographed wearing a black face covering adorned with an American flag pin while she toured Coastal Sunbelt Produce, a food service distributor located in Laurel, Md. The visit was meant to highlight the Department of Agriculture’s $19 billion coronavirus aid program for farmers and ranchers launched last month, which includes funding for a program that helps suppliers whose businesses have been impacted by the pandemic to distribute food boxes to food banks, community organizations and nonprofits. Agriculture Secretary Sonny PerdueGeorge (Sonny) Ervin PerdueJustice Department investigating meat price increases: report 11,000 coronavirus cases tied to three meat processors: report The looming USDA deadline to guarantee access to school meals  MORE, who also toured the facility Friday morning, wore an American flag–patterned face mask. The two officials were joined by Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan (R), who also wore his own face covering. The officials toured the Coast Sunbelt Produce facility and watched food boxes being assembled. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) issued guidance in April recommending Americans wear face coverings in public in order to prevent the asymptomatic spread of the novel coronavirus. The president, however, has resisted wearing a face covering in public on recent trips to Arizona and Pennsylvania amid the pandemic. Trump said he was told it was not necessary that he wear one on a visit to a Phoenix mask facility last week, despite signs around the facility directing employees to wear masks. He is tested daily for the novel coronavirus and has not reported a positive test. Meanwhile, the White House issued guidance at the beginning of this week urging West Wing aides to wear face masks except when social distancing at their desks after two officials tested positive for COVID-19. An increased number of officials have been seen wearing face coverings since the new policy was issued.Markets opened down Friday morning on news that retail sales in April fell a record 16.4 percent, breaking the March record of an 8.3 percent decline. The Dow Jones Industrial Average was down 225 points, or 1 percent, in early trading, as the S&P 500 fell 31 points, or 1.1 percent. The precipitous drop in retail sales, which accounts for both online and in-store shopping, was worse than economists had expected, and is only the most recent in a spate of horrifying economic news. On Thursday, the Labor Department reported that nearly 3 million people applied for initial unemployment last week, marking the eighth straight week of multi-million new claims. The seasonally adjusted estimate since the pandemic began topped 36 million. Goldman Sachs projected that the unemployment rate would peak at 25 percent, near the highest levels seen in the Great Depression nearly a century ago. A survey from the Federal Reserve found that a fifth of workers had no paid leave available if they got sick, and that 39 percent of those earning under $40,000 a year had lost their jobs in April. But economists are also hoping that once some states open for business, workers will come back, sales will start to rise again, and the economy can start churning again, albeit at a confined clip.Sen. Joe ManchinJoseph (Joe) ManchinDemocratic unity starts to crack in coronavirus liability reform fight Stakes high for Collins in coronavirus relief standoff The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Surgeon General stresses need to invest much more in public health infrastructure, during and after COVID-19; Fauci hopeful vaccine could be deployed in December  MORE (D-W.Va.) dismissed President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE’s claims of widely available coronavirus testing in an interview Thursday with The Hill’s Steve Clemons. Trump is “totally wrong … he is absolutely wrong,” Manchin said, in reference to the president's claims that “anybody who wants a test can get a test.” “I've had poor people, people over West Virginia call me, say Joe — I need a test, I want to get a test,” Manchin said. “They said, well, bring your insurance card and get your doctor's referral. These are people that use emergency rooms, they don't have a family physician and you want them to get a doctor's referral before you’ll test them? Come on.” Manchin added that he had instructed constituents who need tests but are unable to get them to contact him, saying his staff is working in all of West Virginia's 55 counties. He also blasted Gov. Jim Justice (R) and other governors he said were still “sitting on” federal funds for testing. “They’re hoping they're going to get relief to where they can use part of it. I want them to have flexibility to be able to balance their shortfalls,” Manchin said, referring to efforts in the Senate to give state leaders a freer hand with the funds meant fight the coronavirus. “But the other $500 [million] or $600 million could go out to all the counties and all the municipalities that are having extreme difficulties in keeping all their services up: first responders, health care, basically police protection, sanitation, all these things. So, they better get on the ball here and get things moving,” he added.WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Another 3 million Americans join jobless rolls, 36.5 million unemployed since pandemic  > Burr to step down as Intel Chairman amid stock sale probe  > Ousted vaccine official tells Congress US faces ‘darkest winter in modern history’ without coordinated response to coronavirus; Trump calls him ‘disgruntled employee’  > WHO warns COVID-19 ‘may never go away’  > Trump says he was ‘surprised’ by Fauci testimony  > ‘Wild West’ in Wisconsin: State Supreme Court strikes down governor’s stay-at-home order  > BIO names Dr. Michelle McMurry-Heath as new CEO > Former Energy Secretary Moniz says U.S. needs energy jobs coalition  > Sen. Manchin says Congress is pushing Wall Street solutions that don’t work for Main Street         Remember Rick Bright? The former top U.S. vaccine official who alleged in a recent whistleblower complaint that he was demoted for prioritizing science over political favors testified before Congress Thursday morning about the need for a national response to the coronavirus pandemic. Bright said in prepared testimony that the United States faces the “darkest winter in modern history” — with “unprecedented illness and fatalities” — if federal officials don’t develop a more coordinated strategy before an expected resurgence of the virus later this year, according to The Washington Post.  As to be expected, President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE took to Twitter to disavow Bright’s whistleblower complaint ahead of his congressional testimony, saying Bright should “no longer” be working for the federal government.     THE INTERVIEWS  Double Header!  Former Energy Secretary Ernest MonizErnest Jeffrey MonizThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Surgeon General stresses need to invest much more in public health infrastructure, during and after COVID-19; Fauci hopeful vaccine could be deployed in December  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of another relief package; Warner says some businesses 'may not come back' at The Hill's Advancing America's Economy summit  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mastercard CEO Ajay Banga says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now; Teva's Brendan O'Grady says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like Strategic Oil Reserve MORE says U.S. needs energy jobs coalition in the same spirit as from the 1930s.          Watch the full interview here.      Sen. Joe ManchinJoseph (Joe) ManchinDemocratic unity starts to crack in coronavirus liability reform fight Stakes high for Collins in coronavirus relief standoff The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Surgeon General stresses need to invest much more in public health infrastructure, during and after COVID-19; Fauci hopeful vaccine could be deployed in December  MORE (D-W.Va.) says Congress is pushing Wall Street solutions that don’t work for Main Street, says we need to invest more in health programs to protect Americans from next pandemic, says President Trump is flat out wrong on testing availability         Watch the full interview here.   Sponsored Content Presented by Nokia    THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Wednesday, May 13  Editor’s Note.   Many folks have commented that in this unusual time, they are having vivid and frequent nightmares. One only wonders what the warnings of former top U.S. vaccine official Rick Bright, who testified Thursday before Congress, will do to the toxicity and intensity of those dreams. Bright stuck a knife of reality into the likelihood that a vaccine could be generated in the next 12 to 18 months. He said that only under the best of circumstances would that be possible; and with a national leadership team and president that elevate “political expediency” over science, in his view, he indicated the chances of a best of circumstance path to a cure for the virus in that time period is very low.   Add to the mix the new unemployment report in which just about 3 million more filed claims, kicking the official number of unemployed-benefits seekers to 36.5 million people. Sen. Joe Manchin (D-W.Va.) told me in my interview Thursday that he wants all of his constituents to be tested for the virus if they want, and to be tested again, but he said the assertion that people could get a test if they want one — an assertion by President Trump — is totally false. Manchin also stated that the trillions of dollars in stimulus are being written to work for Wall Street types, not those in rural areas and not those on Main Street. Manchin tells the world as it is, in my view, and not the world as we’d like to imagine it to be.   But imagining a better world is important too. That might help the content of our dreams, if our aspirations are given a path and some lift. That is why I asked former Secretary of Energy Ernest Moniz to speak about his “Energy Jobs Coalition” idea — a sort of Tennessee Valley Authority-type of big idea for this era and as a way to create jobs and a better energy infrastructure as part of the path out of today’s major economic crisis. Moniz wrote about this idea for The Hill and his piece can be read here.    The CEO of General Electric, Larry Culp, has said “there will be another side” to all this, and I agree with him, but like Bright said, to get to that other side, to get to a new energy jobs coalition, to think about advancing the economy and American society rather than just “recovering,” we will still possibly experience our “darkest winter in modern history.”   We are producing this report to offer the best information we can — and sometimes that comes packaged in hope and aspiration,  and other times in a vividly grim assessment. The best way to the other side is making smart decisions, being resilient where possible, innovating, and not getting seduced into fairy tales or fantasy. The nightmares are necessary.   — Steve Clemons     Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE Join us! The Vir-Tech-Tual World Ahead | Wednesday, May 20        Join us for our upcoming virtual event ‘The Vir-tech-tual World Ahead’, that focuses on our dramatic shift to a digital ecosystem at a time when digital literacy continues to be uneven, much as basic access to the internet.    Steve Clemons, The Hill’s editor-at-large, will be speaking with:    > FCC Commissioner Michael O’Rielly  > Rep. Suzan DelBeneSuzan Kay DelBeneExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support House Democrats press Treasury on debit cards used for coronavirus relief payments Hillicon Valley: Trump threatens Michigan, Nevada over mail-in voting | Officials call for broadband expansion during pandemic | Democrats call for investigation into Uber-Grubhub deal MORE (D-Wash.)  > Superintendent of the Dallas Independent School District Michael Hinojosa > Next Century Cities Executive Director Francella Ochillo  > Information Technology Industry Council President and CEO Jason Oxman  > *Additional speakers to be announced  REGISTER HERE. And join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 4,399,550 reported cases of COVID-19 throughout the world and the virus has claimed 299,333 lives.    The U.S. is reporting 1,398,393 cases and 84,575 deaths as of the time of this newsletter. Russia accounts for the second most global cases with a reported total of 252,245. There are 234,431 cases in the U.K., 228,691 in Spain and 223,096 in Italy. Brazil saw a record increase in cases on Wednesday and has overtaken France as the sixth hardest-hit nation with a total of 196,158 reported cases. 178,184 cases in France. 174,284 in Germany. 81,705 in India. Japan — which is set to lift its state of emergency in 39 of its 47 prefectures — is reporting 16,049 cases. 16,006 in Indonesia. 12,074 in South Africa. 6,819 in Malaysia. 6,593 in Morocco. 6,145 in Finland. 3,380 in Hungary. 3,134 in Iraq. 654 in Zambia.    New York is reporting 340,661 cases. New Jersey 142,389. Illinois 84,694. 73,144 in California. 62,791 in Pennsylvania. 48,391 in Michigan. 43,075 in Texas. 43,210 in Florida. 35,903 in Maryland. 34,855 in Connecticut. 33,489 in Louisiana. 27,813 in Virginia. 16,370 in Tennessee. 10,902 in Wisconsin. 7,542 in Kansas. 1,565 in Maine.    9,974,831 COVID-19 tests have been conducted and 243,430 people have reported full recoveries from the virus in the U.S.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Burr to step down from Senate Intel panel amid stock sale probe. Sen. Richard BurrRichard Mauze BurrTrump asserts his power over Republicans FISA 'reform': Groundhog Day edition Rubio: Coronavirus conspiracy theories could be used in foreign election misinformation campaigns MORE (R-N.C.) will temporarily step aside as chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee amid an investigation into his stock sales, Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE (R-Ky.) announced Thursday. McConnell’s announcement comes after federal investigators seized Burr’s cellphone on Wednesday night as part of an investigation into alleged insider trading. (The Hill)    Trump calls Fauci's caution on schools reopening “not an acceptable answer.” President Trump voiced frustration Wednesday at the nation's top infectious disease specialist after he warned a day earlier against reopening schools and businesses too quickly. "I was surprised by his answer, actually," Trump said when asked about Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE’s warnings during televised congressional testimony that reopening states too quickly could have dire consequences. (CNN)   Trump names ex-pharmaceutical executive, general to lead vaccine push. President Trump plans to tap a former pharmaceutical executive and an Army general to lead Operation Warp Speed, the administration's program aimed at speeding the development of a coronavirus vaccine. Moncef Slaoui will serve as chief adviser to the project, while Gen. Gustave Perna serves as chief operation officer, according to an administration official. (The Hill)  LAWMAKERS TWEET  Rep. Marcia FudgeMarcia Louise FudgeThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Moniz says U.S. needs energy jobs coalition and Manchin says Congress is pushing Wall Street solutions that don't work for Main Street; Burr to step aside Hillicon Valley: Experts raise security concerns about online voting | Musk finds supporter in Trump | Officials warn that Chinese hackers targeting COVID-19 research groups The Hill's Campaign Report: Democrat concedes in California House race  MORE (D-Ohio) @RepMarciaFudge Unemployment is at its worst point since the Great Depression. Meanwhile, the Administration is fighting a ruling that prevented it from stripping food benefits from hungry Americans in the middle of a pandemic. THE CRUELTY IS THE POINT. #HandsOffSNAP   Rep. Michael BurgessMichael Clifton BurgessThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Moniz says U.S. needs energy jobs coalition and Manchin says Congress is pushing Wall Street solutions that don't work for Main Street; Burr to step aside The Hill's 12:30 Report: House returns to DC for coronavirus relief House leaders enact new safety precautions for votes MORE (R-Texas)  @michaelcburgess @HouseCommerce Subcmtee on Health is the premier health subcmtee in Congress. So why have we waited until TODAY to have the first official #COVID19 hearing?   Sen. Bernie SandersBernie SandersOVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump signs order removing environmental reviews for major projects | New Trump air rule will limit future pollution regulations, critics say | DNC climate group calls for larger federal investment on climate than Biden plan Google: Chinese and Iranian hackers targeting Biden, Trump campaigns Sanders: Police departments that violate civil rights should lose federal funding MORE (I-Vt.)  @SenSanders In just eight weeks, 36 million Americans lost their jobs. 27 million lost their health insurance. During the worst public-health crisis in a century, we cannot continue to tie health care to employment. Medicare must guarantee health care to all.  ACROSS THE NATION  WIsconsin governor: Republicans, state Supreme Court decided “facts don’t matter” in move to reopen state. Wisconsin Gov. Tony Evers (D) late Wednesday denounced the state Supreme Court's decision to side with Republican legislators and strike down the extension of his stay-at-home order, saying the ruling would throw the state into "chaos" and lead to a spike in coronavirus cases. Following the court’s ruling, several bars across the state opened at midnight Thursday to welcome their first patrons in months. (The Hill)    Politics, Pennsylvania and re-opening drama. President Trump is in the prominent presidential battleground of Pennsylvania, further submerging himself in a politically charged debate over whether states are opening too quickly or slowly amid the coronavirus pandemic. Scores of protesters descended on the state capital last month to protest Gov. Tom Wolf's (D) stay-at-home directive, and Trump amped them on, tweeting Monday that Pennsylvanians “want their freedom now.” (The Hill)   18 counties in California set to further relax coronavirus restrictions. Eighteen of California's 58 counties have received state approval to further ease coronavirus restrictions, but major population centers such as the San Francisco Bay Area are choosing not to relax stay-at-home orders for now. (NPR)   Bartlesville, Okla., hospital taking part in plasma treatment study. Ascension St. John Jane Phillips in Bartlesville began treating COVID-19 patients with convalescent plasma therapy last week. The process involves an injection of plasma from a person who has recovered from the novel coronavirus into someone that has a severe case of COVID-19. (Examiner-Enterprise)  WORLD VIEW   WHO: Coronavirus may never go away. The coronavirus "may never go away", the World Health Organization (WHO) has warned. Speaking at a briefing on Wednesday, WHO emergencies director Mike Ryan warned against trying to predict when the virus would disappear. He added that even if a vaccine is found, controlling the virus will require a "massive effort.” (BBC)     Japan has its own Trump-vs.-Cuomo divide. And it’s just as tense. It's a struggle that Americans will recognize — a national leader desperately focused on the economy against a governor whose popularity has soared with attempts to bring the coronavirus under control. Japan has its own version. Playing the role of President Trump is Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, whom critics accuse of dithering in the face of the virus threat in a mistaken attempt to evade economic pain.The part of New York Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) is played by Tokyo’s governor, Yuriko Koike, who has battled for a much more resolute response to the threat of COVID-19. Koike’s daily video briefings, clear messaging and approachable style have enhanced her reputation. (Washington Post)     France resists idea of U.S. getting vaccine first. Deputy Finance Minister Agnès Pannier-Runacher was responding to comments by Sanofi CEO Paul Hudson, who said "the U.S. government has the right to the largest pre-order because it's invested in taking the risk.” Many labs worldwide are involved in research to find a COVID-19 vaccine. Vaccines usually take years to develop. "For us, it would be unacceptable for there to be privileged access to such and such a country for financial reasons," Pannier-Runacher told France's Sud Radio. (BBC)  SCIENCE Why vaccine “nationalism” could slow coronavirus fight. When the swine flu pandemic struck in 2009, some of the world’s richest countries scrambled to get their hands on vaccines however they could. Poorer countries — among the worst affected — were pushed to the back of the queue, as western nations signed deals with drugmakers to guarantee access to vaccines. (Financial Times)    Emissions drop during pandemic creates unexpected challenge. Stay-at-home orders around the world have set the stage for an unintentional experiment: What happens to the planet when some of the most polluting activities grind to a halt? Carbon emissions have plummeted as people stick close to home, leading to drastic declines in the use of cars and planes. (The Hill)   BIO, the Biotechnology Innovation Organization, names Dr. Michelle McMurry-Heath as new CEO.  McMurry-Heath, an immunologist, is a former FDA official and a former vice president of external innovation and global leader for regulatory science at Johnson & Johnson. Watch her welcome video message.   BUSINESS 3M more Americans file for unemployment benefits as pandemic expands its impact. Just under 3 million people submitted initial unemployment claims in the week ending May 9, according to Labor Department data released Thursday. The seasonally adjusted figures bring the total number of newly unemployed Americans since the start of the pandemic to roughly 36.5 million. (The Hill)    Cisco CEO: security, collaboration big areas of future opportunity as COVID-19 impacts Q3 results. Cisco Systems customers and partners were under enormous pressure as they transitioned entire teams to a remote working environment. That's why security and collaboration have become even more strategic as businesses all over the globe move to remote working and demand remote-access solutions, according to Cisco CEO Chuck Robbins. Robbins called the COVID-19 coronavirus pandemic the "greatest financial crisis of our lifetime." (CRN)   United Airlines catering workers demand cleaner, safer conditions after four die of coronavirus. United Airlines workers demanded on Wednesday that the company close and clean its catering facility at Newark Liberty International Airport after four workers died from coronavirus. About 60 workers from Unite Here Local 100 rallied outside of the facility, calling for more protocols to protect catering employees from COVID-19. (NY Daily News)   Amtrak’s Acela to make comeback, riders or not. Amtrak plans to restart its Acela express service between Washington and Boston on June 1, a first step in the national railroad’s return from a near-shutdown after the coronavirus crushed rider demand nationwide. (Wall Street Journal)   IDEAS, CAUSES, PASSION The New Deal's lessons can guide into a post-pandemic economy. History has given us a roadmap for how to be ambitious in the face of an economic crisis. But transforming the idea of a “Citizens Energy and Environmental Corps” (CEEC) into action will take more than historical perspective; it will take clarity of vision, practical lines of operation, and lots of resources. We urge Congress to take the first steps toward making this new CEEC “army” a reality by enacting legislation in the next phase of COVID-19 economic stimulus. (Sherri Goodman and Greg Douquet for The Hill)    In defense of Big Pharma, the innovation engine we love to hate. It’s easy to hate Big Pharma. Drug prices are absurdly high compared to the rest of the world. Executive salaries can be stomach-churning. Lobbyists treat Washington like it’s their own personal client state. To any sentient observer, it appears the biomedical industry has gotten greedy. (Bradley Tusk for Fast Company)   Sponsored Content Presented by Nokia    GENEROUS SPIRITS   UAE Ambassador to the U.S. Yousef Al Otaiba hosts “Virtual Interfaith Ramadan Gathering” on Zoom. Yesterday, to mark the holy month of Ramadan, leaders in Washington and the UAE heard the Tarawih (evening) call to prayer from the Sheikh Zayed Grand Mosque Center in Abu Dhabi.    Donation from Twitter CEO more than doubled SF's coronavirus relief fund in a single day. Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey has donated $15 million to the city’s Give2SF COVID-19 Response and Recovery Fund, more than doubling the total of contributions raised in support of the emergency relief program, Mayor London Breed announced Tuesday. (SF Gate)  ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. ROSA DELAURO (D-Conn.) > Steve interviews BIO President and CEO JIM GREENWOOD  > Steve interviews former Surgeon General VIVEK MURTHY  > Steve interviews World Central Kitchen founder chef JOSE ANDRES  > Steve interviews Rep. WILL HURD (R-Texas)  > Steve interviews Sen. JOHN BARRASSO (R-Wyo.)  > Steve interviews Rep. LEE ZELDIN (R-N.Y.)  > Steve interviews former Maryland Lt. Gov. and ex-RNC Chair MICHAEL STEELE  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report.        VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Sen. Joe ManchinJoseph (Joe) ManchinDemocratic unity starts to crack in coronavirus liability reform fight Stakes high for Collins in coronavirus relief standoff The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Surgeon General stresses need to invest much more in public health infrastructure, during and after COVID-19; Fauci hopeful vaccine could be deployed in December  MORE (D-W.Va.).   Steve Clemons: Welcome, Senator Manchin. Thanks for joining us on this very important topic. And let me just start out and ask you just point blank: What has the Congress gotten right in responding to the COVID crisis and what has it gotten not right? Senator Joe Manchin: Oh, boy. Well, I think the early action, basically trying to put finances in place that would help people, that has been good. Even though it's been slow sometimes. The PPP didn't work the way we thought it should work. We told him from day one, you don't understand rural areas. You don't understand poverty. You don't understand Appalachia. You've got to have set-asides for these rural areas, for the underserved areas, for the poverty-stricken areas. If you don't, they get nothing. So even though we talk a good game up here, Steve, and everyone has a big heart and is wanting to help people who are on the low end of socioeconomic ladder, when the plan comes out, it’s usually a Wall Street plan. And I told Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE — we had an argument on the floor, little debate on the floor, when the CARES Act came out — the first two acts that came out, totally bipartisan. Unanimous consent. Totally bipartisan. The third bill, when it got to be $2 trillion, when it became real money, Steve, then you had a situation where Mitch did it all himself, on the Republican side. He just did a bill. And when I looked at the bill, I said, Senator with all due respect, this bill was written by Wall Street, not for Main Street. There's nothing set aside for the smaller areas, for small businesses, for rural areas. There was nothing set aside for the states. They weren’t going to be able to maintain the services that people depend on, and we took an extra two or three days debating to finally get that to be a bipartisan bill. Then you had the 3.5, which was the fourth bill. Now you have a big proposal of 1800 pages and $3 trillion ,which, we're going through that and we haven't seen it all yet. But it's a heavy lift. Clemons: When you say the words $3 trillion, I can kind of feel the stress in your voice. Is this a time to be thinking about fiscal responsibility when you have this big a challenge in the country? Or do we just need to blow through this, put money in every corner of the country and move along? Because I've seen some Republicans say with a straight face that this is the time we need fiscal responsibility and we can't blow the bank? Manchin: Yeah, they've never thought about that before. When it came time to bail out the banks and bail out — and the tax cuts for the corporations, they didn't even hesitate on that. There was no fiscal responsibility there. And the bottom line is, is that everyone's guilty, everyone’s thrown caution to the wind. Let me tell you what bothers me more than anything. How much do you actually hear the discussion going on? What have we done for the National Institute of Health, NIH? What have we done to invest in the CDC and to our research and technology labs? They've been eviscerated over the years. The budget has been cut. What have we done to build them back up to make sure that we find a cure and hopefully accelerate a vaccine? And next of all, prepare for the next pandemic so that we don't be caught like we have? What have we done basically to try to pass any type of a corporate responsibility on manufacturing back in the United States, such as medical devices? How did we get cut so short? Why are we dependent on so many foreign countries for the defense of our country and the medical defense of our country? Those are things we're not talking about and we're not looking at how much money or investment needs to be made there. We’re looking at the socio side, economics, trying to keep people from falling through the cracks, Steve, which is our responsibility, but it has to be balanced Clemons: You just brought a lot of things up in this conversation, you know, supply chains, medical devices, active agents in drugs and also investing in the science ecosystem to get these drugs. So, let me just ask you honestly, you're on a lot of committees there, is there anything going on that's credible right now that begins to look at these as strategic deficits in the country that need to be addressed? Manchin: Well you would think that after we spent $3 trillion, and we’ve been here — the Senate's been here for two weeks. Mitch called us back last week. This is the second week we're here without the House being here. So someone says, well, now they want to hit the pause button. I said that Mitch McConnell, leading the Senate Republicans, has already hit the pause button. We just didn't do anything. We should have been having virtual meetings or real meetings, if you will, to evaluate every aspect of the money that we put out. Call in [Treasury Secretary Steven] Mnuchin. Call in some of the people basically on the front lines that were making the decision to how much money needed to go in what direction to help the economy and help basically stave off a depression. We didn't have any accountability there, we don't know, really, except for what we hear from our front lines in West Virginia, what worked, what didn't work, what money got to where it got to, and didn't get to, what they're still waiting on. Give you a perfect example: The PPP eight-week process. Remember that? If you go ahead and you keep all the employees, 75 percent of the money you borrow go towards your employees, keeping them on the payroll, 25 percent can go for your expenses. You're supposed to keep everything ready to go back into business when it's opened up. So, you keep them on the payroll. There's no business because we told you to shut down. So you're shut down, Steve, and as things start gradually opening up now, your eight weeks come due. Well, your eight weeks come due and basically you want your loan forgiven. OK, now you have not enough business to keep everybody that you kept on the payroll when you had the loan. So, we said, extend that to 16 weeks. We did unemployment for 16 weeks, doesn't it make sense to give a person a chance to keep all those people working as they build their business back up? Little things, those are not big cost items, just commonsense items. That's what we're trying to get through. And we're not having any meetings trying to find a solution and trying to fix maybe what didn't work, money that we basically — maybe there was abuse and fraud that we could stop and make sure that we're able to keep people so they're able to survive. Clemons: Well, you know, we've had two days of just horrible news. Yesterday, Jay Powell, Chairman of the Fed, said that 40 percent of families with a home income of less than $40,000 are out of jobs. And today, we saw the numbers, 3 million more people, 36 million, 36 and a half million people officially unemployed at this moment, probably more when you look at hybrid jobs and gig jobs and partially employed. So, I guess the question is, what are your colleagues missing and understanding that the burden of this time is extraordinary for that low-income bracket, which is a giant footprint in the country?  Manchin: Yeah, the low-income bracket always gets hit the hardest and gets hit first and takes the longest to recover. It always has been through history. With that, I always felt that the people that lost their job because they were told to close down and the people that had to shut their business should have been kept whole. So, they should have gotten their full payroll for whatever time it took us til we were able to ask people to come back to, where we had enough test to make sure  —You're asking a person to go back to work. And you're saying, OK, we want you to go back to work. You have to report back. We’re opening back up. They're going to say, fine, has everybody been tested? I want to be tested and I want every one of my colleagues to be tested. I don't want to go back into an environment that I don't know is virus-free. And on top of that, I want to make sure that I have the necessary equipment to be safe, whether it be the gloves, whether be the gowns, whether it be the face mask, or whether it be the face shields. That should be all made available if you're asking people to go back into harm's way. Now we've talked about heroes pay. What about the people who we’re asking to go back to work and they're not protected? Aren’t they heroes too? So, you know, it doesn't make any sense, Steve. And then in West Virginia, we've done 67,000 tests. We have a million 800,000 people. In the United States of America we've done about nine and a half million tests out of 328 million people. That's nowhere near. And we don't have the capacity to basically make sure that we're keeping availability to where we can identify a hot spot, be able to have a whole army of tracers to trace everybody who had contact, to make sure all of them were tested so we can shut down and quarantine an area that needs to be so that the spread doesn’t grow again. We're not doing any of that. And why we cannot get the president to do the Defense Production Act, I don’t know Steve. Makes no sense to me at all. The Defense Production Act, everybody in this country, every manufacturer has the ability to make PPE's, every ability to make the tests and be able to do that should be mandated by the federal government to do it. And the government should have total acceptability for this and access to it so they can distribute it in the states. I have a state that has the highest vulnerability of elderly and underlying conditions, health conditions. If it hits my state, it will be like a tsunami. The bottom line that saves us: It's a very rural state. We don't have one town or one city over 50,000 population. So, we already have social distancing. It’s our only saving grace. But let me say one thing. Steve, you and I have talked about this before. When you take a poverty-stricken or underprivileged area or poverty- stricken and challenged area, the thing those people have is social gatherings. That's what fulfills their life, with their families, with their friends, with their church, church meetings, church gatherings. All of those have been discontinued. There's very little for someone who is socially challenged, economically challenged in an area that has been hard hit to begin with before the pandemic, to have any type of a quality of life unless we get the testing that can allow them to start moving around, unless we can get to protection, unless we find a cure and a vaccine that protects them.   Clemons: So, when you hear from the President of the United States, we’ve got more than enough tests out there. Anybody who wants a test can get a test. What's your answer? Manchin: He’s totally wrong. He is absolutely wrong. You ask people — I've had poor people, people all over West Virginia call me, say Joe, I need a test, I want to get a test. They said, well, bring your insurance card and get your doctor's referral. These are people that use emergency rooms, they don't have a family physician, and you want them to get a doctor's referral before you’ll test them? Come on. And we've put so much money towards this and now they're saying that. So, I'm telling everybody, you go on get tested. If they refuse you, you call me immediately. Call my office. We have all of our staff totally, readily available, we’re working in all 55 counties. This is a bunch of crock, and we're just — we've got to get through this, and I've got a governor that still sitting on $1.25 billion that we make available for every state, the smallest states, 21 states, got the minimum 1.25, OK? Some of those states are still sitting on it. Ours still sitting on it. They’re hoping they're going to get relief to where they can use part of it. I want them to have flexibility to be able to balance their shortfalls. But the other 500 or $600 million could go out to all the counties and all the municipalities that are having extreme difficulties in keeping all their services up: first responders, health care, basically police protection, sanitation, all these things. So, they better get on the ball here and get things moving. Clemons: Senator, just in our last minute or so. I know that you're in the middle of the tug of war between those that are concerned about the safety of the workplace, returning to work, getting back to those social gatherings and then the other side of it, which is reopening the economy. And we heard Dr. Fauci testifying in the Senate yesterday and saying, hey, we've got problems out there. We've got to open very cautiously. We need better health protocols and standards to begin doing this. He worries about universities and schools, and the president came out and sort of whacked him. Said that he disagrees strongly with what Fauci testified. So how is this tension playing out in West Virginia? How do you think we can resolve it? Manchin: I tell everybody that I speak to, do not pay attention to any of us in the political arena. We do not know what we're talking about when it comes to science, unless someone is a scientist or a medical doctor that happens to be serving in a political position. So that's the first advice I can give any human being: believe the professionals, the doctors, the scientists. And that's what Dr Fauci is talking about. What we're saying is that we're fine. We want to start partially opening, and we know it's going to be a slow roll, Steve. But with that, we have to be testing as we slow roll, we have to be protecting as we slow roll. If we see a spike from an area where we have an opening, then we have to be able to test and trace and then test again to make sure it hasn't spread. That's only common sense. If you're not prepared to do that, then you better be prepared, as Dr Fauci says, to have a relapse. I don't know how else to explain and tell people other than commonsense. I don't know if, someone's coming into my place of business, if we told a restaurant to open, I got the beauty shops open. Now we have tanning salons. I really don't know. But if we're testing people that are operating there and we see a spike and somebody gets it who's the proprietor or working there, and then we test and trace the people, their clients and customers, and then we make sure it hasn't spread. That's the way we can. If it does, we can contain it. We're not prepared to do that because we don't have the testing capability and everyone's bragging about, well I'm less than 3 percent. We've tested 60,000 people out of a million eight. You haven't really gone into the poor communities. Finally, we got the National Guard to go and start testing in our minority communities in the poor neighborhoods. Steve, that’s the only way they are going to get tested. The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews former Energy Secretary Ernest MonizErnest Jeffrey MonizThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Surgeon General stresses need to invest much more in public health infrastructure, during and after COVID-19; Fauci hopeful vaccine could be deployed in December  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of another relief package; Warner says some businesses 'may not come back' at The Hill's Advancing America's Economy summit  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mastercard CEO Ajay Banga says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now; Teva's Brendan O'Grady says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like Strategic Oil Reserve MORE.   Steve Clemons asks former U.S. Secretary of Energy and Energy Futures Initiative founder and president Ernest Moniz about his recent op-ed in The Hill proposing a new “Energy Jobs Coalition” as part of a recovery plan from this coronavirus pandemic. Clemons noted that when Moniz wrote his piece, unemployment claims were at 10 million and they are now at 36 million.  Secretary Ernest Moniz:  You're right, Steve. And in fact, it might be worth just noting that in the clean energy sector, specifically, with the new job numbers, what we've seen is a reduction of about a sixth in the clean energy jobs in the country, frankly wiping out by a factor of two all of the job increases of the last three years. So, this is obviously a very, very serious situation. And we are seeing throughout the economy not only liquidity problems, but solvency problems. All of that means our recovery is really got to get focused on creating lots of new jobs. Well, over the last five years, the job creation in the energy sector, as we wrote in The Hill, has really outpaced the economy by a factor of two in terms of job creation. We also need to really move along, in fact, pick up the pace on accelerating the transition of the energy economy to low-carbon. And so let's put those two things together. As we climb out of this economic hole, let's put resources into not only meeting immediate needs, but in terms of creating the kinds of clean energy jobs that will have such high leverage in adding to the total job numbers, while moving us on the direction that we want to go anyway in terms of clean energy.    Moniz: Well, first of all, in terms of the oil sector itself, Steve, I think it's worth noting that demand, of course, will start coming back once the economy is reopened. But I agree with Dan Yergin that frankly, we're going to see, I think, some permanent structural changes in that industry. And those structural changes were being called for before the virus because of the structure of the American oil industry, which was not exactly managing a great cash flow.  And so, as we come back, it's the same theme I just mentioned. Not all of those jobs, frankly, are going to be there, so we need to think ahead. For example, we should be building a very strong carbon capture and sequestration program to make sure carbon is not going into the atmosphere. But if you think about those jobs, putting large amounts of carbon dioxide underground, it's the same skill set as in the oil industry. So that's a good example as to how a coherent view of how that sector revolves can actually be good from the job perspective as well. Now, from the renewables side, I think it's mixed and I think the school is out in terms of how it will turn out. On the one hand, it's clear that things like collapse in fossil fuel prices historically have diminished the enthusiasm for some of the transition, whether it's to wind and solar or electric vehicles, for example. But on the other hand, I think that the reliability of those renewable sources really has to be in people's mind as we have seen this extreme volatility in the fossil fuel industry, specifically in the oil industry. So I think in the end there's a little bit of near-term uncertainty. But in the longer term, I feel very, very bullish that we will continue the low carbon transition. We will continue to see not only renewables but carbon capture and sequestration and nuclear power and low carbon fuels, maybe hydrogen — on which I'm also very bullish — all coming together for a low carbon system that in fact will be effective in supporting a strong jobs base.   Clemons: Mr. Secretary, when we have talked previously and also in the opening of this show today, we talked about the Tennessee Valley Authority. You look back at the 1930s at the CCC, the Works Progress Administration. From what you've seen thus far, and you talk to folks on both sides of the aisle, do you find there's an appetite to be thinking big along those terms so that the ideas you're suggesting actually have fertile ground when it comes to some of the stimulus packages that are being conceived?  Moniz: Well, I think, frankly, the threads have not all yet come together into a beautiful tapestry, but I think there is certainly a lot of interest. In the Congress — in fact, my colleagues from EFI did a hearing, a quasi hearing, a video briefing, really, with members from both sides of the aisle present, in the House. So, I think the Congress is grappling with this. But as you know, just yesterday, the chair of the Fed made the point that we are going to have to need substantial more work from Congress in terms of putting some funds into the economy. And as we discussed earlier, I certainly think that this direction in clean energy does have historical precedent, as you said, in the Depression, for example, where fundamentally things like big hydropower and getting electricity to every house in America were part of that. In the Economic Recovery Act of 2009, we again had some very, very important foundational work done in moving the energy economy forward with new infrastructure, new, big solar farms and the like. And now I think we need the same thing, and I think Congress will be coming to this in a at least reasonably bipartisan way.    Clemons:  If you were to focus in on the two or three most obvious and biggest initiatives that could be done in the energy place so that lay people could understand how to prioritize them, what would be at the top of your list in terms of having a program like this?  Moniz: Well, one obvious area is energy efficiency. I mentioned earlier that we've lost about a sixth of clear energy jobs in total over March and April. Well, about two-thirds of that job loss was in energy efficiency, because we sometimes forget that a large part of energy efficiency are construction projects that go on in residences and buildings. Well, right now, we could be really making a big push there — maybe not so much in residences quite yet, while we still have at least a large part of the population at home, but businesses, small, medium-sized businesses, public buildings. These are all buildings where even during the virus, we have large parts of the day where there are no or very few people around. And so construction projects could go forward — efficiency projects. That's an example of a big push that would have permanent benefits and could be done and put people to work at the same time. Now, another area that I did already mention for which there is bipartisan support: I believe that in addition to renewables, carbon capture and sequestration, as I said, is going to be very, very important. There's a lot we could do right now. The Congress, in a bipartisan way, has provided some tax credits, major tax credits, for projects that start before 2024. I would put a note in that the IRS needs to finish providing the guidance for the use of those tax credits. But that's a clear manifestation of an important low-carbon direction, one that can be pursued in many places right now and, as I stated earlier, would have a very salutary effect in terms of jobs for those in the oil industry who are suffering major dislocations.    Clemons:  Where is the science of carbon capture and sequestration now? Is the science there and is this now a dependable solution? Moniz:  In terms of capturing the carbon dioxide that's being emitted from power plants or from industrial facilities — now, over the last several years, there have been in the United States and elsewhere many large-scale projects. Large-scale means typically a million tons of CO2 or more per year. Now, the costs have come down as that's happened. We need more cost reduction. But again, that will come as the area scales up and perhaps new technologies for capture also evolve. On the sequestration side, I think we know a lot about the geology. We have vast capacity for storing carbon dioxide deep underground. We do, however, need to catch up in terms of regulatory procedures, liability issues being resolved, many of these at the state level. So, there's still a lot of work to do, but frankly, there's no doubt that we couldn't move out right now. We have big projects going on in Texas and Illinois. We are working to try to promote some projects going forward soon in California. In fact, one of the studies we did, Steve, at the Energy Futures Initiative we published this last year on California's pathways to meet its low carbon goals — we pointed out that by 2030, getting some carbon capture and sequestration going is practically essential for them to meet the 40 percent economywide emissions reduction goal that is on the books. It's a law in California. So, really getting moving on that quickly is, again, another great opportunity, I think right now, as we dig out of this virus-induced economic hole, and meet our carbon requirements, which is going to be another, after all, major threat to society if we don’t.    Clemons: In our last couple of minutes, I want to ask you kind of a political question. I interviewed your successor, Rick PerryRick PerryCoronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Ernest Moniz Trump issues executive order to protect power grid from attack Why we need to transition, quickly, from fossil fuels to clean energy MORE, former governor of Texas, when he was secretary of Energy — and the governor took pride in the level of emissions reductions in Texas. And I asked him, kind of facetiously, “Are you allowed to say that publicly?” Because in his administration, there is an aversion to using the words "climate change." There's a skepticism towards science about this. ... What kind of appetite across both sides of the aisle are you finding for EFI’s work and proposals like an Energy Jobs Coalition? Moniz: I believe there is. Certainly, we've been getting very good receptions with our framework, which we call the Green Real Deal moving forward. But I also want to remind you, Steve, it's not only the EFI. When when I was secretary at the Department of Energy, with my colleagues, not only at DOE but across the government, we produced what was called the Quadrennial Energy Review, two volumes looking at energy infrastructure needs, and specifically, electricity needs. Those were very, very well received. That was a Republican-controlled Congress and yet twenty plus of the recommendations in the Quadrennial Energy Review were put partially or totally into law — not just discussed in the committee, but put into law. So I think, the idea of — while the "climate change" words are sometimes de-emphasized if you like in the discussions, the solutions to climate change, I think, have great support on both sides of the aisle. Especially when we continue — what was the Obama administration mantra? The president many, many times used the words ‘all of the above,’ meaning that it's renewables and storage. But it's also things like carbon capture and nuclear power and advanced bio fuels. Many, many options for going to low carbon while completely serving the needs of our energy economy, and doing so economically, and, I keep emphasizing, with very, very strong contributions to building the employment base in this country. Former Republican National Committee (RNC) Chairman Michael Steele on Wednesday pushed back against President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE’s claims that coronavirus testing is available to any American who wants one.  “The narrative, again put into a political context, is what we hear out of the White House is, oh, you know, anybody who wants a test can get a test. No, that's not true,” Steele said in an interview with The Hill’s Steve Clemons.  “You can only get a test under these guidelines: if you're sick or suffering from some form of the virus, you have evidence of that. But if you wanted to leave your home and go to a medical space to get tested because you have concerns, that's not the reality,” he added.  The White House earlier this week trumpeted the message that tests are widely available in the U.S. During a Trump Monday press briefing in the Rose Garden, two giant banners hung behind a podium declaring “America leads the world in testing.” During the briefing, Trump pushed back on a question about testing availability.  "That’s the problem with a question like that. We go through a whole announcement saying 'We’re number one in the world by far,' by a factor of two, and even three and four depending on where you’re looking, and I get a question, 'When will everybody be able to get tested?'" Trump said. "If somebody wants to be tested right now, they’ll be able to be tested." Steele noted that economics have cited the need to have widespread testing in order to reopen the economy since asymptomatic people can spread the virus.  “The problem is the president has his own mind of what this is and what it isn’t, of how it is functioning, and how it is not functioning that goes beyond the science,” Steele said.  “Remember, this is the guy who somehow either read or was told something about disinfectants, and the next thing we know, the president is out there saying, 'yeah, we could probably inject people with disinfectant to deal with this.' So that's the mindset you're working with,” he added.  He said Trump is “not necessarily going to be inclined” to follow “reasonable approaches” as compared to “the outrageous” ones.  “And that's a competing interest inside this White House right now, and it shouldn't be,” Steele said.  In response to Steele's comments, White House spokesman Judd Deere said the U.S. is a "leader in testing capacity." "Under the leadership of President Trump, the United States has done more than double the number of tests of any country in the world. We are the global leader in testing capacity and continue to work with governors to ensure they have enough capacity for a safe, responsible reopen," Deere said in an email.  The coronavirus has infected more than 1.3 million people in the U.S. and killed at least 83,249, according to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University. —Updated at 5 p.m.WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Senate GOP crafting rebuttal to Dem $3T package > Leaders of National Governors Association urge Congress to help states  > Cabin fever? Analysis shows more Americans on the move as states begin to reopen  > Fed chairman concerned about prolonged recession, says more stimulus needed   > DC extends stay-at-home order to June 8  > Former RNC chair Michael Steele says Trump isn’t telling the truth on testing, calls for every American to have unfettered access to ballot box this November   With not much news out of the White House, Congress is back in the spotlight, expected to take more action to assuage the devastating impact of the pandemic on the U.S. economy.    Bipartisan cooperation will be needed to pass another relief package, and we saw a little bit of that (in some form, at least) during Tuesday’s heavily anticipated Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee hearing.         THE INTERVIEW  Former Maryland Lt. Gov. and ex-Republican National Committee chairman Michael Steele says Trump's statement that anyone who wants a test can get a test is not true, lauds Dr. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE for weighing in on health decisions and distinguishing between economic decisions, says polls indicate voters believe former Vice President Joe BidenJoe BidenOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Davis: 72 hours cementing the real choice for November OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump signs order removing environmental reviews for major projects | New Trump air rule will limit future pollution regulations, critics say | DNC climate group calls for larger federal investment on climate than Biden plan MORE would be a better leader on COVID-19 than Trump and stresses the most important thing that the government must do is make sure every American has unfettered access to the ballot box in November — and that election will happen, he says.          Watch the full interview here.   Sponsored Content Presented by Nokia    THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Wednesday, May 13.  Editor’s Note.    In my conversation with former Republican National Committee chairman Michael Steele on Wednesday, I asked him a combined final question, “Where are you on mail-in ballots? And are the Democratic and Republican national conventions going to happen?” Steele’s answer was stark and direct, saying there is no comparison between them. He noted that the conventions can happen virtually and there are lots of ways to get them done.    He emphasized access to voting though is a sacred commitment the government must assure. He said, “The most important thing that the government must do is make sure every American has unfettered access to the ballot box in November.”  In Steele’s voice, even his posture on camera, I could sense the weight he put behind this government responsibility that he believes can’t be — and  shouldn’t be — manipulated. But making sure “everyone eligible” has easy access to the ballot box has clearly diminished in priority for many elected officials who have spent an inordinate amount of time purging voter rolls, creating scandalous stories of widespread voter fraud, and challenging and harassing some folks — often citizens of color — at voting stations. I hope that Steele is right and that the federal government finally understands its commitment to create unfettered access for most Americans, if not all, to the ballot box in this time of the coronavirus. He is correct that those that will be hurting are elderly voters who Steele said “love to vote” — and who are a key part of the GOP base. Very good point.     One of the sad truths of this crisis is that whether one is on the left or the right, the virus becomes a platform on which to fight other fights that have nothing to do with the crisis at hand. And I fear that mail-in balloting, which sounds like a sensible right everyone should have, is in a fragile place. We’ll see.   — Steve Clemons Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE Join us! The Vir-Tech-Tual World Ahead | Wednesday, May 20        Join us for our upcoming virtual event ‘The Vir-tech-tual World Ahead’, that focuses on our dramatic shift to a digital ecosystem at a time when digital literacy continues to be uneven, much as basic access to the internet.    Steve Clemons, The Hill’s editor-at-large, will be speaking with:    > FCC Commissioner Michael O’Rielly  > Rep. Suzan DelBeneSuzan Kay DelBeneExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support House Democrats press Treasury on debit cards used for coronavirus relief payments Hillicon Valley: Trump threatens Michigan, Nevada over mail-in voting | Officials call for broadband expansion during pandemic | Democrats call for investigation into Uber-Grubhub deal MORE (D-Wash.)  > Michael Hinojosa, superintendent of the Dallas Independent School District  > Francella Ochillo, executive director, Next Century Cities > *Additional speakers to be announced  REGISTER HERE. And join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 4,312,756 reported cases of COVID-19 throughout the world and 294,647 deaths have been recorded as a result of the virus.    The U.S. is reporting 1,379,756 coronavirus cases and 83,150 deaths as of the time of this newsletter. Russia’s cases continue to rise and stand at 242,271 reported. The U.K. is reporting 230,984 cases. 228,030 in Spain. 222,104 in Italy. 180,737 in Brazil. 178,184 in France. 173, 824 in Germany. 143,114 in Turkey. 112,725 in Iran. 84,021 in China. 72,485 in Canada. 44,830 in Saudi Arabia. South Korea, which is seeing a resurgence of cases after easing some lockdown restrictions, is now reporting 10,962 cases. Egypt 10,431. Czechia 8,240. 3,341 in Hungary. 3,017 in Thailand.    New York is reporting 340,661 cases. New Jersey 141,662. Illinois 83,021. Massachusetts 79,332. 71,082 in California. 61,859 in Pennsylvania. 48,021 in Michigan. 42,402 in Florida. 41,733 in Texas. 25,473 in Indiana. 20,157 in Colorado. 10,565 in Alabama. 10,293 in Missouri. 7,246 in Kansas. Kentucky 6,853. 6,584 in the District of Columbia.    9,637,930 COVID-19 test results have been recorded and 230,287 have reported full recoveries from the virus in the U.S.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Senate GOP crafting wish list for next coronavirus package. Senate Republicans say that Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE’s (D-Calif.) new $3 trillion coronavirus relief package is dead on arrival in the upper chamber, but they are assembling ideas for a package that could pass this summer. While Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE (R-Ky.) called for a “pause” last week on new coronavirus legislation, rank-and-file Senate Republicans acknowledge there is growing pressure to respond to the House Democrats. One Republican senator who requested anonymity to comment on internal discussions said the “pause” posture will be politically tenable for only so long. (The Hill)    Democratic bill would require cash refunds for all canceled airline tickets during pandemic. Democratic senators introduced legislation Wednesday requiring airlines refund billions of dollars to customers who canceled flights due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The cash refunds from major airlines and third-party ticket sellers would be issued regardless of whether the airline canceled the flight or if the passenger backed out of their ticket. (The Hill)    Shelved CDC guidance included more severe restrictions than White House plan: report. Shelved guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on reopening the economy amid the coronavirus pandemic included more severe restrictions than the White House’s proposal for reopening, The Associated Press reported Wednesday.    Manafort released to home confinement due to coronavirus concerns. President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE’s former campaign chairman, Paul ManafortPaul John ManafortTrump taps Lewandowski, Bossie for Commission on Presidential Scholars Harris, Jeffries question why Manafort, Cohen released while others remain in prison Cohen released from federal prison to home confinement due to coronavirus concerns MORE, was released from prison Wednesday to serve the rest of his sentence at home because of worries about the coronavirus pandemic, his lawyer told CBS News. (The Hill)  LAWMAKERS TWEET  Rep. Tom EmmerThomas (Tom) Earl EmmerHouse Republicans voice optimism on winning back the House following special election victories GOP pulls support from California House candidate over 'unacceptable' social media posts Trump campaign launches new fundraising program with House Republicans MORE (R-Minn.)  @RepTomEmmer Huge thanks to @realDonaldTrump and his Administration for ensuring the @DeptVetAffairs  offers expanded free and subsidized telehealth services to our veterans! They protected our freedoms, and we must protect them during this outbreak.   Rep. Ilhan OmarIlhan OmarPelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC Minority caucuses call for quick action on police reform Amash readying legislation allowing victims to sue officers MORE (D-Minn.)  @Ilhan This crisis has exposed the deep economic and social inequities that have long existed. Now is the time to rethink our societal structures and act boldly to create a more just society.    Rep. Tom ReedThomas (Tom) W. ReedA quiet, overlooked revolution in congressional power Bipartisan Senate group offers new help to state, local governments GOP Rep. Pete King to buck party, vote for Democrats' coronavirus relief bill MORE (R-N.Y.)  @RepTomReed We were proud to stand with state officials yesterday to call on Albany to work with us on getting WNY up and running again. Moving forward, we have to acknowledge the distinct public health differences between counties and prioritize inter-regional collaboration.   ACROSS THE NATION  Cabin fever? Analysis shows more Americans are on the move as states reopen. Easing restrictions on public life too soon could result in a surge of new cases that could quickly spiral out of control, public health officials said Tuesday, but a New York Times analysis of cellphone data found that tens of millions of Americans were already leaving their homes in growing numbers. With American states starting to reopen businesses, about 25 million more people ventured outside their homes on an average day last week than during the preceding six weeks. (Washington Post)    DC extends stay-at-home order to June 8. Washington, D.C., is extending its stay-at-home order through June 8, Mayor Muriel Bowser announced on Wednesday. The mayor said the city has not yet met all the required benchmarks to reopen. "We're not there yet and not quite ready to begin that phased new opening," Bowser said at a news briefing. The city is looking for a 14-day decline in new cases, but so far has only seen a four-day decline. (The Hill)  Governors warn COVID-19 relief is becoming “political football.” The bipartisan chairmen of the National Governors Association on Wednesday urged Congress to pass more economic relief efforts to help assuage the damage caused by the coronavirus pandemic, warning against allowing debate over the vital aid to become yet another partisan flashpoint. In a joint statement, Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan (R) and New York Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) said states need at least $500 billion in aid to make up for revenue lost during the crisis. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW  For some world leaders, popularity spikes along with coronavirus cases. Before the coronavirus struck their countries, South Korean President Moon Jae-in and German Chancellor Angela Merkel had one thing in common: Their brightest days in office appeared to be behind them. Both Merkel and Moon used testing and contact tracing to avoid full lockdowns. Merkel’s approval ratings have surged to 68 percent in May, up from 53 percent in February. Meanwhile, Moon’s government won a landslide victory in parliamentary elections last month, after a campaign that focused on the government’s pandemic response. (Washington Post)     Coronavirus could hit defense spending and spark NATO tensions once again. Tensions between the U.S. and its NATO allies could flare up once again in the near future, as the coronavirus pandemic puts additional pressure on public spending, according to experts. (CNBC)    Hong Kong records new local infections, breaking a 23-day streak. Hong Kong reported two new locally transmitted infections Wednesday after more than three weeks of no such cases and as social distancing measures began to relax, and a third case recorded on the same day was imported from Pakistan, bringing the total infections in the city to 1,051. The cases showed the challenges of eradicating a community outbreak. (New York Times)     London rail worker dies of coronavirus after being spat on. A railway worker in London died last month after being spat on by a man who claimed to have the coronavirus, the worker’s union announced Tuesday, raising questions about the safety of essential workers as the country looks to ease back on coronavirus restrictions. (Forbes)  SCIENCE Scientists race to find a cure or vaccine for the coronavirus. Here are the top drugs in development. There are no proven, knockout treatments against the virus and U.S. health officials say a vaccine could take at least a year to 18 months. There are more than 100 vaccines in development globally as of April 30, according to the World Health Organization, with at least eight vaccine candidates already in human trials. Read more here about the leading vaccine and drug candidates and where they stand in the development process. (CNBC)   French drug giant to give U.S. preference on vaccine. Americans will likely get Sanofi’s COVID-19 vaccine before the rest of the world if the French pharmaceutical giant can successfully deliver one. That’s because the U.S. was first in line to fund Sanofi’s vaccine research, Chief Executive Officer Paul Hudson said in an interview with Bloomberg News. “The U.S. government has the right to the largest pre-order because it’s invested in taking the risk,” Hudson said. (Bloomberg)   Unveiling “Warp Speed,” the White House’s America first push for a coronavirus vaccine. Conventional wisdom is that a vaccine for COVID-19 is at least one year away, but the organizers of a U.S. government push called Operation Warp Speed have little use for conventional wisdom. The project, vaguely described to date but likely to be formally announced by the White House in the coming days, will pick a diverse set of vaccine candidates and pour essentially limitless resources into unprecedented comparative studies in animals, fast-tracked human trials and manufacturing. Eschewing international cooperation — and any vaccine candidates from China — it hopes to have 300 million doses by January 2021 of a proven product, reserved for Americans. (Science)   PBS documentary special “Decoding COVID-19” airs Wednesday night. Set to air at 9 p.m. ET on PBS, the film reveals the biology of the tiny pathogen devastating lives from Wuhan, China, to New York City and follows the unprecedented global collaboration among scientists racing to develop a vaccine. The special also presents harrowing, humanizing chronicles from the front lines, following the health care providers, patients and families battling the disease. Watch the trailer here and stream the documentary online here.  BUSINESS Fed chairman concerned about a prolonged recession. Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell said Wednesday that policymakers may have to use additional weapons to pull the country out of an economic mire that has cost at least 20 million jobs and caused “a level of pain that is hard to capture in words.” While he did not specify what those measures are and where they would come from, Powell said the coronavirus has triggered a situation unlike previous recessions the U.S. has endured, and the response may have to be more from Congress than the Fed. (CNBC)  Local officials allowing Tesla to restart California factory with conditions. Local officials in California announced Wednesday that they will allow Elon MuskElon Reeve MuskElon Musk calls for Amazon to be broken up: 'Monopolies are wrong!' Capitalism in orbit NASA, SpaceX and the private-public partnership that caused the flight of the Crew Dragon MORE to reopen his Tesla factory during the coronavirus pandemic if specific safety conditions are met. The Alameda County Public Health Department said in a statement that it has approved Tesla’s plan to possibly reopen the Fremont plant as soon as next week if public health indicators regarding the virus remain stable or improve. (The Hill)  IDEAS, CAUSES, PASSION Is the threat from ISIS really more significant because of COVID-19? ISIS is more likely to take advantage of the instability in failed states than to actually depend on the spread of COVID-19 to project its strength. The pandemic makes for a strong talking point for the group, but it probably is not anything more than that. More productive of an answer to ISIS’s blather is for the United States to rekindle the key partnerships that were fundamental to the success of evicting ISIS from its territory. (Jason Blazakis for The Hill)   Sponsored Content Presented by Nokia    GENEROUS SPIRITS Spain’s oldest person (113 years old) survives coronavirus. And she tweets! María Branyas turned 113 on March 4, making her the oldest person in Spain and now she has become one of the oldest coronavirus survivors in the world. “In the solitude of my room, fearless and hopeful, I don’t quite understand what’s going on in the world. But I think nothing will be the same again. And don’t think about redoing, recovering, rebuilding. It will have to be done all over again and differently,” she tweeted. (The Hill)   ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. ROSA DELAURO (D-Conn.) > Steve interviews BIO President and CEO JIM GREENWOOD  > Steve interviews former Surgeon General VIVEK MURTHY  > Steve interviews World Central Kitchen founder chef JOSE ANDRES  > Steve interviews Rep. WILL HURD (R-Texas)  > Steve interviews Sen. JOHN BARRASSO (R-Wyo.)  > Steve interviews Rep. LEE ZELDIN (R-N.Y.)  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES        A world in lockdown: Insight from Uzbekistan. Jamshid Mirzabaev, a reader from Uzbekistan, sent in this picture of an empty square in the city Samarqand, a normally tourist-filled region of the Central Asian country. Uzbekistan is reporting 2,568 cases but President Shavkat Mirziyoyev has issued stay-at-home orders and closed all air, road and railway movement throughout the country.   SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.   CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.      VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEFormer Republican National Committee Chairman Michael Steele said elected leaders should put “partisan foolery aside” and pay attention to scientists, such as Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE, the director of the National Institutes for Allergy and Infectious Diseases. Steele’s comments come after Sen. Rand PaulRandal (Rand) Howard PaulPaul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  Rand Paul holding up quick passage of anti-lynching bill Democratic senator to offer amendment halting 'military weaponry' given to police MORE (R-Ky.) said at a Senate Health Committee hearing Tuesday that while he respected Fauci, “I don’t think you’re the end all,” and that scientists should "have a little bit of humility" because they do not know what's best for the economy.  "I have never made myself out to be the end all and only voice in this," Fauci responded, noting he doesn't give economic advice. “And that is the expectation we... have of our elected officials, regardless of their party, to set the partisan foolery aside, and to pay attention to what the scientists, and the researchers, and the doctors and the medicine are telling us we need to do at this time and injecting ourselves with detergent is not the prescription I think we need,” Steele told The Hill’s Steve Clemons Wednesday, referring to a comment President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE made at a briefing last month where he suggested injecting disinfectants could cure the coronavirus. Paul's comments were rejected by some of his own party's leaders.  Rep. Liz CheneyElizabeth (Liz) Lynn CheneyTrump says he believes Scarborough 'got away with murder' Hillicon Valley: House FISA bill in jeopardy | Democrats drop controversial surveillance measure | GOP working on legislation to strip Twitter of federal liability protections The Hill's Campaign Report: Trump ramps up attacks against Twitter MORE (Wyo.), the No. 3 Republican in the House, defended Fauci "one of the finest public servants we have ever had" whose expertise is needed. Senate Health Committee Chairman Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.), who chaired Tuesday's hearing, also came to Fauci's defense Wednesday, saying he "isn’t holding himself up as an omniscient person."  The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews former Republican National Committee Chairman Michael Steele who says President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE's statement that anyone who wants a test can get one is not true, and he lauds Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE for weighing in on health decisions. Read excerpts from the interview below.    Steele: I think the largest concern is the rush to make this something that it is not and that is putting this and shoving this it into a political context. Yes, we have a national election coming up in November, and we are, you know, in the midst of a primary season that's had its fits and starts, but the reality of it is 80,000 Americans are dead. Well, over a million have suffered with this virus, and we still don't have adequate testing in place across the country. Two percent of the American population has been tested. So, the narrative, again put into a political context, is what we hear out of out of the White House is, "oh, you know, anybody who wants a test can get a test." No, that's not true. You can only get a test under these guidelines — if you're sick or suffering from some form of the virus, you have evidence of that. But if you wanted to leave your home and go to a medical space to get a test because you have concerns, that's not the reality. And so keeping it real is important from my perspective, particularly when others seem to be wanting to contextualize this around how well the president is doing or not doing versus how well the American people are doing.   Clemons: What's happening inside the network of people around the president that the message that we need to be testing those who are not ill isn't penetrating? Steele: Well, not only is it a powerful message, it is a correct message, because this is about how we go about testing the well. Remember, you're talking about a virus with a two week gestation period, a window in which over those 14 days you can infect a number of people. You may not show symptoms, but you are highly infectious. You can pass it on. So, to be able to test people to see exactly how this virus is affecting the body, and how it is mutating as we're beginning to see, as scientists are beginning to speak to, that it is changing given the environment that it is in. That is important information to get in front of the president. The problem is the president has his own mind of what this is and what it isn’t, and how it is functioning and how it is not functioning that goes beyond the science. Remember, this is the guy who somehow either read or was told something about disinfectants, and the next thing we know, the president is out there saying, yeah, we could probably inject people with disinfectant to deal with this. So if that's the mindset you're working with, when others come to the table with reasonable science and reasonable approaches, the president is not necessarily going to be inclined to follow that because, you know, it lends itself more to the outrageous than the normal. And that's a competing interest inside this White House right now, and it shouldn't be.   Clemons: If you were chairman of the Republican National Committee today, and the president said, "Hey, all we need is a little bit of Lysol and Clorox," and you were in a position of responsibility within the party, how do you navigate that? Steele: Well, yeah, not easily. Not easily. Because my initial response would be oh, hell, no. We’re not going out supporting that. I'm not going to advise that I'm not even going to go out and give credence to it. So there would be instantly a loggerhead confrontation between the RNC that I ran and the White House that puts something like that out on the street. But it also speaks to the challenge that the current chairwoman has. You know her organization has been subsumed by the White House political operations and now the presidential campaign, so she has no latitude. Ms. Romney is not going to come out, McDaniel because she is not allowed to use Romney, is not going to come out and say what she believes in a political context is good versus bad advice to the American people. She's gonna take her marching orders from the White House, from the president's lead, and she's going to stick very closely to that. Remember, during the impeachment trial, she had to go out and condemn her own uncle because that was the marching order from the White House. She was not going to give Mitt RomneyWillard (Mitt) Mitt RomneyOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump Romney: Mattis statement 'stunning and powerful' MORE the latitude that any other senator would have in that situation to follow his own course. She hewed very much to the line and stayed true to that. And that would be the case here.   Clemons: What price is that? Because if you see things like that, people are willing to just sort of overlook reality, hasn't that created a real tension with how Americans are being asked to look at science and public health? How do you unravel that or get it back to a healthy place so that we're talking not to Democratic Americans and Republican Americans. We’re talking to all Americans about public safety. Steele: Well, you're not going to expect that from a political party. That's just not how that's going to play out. You're not gonna have the party going against its president. We've seen too many times beforehand where a divergence was opportunistic and possible and they didn’t, going back to Charlottesville and then any number of instances subsequent to that, including what we've heard recently with respect to, you know, detergents. There was no pushback. And there won't be any pushback from the political establishment, and I wouldn't expect them so much to do that. What is expected, however, is other leadership, the senatorial and congressional leadership. They do have the means because they're a separate branch of government. And just because the president is of your party doesn't mean, as we've seen in the past, both Republicans and Democrats have taken a position different from their presidential leadership. ... The public needs their elected officials to be and remain honest brokers, particularly in a moment of crisis. In watching the testimony with Dr. Fauci yesterday, you know, and listening to this plaintive cry to open up the country from Rand PaulRandal (Rand) Howard PaulPaul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  Rand Paul holding up quick passage of anti-lynching bill Democratic senator to offer amendment halting 'military weaponry' given to police MORE and others that, you know, somehow you're not an expert on everything, and Dr. Fauci had to respond I've never said I was an expert on everything, but I am an expert on the stuff I know, and that stuff is related to this virus. I'm not advising you to make economic decisions, I'm advising you to make health decisions. And so that is the difference here. And that is the expectation we, as the public Steve, have of our elected officials, regardless of their party, to set the partisan foolery aside, and to pay attention to what the scientists, and the researchers, and the doctors and the medicine are telling us we need to do at this time and injecting ourselves with detergent is not the prescription I think we need.   Clemons: Critique the Biden campaign. Are they adapting to the moment, or are they being confined by the moment? Steele: Both. They are confined by virtue of the fact that there's no place to go. You can't have rallies. You can't go greet people at a subway stop. So, yeah, you're confined to a space, and they have adapted accordingly by reaching out through Zoom and other media to touch their base. The vice president is in an untenable situation in this moment, because he does not command and control the necessary instruments of government, where he can then speak to action and authority and taking steps. He can only react, like the rest of us in many instances, to what the administration does or fails to do. And so that puts him in a somewhat limited box. Now, to the extent that he is limited by those circumstances, as we've seen the public do still have high regard for him and his voice.   Clemons: I've got two questions for you. One, you're in favor of mail-in ballots and of seeing it roll out. I'd love to get the terrain, when you think that will happen. The second is, are the conventions going to happen? Are the Republican and Democratic national conventions gonna happen. Steele: So, let's just do it on scale of importance. Holding a convention, mail-in ballots. Of the two, the most important thing that the government must do and must be concerned about, is making sure that everyone has unfettered access to the ballot box come November. Irrespective off the current state of play, as Dr. Fauci has reiterated over and over again, we don't know where we will be but what we do know is that when we get to the fall, we fully expect a reemergence of this virus, even if it scales downward over the summer, we expect a rescaling, a scale up in the fall. So governments, starting with the federal government, has to be serious about making sure we have access to the ballots this November. This election is not going to get postponed, folks. It is not going to be derailed. You can't sideline it. It is constitutionally mandated. So, it will happen. How it happens matters. And the states need the resources to make sure that every American can cast their ballot for the candidate of their choice this November. And that means putting in place the resources and the infrastructure necessary to do that. The Congress has allocated under ... the last stimulus package, $400 million of a requested $4 billion. Please when you’re looking at the next level of financing and stimulus four, please meet the financial burden that the states have to meet in order to make sure the personnel, the infrastructure and the ballots are there for voters to access. A convention can happen virtually. We can, you know, watch it from our Zoom screens. You don't need to show up in a big hall and stand shoulder to shoulder in order to urge on our candidate of choice. We, however, must have that availability in terms of the ballot this November. ... The president himself just received his absentee ballot, his stay-at-home ballot from Florida a few weeks ago. So, if it's good enough for the president to do it absentee, it is good enough for all Americans to be able to vote absentee this November.More than 100 children in New York are suspected of having a mysterious inflammatory illness believed to be connected to the coronavirus, New York Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) said Wednesday.  The state’s department of health is investigating 102 cases, including three deaths, of children believed to have the illness, which is referred to as pediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome.  The disease is thought to be related to COVID-19 because all of the children have either tested positive for the virus or its antibodies, Cuomo said.  “As a parent, I can tell you this is a parent’s worst nightmare,” Cuomo said, noting that children were initially thought not to be seriously affected by the coronavirus. “This is truly disturbing.”  Another 14 states, including California and Georgia, are also investigating cases, he said. Five European countries, including Spain and Italy, have also reported instances of the mysterious illness.  The symptoms are wide-ranging and include a fever lasting more than five days, severe abdominal pain, diarrhea or vomiting, bloodshot eyes and skin rash. Other symptoms include change in skin color, such as becoming pale, patchy or blue; difficulty feeding; trouble breathing or breathing too quickly; racing heart or chest pain; lethargy; irritability; or confusion. The illness tends to be severe, with 71 percent of suspected cases being admitted to intensive care units; 43 percent remain hospitalized, Cuomo said.  Experts have said the illness is similar to Kawasaki disease, a rare illness that causes inflamed blood vessels, typically in young children. Global public health officials are warning that the coronavirus circulating around the world right now will take years to completely contain and that the virus might never totally go away. "I would say in a four- to five-year time frame, we could be looking at controlling this," Soumya Swaminathan, the World Health Organization's (WHO) chief scientist, told a Financial Times conference on Wednesday. Swaminathan warned that the current pandemic could "potentially get worse" before it gets better. At a press conference later on Wednesday, another senior WHO official said the coronavirus — known by its scientific name SARS-CoV2 — might never be completely eradicated. "We have a new virus entering the human pop for the first time, and therefore it is very hard to predict when we will prevail over it," said Mike Ryan, director of the WHO's emergency program. "This virus may become just another endemic virus in our communities. This virus may never go away. HIV has never gone away." "It is important that we be realistic, and I don't think anyone can predict whether this virus will disappear," Ryan said. The comments come even as some scientists working on a vaccine are moving toward human trials on an expedited time frame. Ending the coronavirus as a threat to humanity is more complicated than simply developing a vaccine, experts said, because that vaccine must be developed and distributed on a mass scale in order to stamp out the virus. But even some viruses for which vaccines are available are never completely stamped out. Diseases like measles, tuberculosis and the seasonal flu all have vaccines, but either they are not universally available or they are not completely effective. "We have many candidates and hope to have multiple winners. In other words, it’s multiple shots on goal," Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE, director of the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee on Tuesday. "I must warn that there’s also the possibility of negative consequences where certain vaccines can actually enhance the negative effect of the infection. The big unknown is efficacy. Will it be present or absent and how durable will it be?" In January, Fauci predicted that a new vaccine for the coronavirus might be developed in a span of 12 to 18 months. That timeline is ambitious; the previous record for the fastest vaccine produced in the face of a new virus is four years, the time it took to develop a vaccine for the mumps. Even if a vaccine is developed and clears the tremendous hurdles in proving it is both safe and effective, it will take months more to produce it on a vast scale. Billions of doses must be both produced and distributed in order to halt the virus in its tracks.Senate Health Committee Chairman Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.) on Wednesday came to the defense of Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE, the nation's top infectious disease expert, after GOP Sen. Rand PaulRandal (Rand) Howard PaulPaul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  Rand Paul holding up quick passage of anti-lynching bill Democratic senator to offer amendment halting 'military weaponry' given to police MORE (Ky.) and some conservative commentators criticized the doctor's warnings about the coronavirus outbreak.  Alexander said in an interview on Fox News that the longtime director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases "isn’t holding himself up as an omniscient person." "He’s saying what the thinks, as a person who’s been in charge of infectious disease since 1984," Alexander said. "Then it’s up to the president and the governors and the mayors to take that advice and make decisions." The comments from Alexander come just a day after Fauci and other leading health experts testified during a virtual Senate hearing about the U.S. coronavirus response. Fauci warned during testimony that states could face very "serious consequences" if they ignore federal guidelines and reopen too quickly.  But he faced skepticism from Paul, who at one point said that scientists should "have a little bit of humility" because they do not know what's best for the economy. "As much as I respect you, Dr. Fauci, I don't think you're the end-all. I don't think you're the one person that gets to make a decision," Paul said, prompting Fauci to say that he has "never" made himself out "to be the end-all and only voice in this." "I'm a scientist, a physician and a public health official. I give advice according to the best scientific evidence," he said, noting that he hasn't given out any economic advice amid the crisis.  Alexander on Wednesday applauded Fauci for his commentary, saying that he is "usually very careful to say I don’t know or I’m cautiously optimistic." "So I wouldn’t characterize him as trying to be omniscient," he said. "I don’t think he tries to do that all. I think he tries to give good advice and then you can take the advice or leave it." The U.S. has reported more than 1.3 million confirmed cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, and roughly 83,100 deaths from it as of Wednesday afternoon, according to a Johns Hopkins University database. Many states in recent weeks have begun to gradually lift restrictions on businesses that were put in place at the outset of the outbreak to curb the spread of the virus. President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE has begun aggressively pushing for states to reopen, citing the significant economic damage prolonged shutdowns have caused.  Health experts stress that widespread testing availability and a comprehensive contact tracing program needs to be in place to avoid a second a wave of infections. "Even under the best of circumstances, when you pull back on mitigation, you will see some cases appear," Fauci said during Tuesday's Senate hearing. "It's the ability and the capability of responding to those cases with good identification, isolation and contact tracing [that] will determine whether you can continue to go forward, as you try to reopen America.” In addition to Paul, Fox News hosts Sean HannitySean Patrick HannityCable news audience numbers jump amid coronavirus, protests Hannity scolds Ozarks partygoers: 'Could be a disaster' for vulnerable Americans Trump lashes out at Fox News after poll shows him trailing Biden MORE, Tucker CarlsonTucker CarlsonComcast shareholders reject proposals for outside sexual harassment investigation at NBC Cable news audience numbers jump amid coronavirus, protests Tucker Carlson tees off on Trump, Kushner: 'People will not forgive weakness' MORE and Laura IngrahamLaura Anne IngrahamLeBron James renews feud with Laura Ingraham: 'Tired of this treatment' Trump lashes out at Fox News after poll shows him trailing Biden Trump complains Fox News is 'doing nothing to help' him get reelected MORE criticized Fauci's warnings. Carlson labeled Fauci a "chief buffoon of the professional class," claiming that he was responsible for a lot of wrong predictions about the virus.  On the other hand, Rep. Liz CheneyElizabeth (Liz) Lynn CheneyTrump says he believes Scarborough 'got away with murder' Hillicon Valley: House FISA bill in jeopardy | Democrats drop controversial surveillance measure | GOP working on legislation to strip Twitter of federal liability protections The Hill's Campaign Report: Trump ramps up attacks against Twitter MORE (R-Wyo.) praised the official, saying in a tweet that he is "one of the finest public servants we have ever had." "His only interest is saving lives," she said. "We need his expertise and his judgment to defeat this virus. All Americans should be thanking him. Every day."  Dr. Fauci is one of the finest public servants we have ever had. He is not a partisan. His only interest is saving lives. We need his expertise and his judgment to defeat this virus. All Americans should be thanking him. Every day. The United Nations is forecasting that the COVID-19 pandemic will diminish the global economy by 3.2 percent in 2020, according to a report it released Wednesday. The UN World Economic Situation and Prospects report predicted the sharpest downturn for the global economy since the Great Depression in the 1930s. The mid-year report suggested that $8.5 trillion will be lost over the next two years, eliminating all gains in the last four years.  In January, the UN had estimated the global economy would experience 2.5 percent growth in 2020.  Now, the UN predicts a modest rebound next year, mostly making up for lost output. Developing countries are also likely to experience large fiscal deficits and high public debt. The report suggested the pandemic is also causing an increase in poverty and inequality as 34.3 million people are expected to fall below the extreme poverty line this year, with 56 percent of them in Africa. Another 130 million are expected to join the list by 2030. The UN report said without “quick breakthroughs” in COVID-19 vaccine and treatment developments, “the post COVID-19 world will likely be vastly different.” “The possibility of a slow recovery and prolonged economic slump — with rising poverty and inequality — looms large,” the report said.  “Stronger development cooperation—supporting efforts to contain the pandemic and extending economic and financial assistance to countries hardest hit by the crisis—will remain critical for accelerating recovery and putting the world back on the trajectory of sustainable development,” it added. The pandemic has thrown a wrench in economies around the world, as several countries had to shut down businesses to prevent further community spread. The coronavirus has infected more than 4.3 million people worldwide, causing at least 294,155 deaths, according to data from Johns Hopkins University.Fox News host Tucker CarlsonTucker CarlsonComcast shareholders reject proposals for outside sexual harassment investigation at NBC Cable news audience numbers jump amid coronavirus, protests Tucker Carlson tees off on Trump, Kushner: 'People will not forgive weakness' MORE chided Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE, the country's leading virologist, on his show Tuesday night, taking aim at Fauci's track record throughout the coronavirus pandemic. "A lot of wrong predictions have come out of Washington on the question of the coronavirus, and quite a few of them came directly from Dr. Fauci himself," Carlson said. "We are not singling him out or attacking him, we've certainly made a lot of wrong predictions on this show. But we're not in charge of the entire country." Carlson played a clip from an interview that Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, did with CBS on March 8, in which Fauci said that Americans didn't need to be walking around outside with masks. "Right now in the United States, people should not be walking around with masks," Fauci said in the interview. The doctor's stance has since shifted. In front of the Senate Health Committee on Tuesday, Fauci said that he was glad to see people wearing masks. Carlson likened people's faith in Fauci despite his change in view to religion. “This might be painful for some people, it’s kind of like learning a religion is fake,” he said. “But this religion is fake! It shouldn’t be a religion in the first place. It’s supposed to be science. You are supposed to admit when you are wrong and you are supposed to be totally transparent with your reasoning.” Carlson's criticisms of Fauci echoes criticism that the physician received during the hearing. Sen. Rand PaulRandal (Rand) Howard PaulPaul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  Rand Paul holding up quick passage of anti-lynching bill Democratic senator to offer amendment halting 'military weaponry' given to police MORE (R-Ky.) expressed his respect for Fauci, but said that when it comes to COVID-19 and determining when states should begin to reopen, that he shouldn't be the "end all." “So I think we ought to have a little bit of humility in our belief that we know what’s best for the economy,” Paul said. “I don’t think you’re the one person that gets to make a decision. We can listen to your advice, but there are people on the other side saying there’s not going to be a surge and that we can safely open the economy and the facts will bear this out.” Dr. Fauci is one of the finest public servants we have ever had. He is not a partisan. His only interest is saving lives. We need his expertise and his judgment to defeat this virus. All Americans should be thanking him. Every day.A former top federal vaccine doctor plans to testify in Congress that the Trump administration was unprepared for the coronavirus pandemic, and that without a national coordinated response "2020 will be the darkest winter in modern history." "Our window of opportunity is closing. If we fail to develop a national coordinated response, based in science, I fear the pandemic will get far worse and be prolonged, causing unprecedented illness and fatalities," Rick Bright will say, according to written testimony first obtained by CNN and then posted publicly by a House committee. Bright is the former head of the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA). He will testify Thursday before the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Health after he filed a whistleblower complaint alleging that his refusal to broadly promote an unproven anti-malaria drug to treat COVID-19 directly resulted in his ouster from the agency. Bright had been in charge of BARDA from 2016 until last month, when he was reassigned to a narrower position at the National Institutes of Health. Bright is seeking to be reinstated to his former position and is asking for a full investigation into his reassignment. According to his testimony, Bright plans to say that the Department of Health and Human Services ignored his warnings about a broad outbreak and dismissed his recommendations to ramp up U.S production of masks, respirators and other critical supplies, such as medicine, syringes and swabs.   "We missed early warning signals and we forgot important pages from our pandemic playbook," Bright writes in his testimony, adding that, "There will be plenty of time to identify gaps for improvement. For now, we need to focus on getting things right going forward." Bright's testimony also calls for a national testing strategy to combat the virus, something that the White House has left to individual states. "We need to be able to find it, to isolate it and to stop it from infecting more people. We need tests that are accurate, rapid, easy to use, low cost, and available to everyone who needs them," Bright's testimony says.  "We need to be able to trust the results so that we can trace contacts, isolate and quarantine appropriately while striving to develop a cure." Washington Gov. Jay InsleeJay Robert InsleeMillions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks Trump rule limits states from blocking pipeline projects Inslee says Trump coronavirus response akin to if FDR called Pearl Harbor 'a hoax' MORE (D) announced Tuesday that the state plans to hire and train more than 1,300 contact tracers by the end of this week in an effort to limit the spread of the coronavirus.  Inslee said the 1,371 contact tracers will allow more businesses to open and more people to be active in public while helping to slow and prevent the spread of COVID-19. Inslee's extended stay-at-home order is currently set to expire at the end of May.  According to Inslee, the information about who came into contact with someone with a confirmed case of COVID-19 will be confidential. Contacts will not be told the name of the person who may have exposed them to COVID-19. He said the plan involves contacting people within 24 hours of a positive test result and talking to their close contacts within 48 hours. Contact tracing is a pillar of basic public health, a critical element in battling infectious disease around the globe. The goal is to identify those who have been infected with a virus and those with whom the infected person has come into contact.  In Washington, when someone tests positive for COVID-19, Inslee said an interviewer will reach out by phone. They will ask who that person has been in close contact with, then reach out to those other people to let them know they have been exposed. Those people would need to isolate or quarantine themselves, but there will be no enforcement.  Inslee will also require restaurants, once they are allowed to reopen, to "create a daily log of customers and maintain that daily log for 30 days, including telephone/email contact information, and time in," to make it easier for contact tracers. But the measure could raise privacy concerns, especially if the information is not properly secured.  In a statement, Inslee acknowledged that voluntary quarantine will be a challenge, "but it is one of the most critical portions of this entire endeavor.” Inslee said his office is looking at ways to address the challenges quarantine may pose on some families. Public health experts widely agree that states need a massive boost in their ability to contact, trace and isolate people who may have been exposed to the virus. It is one of the main ways states could begin to ease rigid physical distancing measures and reopen closed businesses.  The federal government has largely left it up to the states to build their contact tracing capacity. But contact tracing can work only if the number of new cases the United States confirms every day begins to bend down to a manageable number and if the tracers have the ability to test people broadly and get results quickly.  The number of contact tracers a state will need is based on population, as well as the severity and spread of the virus outbreak. If there are more contacts, more people will need to be hired. Some states have set a benchmark of 30 health workers per every 100,000 people. Inslee said in the interim, the contact tracers will be comprised of 351 National Guard personnel, 630 local and state health workers and 390 state Department of Licensing staffers. The state's Department of Health plans to continue training more workers and volunteers to replace them over time, he said. Updated 1:35 p.m.Washington, D.C., is extending its stay-at-home order through June 8, Mayor Muriel Bowser (D) announced on Wednesday.  The mayor said that the city has not yet met all the required benchmarks to reopen.  "We're not there yet and not quite ready to begin that phased new opening," Bowser said at a news briefing. The city is looking for a 14-day decline in new coronavirus cases, but so far has only seen a four-day decline, she said. Other criteria for starting to reopen have been met, the mayor noted. Bowser said Washington has the ability to test all key groups it needs to, including people who are symptomatic, health care workers, essential workers and close contacts of infected people. Washington is also in the process of hiring contact tracers, with plans to hire 200 more, Bowser noted. "We will continue to follow the advice of our health officials," she said. "Rushing to reopen could have tragic results." Bowser emphasized that she will be looking at data to make decisions, adding that she has consulted with Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. While President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE has made clear that he wants states to start reopening soon, Bowser said there had not been any pressure when asked if the White House had pushed for reopening the nation's capital. Bowser also said that it is possible she could lift the stay-at-home order before June 8 if the situation improves. It is also possible the order could be extended past that date, she added. "I could extend it, yes, but hopefully we won't have to," she said. Her order was previously scheduled to expire on Friday. This report was updated at 1:31 p.m. GOP Sen. Mike BraunMichael BraunBill aims to help farmers sell carbon credits Republicans stand by Esper after public break with Trump GOP senators dodge on treatment of White House protesters MORE (Ind.) on Wednesday blocked a resolution calling for the release of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's (CDC) guidance on reopening businesses. Senate Minority Leader Charles SchumerCharles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerGOP lawmaker calls on Senate to confirm Michael Pack as head of US media agency McConnell blocks resolution condemning Trump over treatment of protesters House Democrat demands answers from Secret Service about role breaking up White House protests MORE (D-N.Y.) tried to pass the resolution amid reports that Trump administration officials had sidelined the document. "The president is not a doctor. The president is not a scientist. Many don't even believe he's a stable genius like he thinks he is. ... Anybody who would say drink bleach, use bleach to protect yourself is not much of a medical expert," Schumer said from the Senate floor. "I wish President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE and his aides could be trusted to tell the American people the truth about this public health crisis. ... The point is that America needs and must have the candid guidance of our best scientists unfiltered, unedited, uncensored by President Trump or his political minions," Schumer added. The Associated Press reported earlier Wednesday that the guidance from the CDC on how to reopen businesses and institutions shuttered during the coronavirus outbreak was more detailed and restrictive than guidelines issued by the White House task force. The CDC guidance, according to the AP, calls for national coordination that would give communities a step-by-step guide for how to reopen shuttered sectors and lift social distancing restrictions. CDC Director Robert Redfield told the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee this week that the recommendations would be released "soon." Braun maintained Wednesday that Schumer was making a "faux argument" and characterized the CDC recommendations as "overly prescriptive."  "This is not about transparency. The White House is always going to be in favor of transparency. ... This is about the minority leader trying to use the bureaucracy at the CDC to bog down the economy," Braun added.The bipartisan chairs of the National Governors Association on Wednesday urged Congress to pass more economic relief efforts to help assuage the damage caused by the coronavirus pandemic, warning against allowing debate over the vital aid to become yet another partisan flashpoint. In a joint statement, Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan (R) and New York Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) said states need at least $500 billion in aid to make up for revenues lost during the crisis. "Each day that Congress fails to act, states are being forced to make cuts that will devastate the essential services the American people rely on and destroy the economic recovery before it even gets off the ground," Hogan and Cuomo wrote. "With widespread bipartisan agreement on the need for this assistance, we cannot afford a partisan process that turns this urgent relief into another political football. This is not a red state or blue state crisis. This is a red white and blue pandemic. The coronavirus is apolitical. It does not attack Democrats or Republicans. It attacks Americans," they said. House Democrats on Tuesday unveiled a sweeping $3 trillion aid package that includes $916 billion in funding for state, local and tribal governments. Republicans have been critical of what they call bailouts to Democratic-led states, some of which face the steepest budget holes. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE (R-Ky.) called the measure "exactly the wrong approach." McConnell wants to see state and local aid coupled with legislation that would indemnify businesses that are allowed to reopen from lawsuits related to the coronavirus.Democratic senators introduced legislation Wednesday requiring airlines refund billions of dollars to customers who canceled flights due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The cash refunds from major airlines and third-party ticket sellers would be issued regardless of whether the airline canceled the flight or if the passenger backed out of their ticket, according to a summary of the bill introduced by Sens. Ed MarkeyEdward (Ed) John MarkeySenate Dems introduce bill to keep pilots and bus and train operators safe Markey, Harris, Booker to introduce resolution calling for elimination of qualified immunity GOP Massachusetts governor: Trump's compassion 'nowhere to be found' MORE (Mass.), Elizabeth WarrenElizabeth WarrenGeorge Floyd protests show corporations must support racial and economic equality It's time to shut down industrial animal farming The Hill's Morning Report - Protesters' defiance met with calls to listen MORE (Mass.), Richard Blumenthal (Conn.), Chris MurphyChristopher (Chris) Scott MurphyPelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC Lawmakers call for legislation to force federal officers to identify themselves Missouri state lawmaker sparks backlash by tweeting 'looters deserve to be shot' MORE (Conn.) and Kamala HarrisKamala Devi HarrisPaul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  Rand Paul holding up quick passage of anti-lynching bill Minority caucuses call for quick action on police reform MORE (Calif.). While airlines are already required to offer cash refunds for flights they cancel, air carriers are not under the same obligation for flights canceled by customers. Airline activity has dropped off dramatically since March with the increased spread of the coronavirus and the majority of Americans under stay-at-home orders. Department of Transportation figures showed that air travel was down 51 percent in March compared to the same month in 2019. It plunged 93 percent in the beginning of May, according to Airlines for America, a trade association for major North American airlines. Senators backing the legislation conducted an earlier investigation that found major U.S. air carriers were sitting on approximately $10 billion in customer payments over canceled flights and only offered travel vouchers and credits toward future flights. “Americans need cash in their pockets to pay for food, housing, and prescriptions, not temporary credits toward future travel,” Markey said in a statement Wednesday. Congress provided up to $25 billion in relief for airlines as part of the $2.2 trillion CARES Act signed into law March 27. Portions of the coronavirus relief package were to be used for payroll grants for employees and low-interest loans and negotiated on an individual basis between the Treasury Department and U.S. airlines. “In light of this pressing need, and an unprecedented multibillion-dollar bailout, it’s absolutely unconscionable that the airlines won’t give consumers their money back,” Markey said. “Airlines already have a moral responsibility to give cash refunds for all cancelled tickets during the coronavirus pandemic. My new legislation will give them a legal responsibility, too.”Texas, which began to open its businesses at the beginning of May, has reported more than 1,000 new cases of COVID-19 for five consecutive days as the state struggles to curb the coronavirus pandemic. According to data from the Texas Department of State Health Services, 1,179 new cases were reported on Tuesday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases in the Lone Star State to 41,048. Since Gov. Greg Abbott (R) allowed some businesses to resume operations on May 1, Texas has only been below 1,000 new cases per day twice — on May 4 and May 7. On Tuesday, Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE, one of the nation's top public health officials, appeared before the Senate Health Committee and warned that states who reopen their economies too quickly could see new outbreaks of the disease that could result in “needless suffering and death.” “The consequences could be really serious,” Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told the committee. Fauci stressed that states follow the reopening guidelines released by the White House, specifically citing that states should see a 14-day consecutive decline in daily new COVID-19 cases before beginning to reopen. Texas has failed to reach that benchmark. Also on Tuesday, Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton (R) warned cities to not enforce stricter coronavirus restrictions than those the state government has mandated during the state's first reopening phase, which Abbott has slated to run through May 18. “Unfortunately, a few Texas counties and cities seem to have confused recommendations with requirements and have grossly exceeded state law to impose their own will on private citizens and businesses. These letters seek to avoid any public confusion as we reopen the state,” Paxton said in a statement. “I trust that local officials will act quickly to correct any orders that unlawfully conflict with Texas law and Governor Abbott’s Executive Orders.”  Paxton added that Abbott's executive order detailing a phased reopening supersedes any stay-at-home order issued by a city or municipality government. More than 1,100 Texans have died from the virus during the pandemic.A new study estimates that about 27 million people could lose their employer-sponsored health insurance in the middle of a pandemic due to job losses, though many will be able to find coverage elsewhere.  The analysis from the Kaiser Family Foundation finds that as of May 2, 26.8 million people could have lost their employer health insurance because either they or a family member lost their job and the health insurance that came with it. More than 31 million people have filed for unemployment in recent weeks due to staggering losses from the coronavirus-caused economic downturn. Not all of the 26.8 million people will become uninsured. In fact, the analysis finds that a large majority, 79 percent, will be eligible for government-subsidized coverage elsewhere, either through Medicaid or the Affordable Care Act marketplaces.  However, 5.7 million people are not eligible for government help, due to factors like living in a state that did not expand Medicaid or making too much income to qualify for ACA subsidies.  Many of those people could become uninsured, the study estimates.  And even among the majority who are eligible for subsidized coverage elsewhere, they will need to sign up for it, and bureaucratic hurdles or lack of awareness about their options could lead some of those people to become uninsured too.  The findings illustrate the dangers of having widespread job losses and loss of employer-provided health insurance combined with a health crisis caused by the coronavirus pandemic.  Congress is exploring ways to try to address the problem. The massive bill that House Democrats unveiled on Tuesday includes subsidies to cover the full cost of a program called COBRA that allows laid-off workers to stay on their old employer’s health insurance plan. That could provide an easier, more seamless way for people to keep coverage by simply remaining on the same plan.  Republicans have expressed some openness to that idea, though they say the new funds must include restrictions on paying for abortion coverage, causing a standoff with Democrats. Four members of the White House coronavirus task force were grilled by the Senate Health Committee Tuesday in the body’s first major hearing since the novel coronavirus ravaged the country. The virus has led to more than 81,000 deaths and more than 1.3 million cases, and has also shut down the economy, triggering fears about Great Depression-level joblessness. Here are five takeaways from what was a must-watch hearing. Fauci issued a clear warning on reopening too quickly  Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE, who over the past few months has become the nation’s preeminent health voice on the crisis, warned that states reopening too early could face “really serious” public health and economic consequences.  “There is a real risk that you will trigger an outbreak,” said Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. He warned states that move too quickly might not be able to control new outbreaks, risking “suffering and death” and a longer road to recovery. Fauci, who polls show is trusted more than the president when it comes to the coronavirus, did not name any specific states, and credited “many” state governments with moving at an “appropriate pace.” He warned that, even in the best of circumstances, cases will appear and good testing, contact tracing and the isolation of people who get COVID-19 will be necessary. Fauci’s comments go against the grain with the White House, which has pressed for the nation to reopen amid a recession that threatens President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE’s reelection. But the health official, who has become a celebrity during the crisis and was recently played by Brad Pitt in a “Saturday Night Live” parody, offered his remarks in a measured way, taking care not to criticize the White House and repeatedly urging states to follow guidelines endorsed by the president. There were few skirmishes during the hearing, though Sen. Rand PaulRandal (Rand) Howard PaulPaul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  Rand Paul holding up quick passage of anti-lynching bill Democratic senator to offer amendment halting 'military weaponry' given to police MORE (R-Ky.) said that while he respected Fauci, “I don’t think you’re the end all.” “So I think we ought to have a little bit of humility in our belief that we know what’s best for the economy,” Paul said. “I don’t think you’re the one person that gets to make a decision. We can listen to your advice, but there are people on the other side saying there’s not going to be a surge and that we can safely open the economy and the facts will bear this out.” Fauci responded that he had “never made myself out to be the end all and only voice in this.” “I'm a scientist, a physician and a public health official. I give advice according to the best scientific evidence,” he added. Republicans call for more testing  GOP senators called for more testing in a sign that some Republicans do not agree with the White House’s assessment that everything is fine with the nation’s testing regimen. Sen. Lamar AlexanderAndrew (Lamar) Lamar AlexanderMurkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump China stalled reporting genetic information about COVID-19, angering WHO: report Senate GOP chairman criticizes Trump withdrawal from WHO  MORE (R-Tenn.), the chairman of the committee, said while it is “impressive” the U.S. has completed more than 9 million COVID-19 tests, many more are needed. “Vaccines and treatments are the ultimate solutions but until we have them, all roads back to work and back to school go through testing,” he said. “This will require millions more new tests, many of them new technologies.”  Sen. Mitt RomneyWillard (Mitt) Mitt RomneyOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump Romney: Mattis statement 'stunning and powerful' MORE (Utah), the only Republican to vote for Trump’s impeachment, was more critical. “I find our testing record nothing to celebrate whatsoever,” he said. “I understand that politicians are going to frame data in a way that's most positive politically. Of course I don't expect that from admirals,” Romney said to Adm. Brett Giroir, assistant secretary for health at the Department of Health and Human Services. Both Giroir and Trump asserted Monday at a White House press conference that the U.S. has done more than twice the rate of testing per capita than was achieved in South Korea.  “The fact is their test numbers are going down, down, down now because they don't have the kind of outbreak we have,” Romney said of South Korea.  Giroir said the U.S. should have the ability to conduct 40 million to 50 million tests per month by September, if necessary.  Fauci warns a vaccine won’t be ready this fall A vaccine will not be ready in time to play a role in school reopenings, Fauci said, though he voiced cautious optimism there will be a vaccine relatively soon.  Alexander asked Fauci what he would tell the chancellor of the University of Tennessee about what will be in place to allow thousands of students to safely return in August. “In this case the idea of having treatments available, or a vaccine, to facilitate the reentry of students into the fall term, would be something that would be a bit of a bridge too far,” Fauci said.  Overall, however, Fauci said efforts to develop a vaccine are moving far faster than ever before. Asked by Romney if getting a vaccine in the next year or two is a “long shot,” Fauci replied: “It's definitely not a long shot; I would think that it's more likely than not that we will.” Republicans ready to open the economy, but at different speeds  GOP senators made it clear they believe the economies in their states are ready to reopen, though some appeared ready to move much more quickly than others.  While Paul was at one end of the spectrum in pressing for an early opening, Sen. Tim ScottTimothy (Tim) Eugene ScottPaul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  Rand Paul holding up quick passage of anti-lynching bill With capital, communities of color can lead our economic revival MORE (R-S.C.) struck a pragmatic tone about the decisions his state is making. “When we set out to flatten the curve by taking aggressive unprecedented measures like staying at home orders and mass small business closures, we didn't set out with a goal of preventing 100 percent fatalities. That would be unrealistic," Scott said.  His description of his state's efforts to contain its outbreak drew praise from Fauci. “You have put things in place that I think would optimize your capability of reopening, and obviously, as I was thinking as you were speaking, I almost want to clone that and make sure other people hear about that,” Fauci said.  Virtual hearing illustrates pros, cons Dogs barking, a glitching internet and the head of the Food and Drug Administration speaking in front of a blurry white backdrop: the Health Committee's first major hearing since the pandemic began was a microcosm of the pros and cons of a virtual workplace that Americans across the country are all too familiar with. All of the government's witnesses testified remotely after coming into contact with a White House aide who tested positive for COVID-19. Alexander led the hearing from home, after one of his staff tested positive.  Only a handful of senators were in the hearing room, sitting six feet apart from each other. Almost all of them were wearing masks or face coverings at some point. The rest were either in their offices or in their homes. There was no room for the public. Alexander made it clear that videoconference witness testimony was a one-time happening, but it was clear that even in Congress, life was far from “normal.”Rep. Lee ZeldinLee ZeldinFlynn urged Russian diplomat to have 'reciprocal' response to Obama sanctions, new transcripts show The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Surgeon General stresses need to invest much more in public health infrastructure, during and after COVID-19; Fauci hopeful vaccine could be deployed in December  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of another relief package; Warner says some businesses 'may not come back' at The Hill's Advancing America's Economy summit  MORE (R-N.Y.) said Tuesday that U.S. coronavirus testing should be expanded to asymptomatic people in the next phase in order for the country to recover from the pandemic.  Zeldin said in an interview with The Hill’s Steve Clemons that he agrees with officials, like President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE’s former Homeland Security adviser Tom Bossert, that tests need to be given to people who are not showing symptoms in order to stop community spread.  “The community spread that's been happening over the course of the last few months since this all started, in many cases was directly resulted by coming in contact with people who are showing no symptoms,” the congressman said.  The New York Republican said the policy of only testing those with symptoms made sense earlier in the pandemic when there were limited testing kits, but now that testing has increased in the country to reach “several hundred thousand tests” per day, lawmakers should look at broadening the requirements. “We need to look at the next level, the next phase of how testing should be conducted, and that would certainly include the ability to identify people who are asymptomatic,” he added.  Zeldin, a member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said Congress should also concentrate on issues outside of coronavirus recovery, including economics, trade and cybersecurity involving China. “Because of politics, we should not be censoring a conversation, where we're not having any hearings on these topics,” he said. “Let's talk about the coronavirus-related issues and the non-coronavirus-related issues regarding a country that you could argue is our largest geopolitical threat at this moment in time.” He added that the U.S.’s recovery should focus on advancement, including in technological and cyber-related ways, rather than just rebuilding what once was. Republican Rep. Lee ZeldinLee ZeldinFlynn urged Russian diplomat to have 'reciprocal' response to Obama sanctions, new transcripts show The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Surgeon General stresses need to invest much more in public health infrastructure, during and after COVID-19; Fauci hopeful vaccine could be deployed in December  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of another relief package; Warner says some businesses 'may not come back' at The Hill's Advancing America's Economy summit  MORE (N.Y.) said Tuesday that the federal government needs to produce more aid for states whose tax bases have been depleted as a result of the coronavirus pandemic because “bankruptcy is not an option” for states.  “Maybe some of these governments were cash strapped going into this, I understand that, but this is about survival,” Zeldin said in an interview with The Hill's Steve Clemons. “Bankruptcy is not an option. Some of these local municipalities are run by Republicans.” Zeldin represents a state at the epicenter of the coronavirus pandemic. New York has had more than 342,000 cases of the virus and more than 27,000 deaths, according to numbers kept by The New York Times. It has shut down much of the state's economy and it is unclear when New York City will truly begin to open.  Many Republicans have been skeptical of providing money to hard-hit states, and President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE has criticized the calls from some states. Zeldin's comments on bankruptcy reference controversial remarks from Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE (R-Ky.), who suggested it could be an option for states. Zeldin was part of a group of New York lawmakers who sent a letter to McConnell last month saying “bankruptcy is not the answer.”  “Some of these local governments were in very sound fiscal shape going into this. But unfortunately, right now, because of both the hits on the revenue side and the expenditure side, they need help,” Zeldin said Tuesday. House Democrats on Tuesday unveiled a $3 trillion coronavirus relief package that includes $915 billion for state, local, territorial and tribal governments. The bill is seen as dead on arrival in the Senate, but is expected to be a focal point of talks on a new bill. Republicans argue giving money to states serve as a bailout for Democratically-controlled states that have made poor financial decisions that predate the pandemic.     WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Senate HELP Committee hearing: Fauci says reopening too soon will have ‘really serious’ consequences  > House Democrats unveil $3 trillion coronavirus relief package  > Trump, Pence to distance from one another out of abundance of caution; West Wing staffers asked to wear masks  > New clusters emerge in countries once praised for successful coronavirus fights  > Wuhan to test all 11 million residents amid fears of the virus reemerging  > CNN poll: Majority of Americans fear the worst of the pandemic is still ahead of us  > Mental Health Awareness Month: Expert tips on how to stay sane during isolation  > Rep. Lee ZeldinLee ZeldinFlynn urged Russian diplomat to have 'reciprocal' response to Obama sanctions, new transcripts show The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Surgeon General stresses need to invest much more in public health infrastructure, during and after COVID-19; Fauci hopeful vaccine could be deployed in December  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of another relief package; Warner says some businesses 'may not come back' at The Hill's Advancing America's Economy summit  MORE says it’s absolutely imperative that Congress shores up finances of state and local governments that should not be blamed for pandemic consequences         President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE touted his response to the pandemic at a Monday press conference he later stormed away from. But the numbers tell a far different story.  Another day of growing fears about the virus’s potential spread throughout the West Wing comes after President Trump abruptly ended yesterday’s press conference following a contentious exchange with a reporter. Weijia Jiang of CBS asked Trump, who frequently compares the United States's testing ability and mortality rate with those of other countries, why the statistics surrounding the virus are a "global competition" to him. Trump responded to the question, “Don't ask me. Ask China that question, OK?” The president continues to tout his administration’s response to the pandemic as top-notch when compared with our global counterparts, but the numbers tell a different story. There are two categories the U.S. is leading the way in — confirmed cases and fatalities.    And in other big news out of the White House ...    Trump and Pence to distance themselves from one another. President Trump and Vice President Pence plan to keep some distance from one another out of an abundance of caution after one of the vice president's top aides tested positive for the coronavirus. The two leaders plan to maintain their distance for the "immediate future" after consulting with the White House medical unit, an administration official said. The decision is the latest step put in place by the White House to try to mitigate the spread of the virus after two staffers working in the building tested positive last week. The White House also announced Monday evening that West Wing staffers will be asked to wear masks throughout the day. Remember in February when now White press secretary Kayleigh McEnany told Fox Business that “we will not see diseases like the coronavirus come here?” Well, it did come to America, in devastating fashion — and now it has come to the very White House that claims to have the spread of the virus under control.  This just in from Capitol Hill: House Democrats unveil $3 trillion coronavirus relief package. House Democrats on Tuesday unveiled their latest round of legislation to provide Americans with economic relief from the coronavirus pandemic. The House is expected to pass the $3 trillion bill on Friday along party lines as Democrats seek to put pressure on Republicans to start negotiations for additional measures to contain the impact on workers. The legislation  provides additional funding for food assistance and state and local governments, among other provisions. (The Hill)   THE INTERVIEW  Rep. Lee Zeldin (R-N.Y.) tells The Hill’s Steve Clemons that it is absolutely imperative that Congress moves further to shore up finances of state and local governments that should not be blamed for pandemic consequences. He also argues the U.S. must rethink supply chains and dependence on Chinese manufacturing and technology.          Watch the full interview here.   Sponsored Content Presented by Nokia    THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Tuesday, May 12.  Editor's Note.    I spoke with Sen. John BarrassoJohn Anthony BarrassoHouse Democrats roll out 0B green transportation infrastructure bill IRS proposes guidance for expanded carbon capture tax credit No better time to modernize America's energy infrastructure MORE (R-Wyo.) on Monday about how to get a geographically large state with a low density population back and functioning again. Barrasso shared that with smart precautions in place, common sense distancing, and lots of testing, communities could get back to near normal — particularly those that have less dense populations than some of the harder hit high density centers in the country.   But what if you are a mayor of a small city packed in a densely populated area? And let’s add a few more realities to the mix. Your population is 86 percent African American and about 12 percent Hispanic — two communities hit very hard by COVID-19 both health-wise and economically. The city I’m talking about is Seat Pleasant, Md., which has a population of 4,721 people. It sits in Prince George’s County, just east of Washington, D.C.   Seat Pleasant Mayor Eugene Grant has been pushing to get his residents back into safe work environments. Everyone I have interviewed for this daily report wants safe working conditions that both workers and consumers can trust. And just about everyone I have spoken to, and we heard the same in Senate testimony from Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE on Tuesday, has said we must have robust, ever-present testing for both the well and the ill, as former Trump homeland security adviser Tom Bossert put it to me. Grant wants “point of care testing for antibodies” for his community. That means you test on the spot and get results there on the same spot. Imagine something as accessible, reliable, quick and cheap to use as a pregnancy test.   But earlier this week, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has constrained “antibody testing” to be done only in laboratories. According to the mayor whose team reached out to me, point of care testing uses only a finger stick of blood and costs a fraction of what laboratory tests do. I should add that the issue at hand is not only cost in dollars but also cost in time for results if working exclusively through labs. The FDA is worried about testing procedures and standards, worried about low quality tests, and more. But building a testing apparatus around laboratories for the nation as it struggles to reopen drives up costs and drives down access for vulnerable communities, especially some communities of color that are already on the ropes because of economic hardship.     There is always more to a story, and I’m sure there is here as well. But when I heard of a mayor of fewer than 5,000 people trying to get his people the kinds of tests that work in the realities they have and being told no, it occurred to me that this needs some scrutiny, some debate, and perhaps some capacity-building to get Grant and the tens of thousands of other American mayors just like him the resources they need.    – Steve Clemons   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE       We’re bringing you insight on the issues of the day from Washington’s top policymakers and thought leaders via our virtual, 3D journalism platform: The Hill Virtually Live.  Follow @TheHillEvents and watch this space for news on upcoming virtual programs. And keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.  CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 4,229,074 reported cases of coronavirus throughout the world and 289,349 reported deaths from COVID-19.    The U.S. is reporting 1,356,037 cases and 81,571 deaths as of the time of this newsletter.  Russia is continuing to see its cases spike and is now reporting 232,243 cases, passing Spain for the second most cases in the world, behind the U.S. 227,736 in the U.K. Spain is reporting 227,436 cases. 221,216 in Italy. 177,547 in France. 172,812 in Germany. 172,243 in Brazil. 84,011 cases in China – where a new cluster of cases in Wuhan is raising serious concerns and all 11 million of the city’s residents will be tested. 68,822 in Peru. 43,183 in the Netherlands. 42,925 in Saudi Arabia. 31,721 cases in Chile. 24,873 in Belarus. 24,671 in Singapore. 1,465 cases in Slovakia. 1,089 in Somalia.    New York is reporting 337,055 cases. New Jersey 140,917. 79,007 in Illinois. 78,462 in Massachusetts. 69,417 in California. 61,086 cases in Pennsylvania. 47,552 in MIchigan. 40,642 reported cases in Texas, where one city, San Antonio, is expanding testing to asymptomatic people. 19,879 cases in Colorado. 17,122 in Washington. 11,736 in Arizona. 10,418 in Wisconsin. 10,261 in Alabama. 634 in Hawaii.    In the U.S., 9,382,235 COVID-19 test results have been reported and 232,733 have reported full recoveries from the virus.   WASHINGTON WATCH        Senate HELP Committee hearing: Fauci warns of “really serious” consequences if nation reopens too quickly. Anthony Fauci, in a highly anticipated hearing on Tuesday, warned the Senate Health Committee of "really serious" consequences if states ignore federal guidelines and reopen too early during the coronavirus pandemic. Fauci said the danger of new spikes of coronavirus cases from reopenings is both real and dangerous. “The consequences could be really serious,” said Fauci, who is self-isolating after being in contact with a confirmed COVID-19 case at the White House. (The Hill)     Trump testing czar says hope is for 40 million to 50 million coronavirus tests a month by September. Adm. Brett Giroir,  who is overseeing the administration's coronavirus testing efforts, said he hopes the country will be testing tens of millions of people a month by the fall. "So by September, taking every aspect of development, authorization manufacturing and supply chain into consideration, we project that our nation will be capable of performing at least 40 [million] to 50 million tests per month if needed at that time," Giroir said. (The Hill)   Pandemic roils GOP views on trade with China. Key Republican senators urged President Trump on Monday not to let rising tensions with China upset bilateral trade at a time when the U.S. economy is reeling from the coronavirus. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. Bill CassidyWilliam (Bill) Morgan CassidyGOP senators dodge on treatment of White House protesters The Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - US virus deaths exceed 100,000; Pelosi pulls FISA bill Stakes high for Collins in coronavirus relief standoff MORE (R-La.)  @SenBillCassidy #COVID19 has interrupted our lives & the impacts will persist. Although most children don't appear to be at physical risk from the disease itself, the collective response to the disease promotes an environment that increases the vulnerability of children. https://pediatricnursing.org/article/S0882-   Sen. Patty MurrayPatricia (Patty) Lynn MurrayCOVID-19 workplace complaints surge; unions rip administration Lack of child care poses major hurdle as businesses reopen Democratic leaders say Trump testing strategy is 'to deny the truth' about lack of supplies MORE (D-Wash.)  @PattyMurray @SecGeneScalia needs to stop dragging his feet, do his job, and issue a rule to ensure that employers are making workers' health and wellbeing their top priority.   Rep. Bradley ByrneBradley Roberts ByrneOvernight Defense: Pentagon chief says he opposes invoking Insurrection Act for protests | White House dodges on Trump's confidence in Esper | 'Angry and appalled' Mattis scorches Trump Republicans stand by Esper after public break with Trump Democrats press OSHA official on issuing an Emergency Temporary Standard MORE (R-Ala.)  @RepByrne Instead of drafting a partisan wish list behind closed doors, @SpeakerPelosi needs to get serious and call Congress back to Washington so the people's representatives can sit at the table to discuss how to fight the #coronavirus. The American people want their voices heard!  ACROSS THE NATION  CNN Poll: Negative ratings for government handling of coronavirus persist. Most Americans (54 percent) continue to say the U.S. government is doing a poor job preventing the spread of COVID-19, according to a new CNN poll conducted by SSRS. And, while a growing share of the public feels the worst of the outbreak is behind us (44 percent, up from 17 percent in April), a majority (52 percent) still sees the worst on the horizon. (CNN)    Michigan sheriff says he won't enforce Whitmer's stay-at-home order. A county sheriff in Michigan said Monday that his office will not enforce Gov. Gretchen Whitmer’s (D) stay-at-home order intended to stop the spread of the coronavirus, which data shows has resulted in more than 47,000 cases in the state and more than 4,500 deaths. (The Hill)    Pennsylvania governor pushes back on counties threatening to step out of line, with some early signs of success. Gov. Tom Wolf (D) pushed back forcefully — and with some apparent success — Monday on a brushfire of opposition in central and eastern Pennsylvania counties to his ongoing coronavirus pandemic lockdown. (PennLive Patriot News)  WORLD VIEW    New clusters emerge in countries once praised for successful coronavirus fights. Several nations in Asia have been hailed for curbing the spread within their borders. But in the face of the coronavirus, victory can be elusive and fleeting. Singapore, once a model for its speed and efficiency in tracing the contacts of infected people, has seen its cases balloon to more than 24,000 as the virus spread in dormitories for foreign workers. Officials in Wuhan, the Chinese city where the outbreak began and which celebrated its recent emergence from more than two months in lockdown, said it would test all 11 million residents after six new cases were confirmed this week. (New York Times)      Japan raises travel alert for 13 countries over virus pandemic. Japan on Tuesday raised its travel alert for 13 countries to its second-highest level, warning against any trips to these areas as new coronavirus infections continue to spread globally. (Kyodo News)    Robot dog enforces social distancing in Singapore park. A robot dog is patrolling one of Singapore's parks as part of a coronavirus-related trial. The machine — made by U.S.-based Boston Dynamics — is fitted with a camera to monitor how busy Bishan-Ang Mo Kio Park becomes. (BBC)  SCIENCE What you need to know about four potential COVID-19 vaccines. New technologies are helping speed the process along at a rate much faster than the traditional method of giving someone a weakened version of the virus. For example, new technology uses RNA or DNA to code for a part of the virus to trigger an immune response that offers protection. But that technology has never been used on a wide scale for an approved vaccine, adding to the uncertainty. Here’s a guide to the four U.S. and European vaccine efforts that have started clinical trials. (The Hill)   BIO launches new COVID-19 therapeutic development tracker. BIO’s Industry Analysis Team has reviewed and annotated pipeline data from BioCentury and Biomedtracker to create an interactive view of the COVID-19 pipeline. The team has investigated each drug as to the original inventor (company/country), mechanism of action, and strategic approach, as well as de-duplicated programs for the same active ingredient (for example, hydroxychloroquine is counted only once). This data will be updated weekly on Monday mornings. (Good Day Bio)   Johns Hopkins offering free class in how to become a contact tracer. An online course being offered by Johns Hopkins University teaches people how to become contact tracers for free, filling a need by states across the country for trained professionals who can help identify COVID-19 victims and those they have come into contact with. ABC News first reported the online course. (The Hill)   University Hospital, UT Health San Antonio begin second phase of patient testing for promising COVID-19 drug. The COVID-19 Infectious Disease Team at University Health System and UT Health San Antonio has launched the second stage of a clinical trial involving a coronavirus drug that has delivered promising results. According to a news release, the second phase of the remdesivir clinical trial follows encouraging results from the initial part of the study that included 1,063 patients. (KSAT)   BUSINESS   Twitter to label misleading coronavirus tweets. Amid a surge of misinformation triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic, Twitter has announced yet another update to its policies regarding conspiracy theories and fake news. Now, COVID-19 tweets that are considered misleading will get labels designed to offer more context about the information therein. Tweets making potentially harmful claims disputed by experts will now come with a more direct warning message. (Vox)   The biggest U.S. mall owner plans to have 50 percent of its centers reopened this week. The biggest U.S. mall owner, Simon Property Group, said Monday that it plans to have roughly 50 percent of its properties reopened again within the next week, as states begin to loosen their lockdown restrictions during the coronavirus pandemic. (CNBC)   United updates social distancing policies after viral photo of packed flight. On Monday, just days after Eric Weiss posted a photo of a crowded cross-country flight, United announced that it would be “implementing additional, temporary changes to promote social distancing in the air and on the ground.” (Washington Post)   IDEAS, CAUSES, PASSION The scientific road to recovery. If we want a more accurate picture, we must perform both viral testing and antibody testing on a systematic basis. This is not just an academic exercise. It is critical to safely reopening society. Reopening without having a handle on the infection fatality rate will lead to a disorganized and potentially devastating, and deadly outcome. (Sandra Gelbard for The Hill)    COVID-19 and the future of North American borders. Whether the control is in China or in the United States, borders in North America will fundamentally change again. Decisions to sort, enable or exclude, and to enhance the movement of people, goods and ideas across North American borders will become even more centralized and politicized. (Guadalupe Correa-Cabrera and Victor Konrad for The Hill)   Sponsored Content Presented by Nokia    GENEROUS SPIRITS May is Mental Health Awareness Month. This year, it comes at a time when more Americans than ever are struggling with their emotional health as they grapple with the anxiety and financial strain of the coronavirus pandemic and the prolonged isolation period we now find ourselves in.    Here’s some helpful tips to boost your mental health as the pandemic drags on:    > 9 ways to boost your mental health during the pandemic > Mindfulness during the coronavirus: Harvard professor’s tips to help lower anxiety > The best mental health tips for staying sane in isolation  > Quick tips on how to stay sane in a pandemic, from a psychologist   John Krasinski and “The Office” cast re-create show’s wedding dance for newlyweds. John Krasinski, Steve Carell and the rest of "The Office" crew reunited for a very important occasion — and no, it wasn't a reboot of the hilarious sitcom. But it was for a good cause. On his YouTube show, "Some Good News," Krasinski called on his former castmates, including Jenna Fischer, to re-create the epic dance scene from Jim (Krasinski) and Pam’s (Fischer) wedding for a newlywed couple. (Fox News)   ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. ROSA DELAURO (D-Conn.) > Steve interviews BIO President and CEO JIM GREENWOOD  > Steve interviews former Surgeon General VIVEK MURTHY  > Steve interviews World Central Kitchen founder chef JOSE ANDRES  > Steve interviews Rep. WILL HURD (R-Texas)  > Steve interviews Sen. JOHN BARRASSO (R-Wyo.)    Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES        One of the things I have been doing on Facebook — but there are other platforms like Instagram that are just as good — is sharing with my “friends” museum tours I have done in the past. I take tons of pics at museums nowadays and folks seem to like the walkthroughs. So, here are a few artworks from the National Portrait Gallery and a compelling “Eye to I: Self Portraits from 1900 to Today” exhibit I saw recently. This to me is a refreshing alternative to #selfies (which I still love), and here, courtesy of National Portrait Gallery Director Kim Sajet are a lot of other virtual tours of online exhibitions featured on Google Arts & Culture.  Enjoy these selfies.    SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.     VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Rep. Lee ZeldinLee ZeldinFlynn urged Russian diplomat to have 'reciprocal' response to Obama sanctions, new transcripts show The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Surgeon General stresses need to invest much more in public health infrastructure, during and after COVID-19; Fauci hopeful vaccine could be deployed in December  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of another relief package; Warner says some businesses 'may not come back' at The Hill's Advancing America's Economy summit  MORE (R-N.Y.). Excerpts from the interview are below: Clemons: What do you think it's gonna take to get the high trust environments that workers and consumers and your community want to have as we think about reopening the economy? Rep. Lee Zeldin: We want to reopen smartly and precisely. We want to do so in a way that prevents another outbreak. That includes the ability to do diagnostic testing, the ability to do antibody testing. Also for the individual business owner to utilize its own mitigation efforts, not just to protect their own employees, but also the public. One example is a retail store that might be able to open. If the retail store is able to do curbside pickup, that would allow that business to start making money again, and for those employees to get back to work. At the same time, prevent the densely populated scenario inside their store to be avoided. So it's not just what government does at all levels, but it's also what businesses will do as well as the steps that individuals will do to make it possible to continue that reopening along the phases.    Clemons: You have been an active part of the legislation, the various CARES packages and the CARES legislation that have come out. What do you think Congress still needs to do that it hasn't done so far?  Zeldin: Well, we want to drive additional support, for example, to state and local governments. I have governments in the first congressional district between Albany, the state capital, our county, our towns, our villages. They’re on the front lines of this fight against coronavirus. And they're seeing hits, not only with coronavirus-related expenses, but also with revenue losses. And because of coronavirus, directly because of coronavirus, you're seeing these gaps being blown much larger in their budgets. Maybe some of these governments were cash strapped going into this, I understand that, but this is about survival. Bankruptcy is not an option. Some of these local municipalities are run by Republicans. It's not just Democrats, and you have great bond ratings. Some of these local governments were in very sound fiscal shape going into this.    Clemons: Yesterday I spoke to Sen. John BarrassoJohn Anthony BarrassoHouse Democrats roll out 0B green transportation infrastructure bill IRS proposes guidance for expanded carbon capture tax credit No better time to modernize America's energy infrastructure MORE, and he said there had been $150 billion appropriated to state and local governments that hasn't even gone out yet so that he thinks it's too early to begin looking at more money right now. Do you think he's wrong? What are the aspects of this that you think that those people in that camp don't understand about this moment?  Zeldin: Well, I would say a few things. One is that the funding formula under the CARES Act only allows the money to be spent for COVID-19-related expenses, so the funding formula needs a bit more flexibility. Two, is that the CARES Act caps the population threshold at 500,000 which means that Brookhaven Town, which is the largest town in my congressional district, with a population of 480-something-thousand people, they haven't gotten any direct aid as a result of the CARES Acts, so driving support to that lower level of government is important as well.   Clemons: Is New York anywhere near the threshold that it can begin thinking about testing asymptomatic people and opening that which everyone tells me that that's just a vital part of getting us back to work.  Zeldin: I very much agree with the need to be testing individuals, not only those who are most ill, but also those individuals who are asymptomatic. When you hear of community spread, it's not just from that individual they come in contact with who is showing symptoms. But the community spread that's been happening over the course of the last few months since this all started, in many cases, was directly resulted by coming in contact with people who are showing no symptoms. So, where there was a policy at the beginning of this, where there was a limited amount of tests, and tests can only be given at that time they say to individuals who we're showing symptoms or came in direct contact with other people who had tested positive, now that we've seen testing capacity increase as much as it has daily, where several 100,000 tests now can be conducted each day in the United States, we need to look at the next level, the next phase of how testing should be conducted, and that would certainly include the ability to identify people who are asymptomatic    Clemons: Dr. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE is testifying remotely in the Senate and he's issuing a lot of cautionary warnings about moving too quickly on reopening around the country. And I know we have an uneven patchwork about what that will look like, but he's saying he is worried that there are too many places that are going to jump the gun. Where are you in that?  Zeldin: I certainly wouldn't want to paint the entire country with the same broad brush, which means even in a place like New York, you might see parts of upstate reopening this week, in the coming days, and maybe there will be other parts of upstate or other parts downstate that may be reopening in the days and the weeks after that. So, as you see with New York, where all different parts of the state are trying to meet these seven different dimensions, these seven factors for entering into that phase one, I think that that's a better approach than telling people upstate that they have to wait until every corner of New York is ready to move into that next phase.    Clemons: You're a member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, and China is a big part of this equation we're struggling with. China is now a matter of political debate. What do you think we should be doing right now with regards to China and this pandemic?  Zeldin: Well, for one, step one is about issues, and investigation, and answers. We have questions. There are issues related to early detection, one. And for us to understand why China was censoring social media content. Why China was forcing confessions and putting criminal charges on individuals who wanted to tell China and the world about what they were seeing. Why they weren't letting the public know about human to human transmission. Why was the World Health Organization utilizing Chinese Communist party talking points as we were going through those first few critical weeks? That's one component of this is early detection. Another component, another issue, more questions with regards to PPE and ventilators, our supply chain. What should we be doing to be prepared for a next pandemic, better than we've been prepared for any pandemic in the past, to ensure that we don't have to rely on foreign countries like China for ventilators, for PPE and to the maximum extent possible medicines as well. Between our national stockpile, our state stockpiles and an emergency domestic manufacturing plan, we should have an ability within our own borders to be prepared for the next pandemic.    Clemons: Congressman Will HurdWilliam Ballard HurdScaled-back Pride Month poses challenges for fundraising, outreach The Hill's Morning Report - Protesters' defiance met with calls to listen GOP Rep. Will Hurd marches with protesters in Houston MORE said we can't just think about recovery, we need to think about advancement. We need to think about 5G, technology and cyber. Rather than going back to where we were in November 2019, we have to put the resources we need to move this forward so that we're safer and better, but that there's more agility and more capacity in the United States. Do you support that sort of approach of advancing the economy as opposed to recovery? Zeldin: Yeah, absolutely. It should be our goal to recover stronger than we have ever been. Recovery is also about rebuilding. It's also about advancement. ... We should be looking to the future as we're tackling these issues, not to go back into time, but to go forward stronger and for our country to be the best version of itself, for our economy to rebound as quickly as possible to get people back to work. But also, as you referenced 5G and Huawei, this is an issue for the future. We'd be doing a real disservice for our own national security interests and other dynamics if we were looking at the 5G and Huawei issue as an issue of the past as opposed to an issue of the future.Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE bluntly told Sen. Rand PaulRandal (Rand) Howard PaulPaul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  Rand Paul holding up quick passage of anti-lynching bill Democratic senator to offer amendment halting 'military weaponry' given to police MORE (R-Ky.) on Tuesday that he has never put himself up as the definitive authority on the coronavirus pandemic. "I have never made myself out to be the end all and only voice in this. I'm a scientist, a physician and a public health official. I give advice according to the best scientific evidence," Fauci, the director of the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said during a Senate hearing about the coronavirus pandemic.  Fauci pushed back on Paul's comments that scientists should "have a little bit of humility" because they do not know what's best for the economy. "As much as I respect you, Dr. Fauci, I don't think you're the end all. I don't think you're the one person that gets to make a decision," Paul said. "We can listen to your advice, but there are people on the other side saying there's not going to be a surge, that we can safely reopen the economy, and the facts will bear this out."  Fauci responded that he doesn't give economic advice. "I don't give advice about anything other than public health," Fauci said.  Rand Paul: "Dr. Fauci, I don't think you're the end-all, I don't think you're the one person that gets to make a decision..."Dr. Fauci: "Sen. Paul, I have never made myself out to be the end-all & only voice of this. I'm a scientist, a physician, and a public health official." pic.twitter.com/kp28BusfUL  Paul, an ophthalmologist, predicted that there won't be a surge in positive cases and deaths in states that are currently reopening their economies.  Paul said he thinks public health officials who model diseases should own up to being wrong if there's no surge, "because I think that's what's going to happen. In rural states we never really reached any sort of pandemic levels in Kentucky and other states." Paul also suggested that children should go back to school in the fall because he thinks they are at low risk for catching COVID-19 and have such low levels of mortality.  Fauci responded, noting that humility is saying there's a lot people don't know about the virus, especially about its effects on children.  "We really better be very careful, particularly when it comes to children, because the more and more we learn, we're seeing things the virus can do that we didn't see from the studies in China or in Europe," Fauci said. "You're right, in the numbers that children, in general, do much much better than adults and the elderly, and particularly those with underlying conditions, but I am very careful and hopefully humble that I don't know everything about this disease, and that's why I'm very reserved in making broad predictions," Fauci said. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE said Tuesday that the real number of deaths from coronavirus is "almost certainly" even higher than the official death toll of 80,000 because of the likelihood that some deaths went unrecorded. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told the Senate Health Committee during a virtual hearing that with health care systems overwhelmed, it's very likely a number of deaths were not recorded, meaning total deaths from the coronavirus across the country are likely higher than the already staggering toll of more than 80,000 now counted by Johns Hopkins University.  "Most of us feel that the number of deaths are likely higher than that number because given the situation particularly in New York City, when they were really strapped with a very serious challenge to their health care system, that there may have been people who died at home who were not counted as COVID because they never really got to the hospital," Fauci said during the hearing. Fauci: "Most of us feel that the number of deaths are likely higher than [current count of 80,000+]. There may be people [in NYC] who died at home who did have COVID-19 who were not counted because they never really got to the hospital. I don't know exactly what percent higher." pic.twitter.com/SwKJ9ESuWT Asked by Sen. Bernie SandersBernie SandersOVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump signs order removing environmental reviews for major projects | New Trump air rule will limit future pollution regulations, critics say | DNC climate group calls for larger federal investment on climate than Biden plan Google: Chinese and Iranian hackers targeting Biden, Trump campaigns Sanders: Police departments that violate civil rights should lose federal funding MORE (I-Vt.) if the real number of deaths could be even 50 percent higher than the official number of 80,000, Fauci said: "I think you are correct that the number is likely higher, I don't know exactly what percent higher, but almost certainly it's higher." The comments drive home how devastating the death toll from the virus has been in the United States. Even going by the recorded number of 80,000, the U.S. by far leads the world in total deaths, according to Johns Hopkins data, though numbers from China have been cast in doubt. Following the U.S., the United Kingdom has about 32,000 deaths, and Italy has about 30,000 deaths.Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE in a highly anticipated hearing on Tuesday warned the Senate Health Committee of "really serious" consequences if states ignore federal guidelines and reopen too early during the coronavirus pandemic. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said the danger of new spikes of coronavirus cases from reopening is both real and dangerous. “My concern is that if some areas, city, states or what have you, jump over those various checkpoints and prematurely open up without having the capability of being able to respond effectively and efficiently, my concern is that we will start to see little spikes that might turn into outbreaks,” Fauci said during virtual testimony from his home in Washington. “The consequences could be really serious,” said Fauci, who is self-isolating after being in contact with a confirmed COVID-19 case at the White House.  He added that this is also the case in states that are moving at an “appropriate pace” in reopening as well. “Even under the best of circumstances, when you pull back on mitigation, you will see some cases appear. It's the ability and the capability of responding to those cases with good identification, isolation and contact tracing will determine whether you can continue to go forward, as you try to reopen America.” Experts say far more testing and contact tracing capacity is needed before the country can safely reopen. Testing availability varies dramatically from state to state, and some public health departments are still hiring and training workers who will trace contacts of confirmed COVID-19 cases and link them to testing. Fauci's comments at the hearing, which was carried live by cable television networks, comes as the White House has pressed states to reopen their economies.  President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE has also criticized some states for not doing more to reopen.  "The great people of Pennsylvania want their freedom now, and they are fully aware of what that entails," Trump tweeted on Monday. "The Democrats are moving slowly, all over the USA, for political purposes. They would wait until November 3rd if it were up to them." "Don’t play politics. Be safe, move quickly!" he concluded. The debate over reopening comes months before a presidential election expected to hinge on the administration's response to the pandemic and the economic crisis it has caused.  Unemployment jumped to 14.7 percent in a report last week and is expected to grow higher, raising pressure on the administration and Trump. More than 1.3 million coronavirus cases have been confirmed in the U.S., leading to nearly 81,000 deaths. Most states have reopened in some capacity, creating a political divide as Republican governors have tended to lift restrictions faster than states led by Democrats. Several states have begun reopening without first experiencing a 14-day downward trajectory in COVID-19 cases or a decline in the percentage of positive tests, recommendations laid out in the administration's guidelines for reopening. "There is a real risk that you will trigger an outbreak," Fauci said of ignoring those guidelines. "You might not be able to control it, which in fact, paradoxically, will set you back, not only leading to some suffering and death [that] could be avoided, but could even set you back on the road to try to get economic recovery." Updated at 12:12 p.m.Adm. Brett Giroir, who is overseeing the Trump administration's coronavirus testing efforts, said on Tuesday that he hopes the U.S. will be testing tens of millions of people a month by the fall. "So by September, taking every aspect of development, authorization, manufacturing and supply chain into consideration, we project that our nation will be capable of performing at least 40 [million] to 50 million tests per month if needed at that time," Giroir said during a virtual hearing before a Senate panel.  That number would represent a massive increase in the nation's current testing capacity, much of which is handled by the states with some federal support.  As a whole, the U.S. conducted approximately 1.9 million coronavirus tests last week and has conducted approximately 9 million tests since January. The administration has said it aims to conduct about 12 million tests this month.  Public health experts have said the U.S. needs to conduct about 5 million tests a week for states to consider safely reopening. The current weekly rate of testing is well below that level, even though several states have begun easing physical distancing measures.President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE and Vice President Pence plan to keep some distance from one another out of an abundance of caution after one of the vice president's top aides tested positive for the coronavirus. The two leaders plan to maintain their distance for the "immediate future" after consulting with the White House medical unit, an administration official said. The decision is the latest step put in place by the White House to try and mitigate the spread of the virus after two staffers working in the building tested positive last week. White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany told reporters later Tuesday that it was Pence's personal choice to stay away from the president. "The vice president has made the choice to keep his distance for a few days, and I would just note that that's his personal decision," she said at a press briefing, adding that Pence would determine how long he would choose to keep his distance from Trump. The two leaders had previously attended White House events together, often standing side-by-side at coronavirus briefings throughout the month of April. Trump told reporters on Monday that he would discuss keeping some separation from Pence as a precautionary measure after his press secretary, Katie Miller, was one of the staffers who tested positive. "I have not seen him since then," Trump said. "But I would say that he will — he and I will be talking about that. Yeah, we could talk on the phone." Miller tested positive last Friday, one day after a military member who serves as a personal valet for Trump tested positive. The White House has implemented additional measures in the days since to try and keep the president safe. Both Trump and Pence are now tested daily instead of weekly, as are some officials who are in regular contact with either leader. The most visible change came Monday when a memo instructed all officials working in the West Wing to wear a mask when they were not at their desks or able to maintain proper social distancing from others. The new policy was on display in the Rose Garden, where every official in attendance had a mask on other than Trump. Pence traveled to Iowa on Friday, the day Miller tested positive. He is working from the White House this week, though his public schedule shows he has been holding meetings with governors and other officials via teleconference and videoconference. The vice president did not attend Monday's Rose Garden event. Updated at 2:43 p.m.WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > White House struggles to contain coronavirus spread among its ranks  > FDA, CDC chiefs to enter self-quarantine after contact with positive White House aide  > Battle heats up between South Dakota government and Sioux tribes > FDA grants emergency use authorization for Abbott coronavirus antibody test  > Wuhan sees new COVID-19 cluster, deepening fears of a second wave of the virus  > Poll shows more Americans are beginning to ease up on isolation  > Sen. Barrasso says we haven’t sent out the $650 billion for states and localities already appropriated; too soon to consider more    The coronavirus is raising questions about the safety of yet another workplace: the White House. Following the news that a valet to President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE and Katie Miller, Vice President Pence’s press secretary, both tested positive for COVID-19, three of the government’s top health officials have announced they are going into some form of self-quarantine after loose contact with Miller. Food and Drug Administration Administrator Stephen Hahn and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Robert Redfield both intend to self-quarantine, according to spokespeople. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE said he will go into a "modified" self-quarantine. The timing could not be worse for the administration and Trump. Just as the president is fervently doubling down on his belief that it is safe to reopen the country, the coronavirus is feared to be spreading rapidly through the close quarters of the West Wing. Kevin Hassett, a top economic adviser to the president,  said on CBS’s “Face The Nation” Sunday that “it is scary to go to work” in the White House. The White House is ramping up its testing and contract tracing efforts to contain the spread of the virus, but with an infected patient roaming its halls, who knows who else in the West Wing could have been exposed. The administration’s battle to contain the outbreak of the virus among its own ranks underscores the conundrum that business leaders across the country are grappling with — how to safely reopen and protect themselves, their employees and their customers. Political persuasion aside, it is inherently difficult to believe the president that it’s safe to get back to work when the coronavirus has creeped its way into the West Wing. The virus most certainly does not care about the politics of the pandemic. Should we?     THE INTERVIEW  Sen. John BarrassoJohn Anthony BarrassoHouse Democrats roll out 0B green transportation infrastructure bill IRS proposes guidance for expanded carbon capture tax credit No better time to modernize America's energy infrastructure MORE (Wyo.), the third ranking member in Senate GOP leadership, says we haven’t sent out the $650 billion for states and localities already appropriated and it’s too soon to consider more; calls for funding studies for all vaccine candidates; says rules for low-density communities need to be different than cities; and adds that it’s time for rural hospitals to resume elective procedures.          Watch the full interview here.    Sponsored Content Presented by Nokia    THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Monday, May 11.  Editor's Note.          After the taping had concluded of my interview with Sen. John Barrasso (R-Wyo.) but our Skype  connection continued, the senator held up a newspaper, the April 30 edition of the News Letter Journal from Newcastle, Wyo. The headline reads, “Hospital cuts staff, hours, $2.7 million” and another headline on the front page reads “Still no cases — No positive test results for COVID in county.”  I asked the senator to text me a picture of that paper, which I then embedded above because I can imagine that if I lived in Newcastle and needed a hip replacement, a mammogram, a colonoscopy, a check-in with a doctor for a sinus infection, or any number of other “elective procedures,” I’d be very frustrated that a rural hospital in a county with zero coronavirus infections could not help me. And because they can’t help me with my hypothetical ailment, health care workers are losing their jobs and the hospital is cutting back services that are already endangered in America’s rural areas.   What I learned from Barrasso is that we need to be careful of approaches where we think one size fits all. I think that different states today are proceeding along different lines. Gyms, tattoo parlors and salons opened in Wyoming on May 1 — and there does not seem to be a surge in new infections. The state is planning to open bars and restaurants on May 15, but only those establishments that have put into place precautionary measures. Maybe cities will eventually be able to do this safely as well, but clearly there is an uneven patchwork of infection in the nation. In my view, advocates of reopening and those cautioning against it need to widen their apertures on both sides to understand that rebuilding high-trust environments for people to socialize, to learn in, to do business in, and play and eat in is going to take time. Barrasso said testing is key — and he quoted Anthony Fauci saying we need to be able to do 3 million tests a week in the U.S. to get where we need to be.     Barrasso remembered that I had worked for former Sen. Jeff Bingaman (D) of New Mexico and said that the distancing rules and business and commerce guidelines needed to be different between Albuquerque and most of the rest of the state. Drive 30 minutes outside Alexandria, Va., and one can see a slide into very low density communities. Somehow embracing these differences and acknowledging them may be a path to desensitizing some of the growing unrest in the country over shutdowns — at least that is my view at the moment.   Interesting interview with Sen. Barrasso. Hope you find it valuable.   — Steve Clemons     Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE       We’re bringing you insight on the issues of the day from Washington’s top policymakers and thought leaders via our virtual, 3D journalism platform: The Hill Virtually Live.  Follow @TheHillEvents and watch this space for news on upcoming virtual programs. And keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.  CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 4,142,970 reported cases of COVID-19 throughout the world. 283,861 deaths have been attributed to the coronavirus as of the time of this newsletter.    The U.S. is reporting 1,334,951 cases and 79,825 deaths. Spain 224,350. The U.K. and Russia have surpassed Italy’s total number of cases with 224,327 and 221,334 confirmed cases, respectively. 219,814 in Italy. 177,094 in France. Germany 171,999. Brazil 163,510. 138,657 in Turkey. 109,286 in Iran. 67,307 in Peru. 41,014 in Saudi Arabia. 35,022 in Mexico. 23,906 in Belarus. 22,996 in Ireland. 8,157 in Czechia. 6,034 in Argentina.    This in from my colleague Reid Wilson: States / territories where week-over-week cases are UP over last week:  AL, AZ, AR, CA, CT, DE, DC, ID, KY, ME, MD, MN, MS, NE, NC, OH, OR, SD, TX, UT, WA, WV, WI, WY.     States where week-over-week cases are down two weeks in a row: HI, LA, MA, MI, MT, NV, NJ, NY, PA, RI.   New York is reporting 335,395 cases. 138,754 in New Jersey. 77,793 in Massachusetts. 77,741 in Illinois. 67,875 in California. Pennsylvania 60,357. Michigan 47,182. Florida 40,982. Texas 39,258. 33,837 in Georgia. 33,373 in Maryland. Virginia is reporting 25,070 cases. 24,629 confirmed cases in Indiana. 24,081 in Ohio. 19,703 in Colorado. 16,891 in Washington, D.C. 8,171 cases in Nebraska, which saw a dramatic spike in cases over the weekend. 6,251 in Utah. 926 in Vermont.    8,987,524 COVID-19 tests have been conducted in the U.S. 216,169 have reported full recoveries from the virus in the states.   WASHINGTON WATCH  GOP senators worry Trump, COVID-19 could cost them their majority.  Senate Republicans looking at polls showing GOP incumbents losing ground are concerned that President Trump's handling of the pandemic has put their majority in danger. The two biggest criticisms of Trump that GOP lawmakers express privately are that his administration took too long to deploy coronavirus tests and that the president’s statements and demeanor have been too flippant. (The Hill)   Administration health officials to answer senators’ questions via videoconferencing. Administration officials will answer senators' questions at a Tuesday hearing through video conference, Senate Health Committee Chairman Lamar AlexanderAndrew (Lamar) Lamar AlexanderMurkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump China stalled reporting genetic information about COVID-19, angering WHO: report Senate GOP chairman criticizes Trump withdrawal from WHO  MORE (R-Tenn.) said Sunday. The update follows Alexander's announcement Saturday that FDA Commissioner Stephan Hahn and CDC Director Robert Redfield, who are both self-quarantining after exposure to COVID-19, would appear at the hearing through video conference.    FDA grants authorization to new Abbott COVID-19 antibody test. The Food and Drug Administration granted emergency use authorization to a new coronavirus antibody test from Abbott Labs, the company announced Monday. Abbott said it plans to ship nearly 30 million antibody tests globally in May, and will have capacity for 60 million tests in June. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. Kamala HarrisKamala Devi HarrisPaul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  Rand Paul holding up quick passage of anti-lynching bill Minority caucuses call for quick action on police reform MORE (D-CA)  @SenKamalaHarris Cities should be able to deliver meals from local restaurants to vulnerable people. It’s a common sense solution to feed hungry people and lift up restaurants and suppliers on the brink of collapse. I Introduced the FEED Act last week to make it easier for cities to do that.   Sen. John CornynJohn CornynGOP chairmen stake out turf in Obama-era probes Cornyn presses DOJ to release results of investigation into Larry Nassar probe Minority caucuses call for quick action on police reform MORE (R-Texas)  @JohnCornyn SPEAKER NANCY PELOSI’S HOUSE is not officially coming back yet. They are waiting for the release of a new coronavirus bill, which will cost trillions of dollars. Neither this bill nor anything resembling it will ever become law -- it’s a Democratic wish list filled up with all the party’s favored policies.    Rep. Mark PocanMark William PocanPelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus House punts on FISA, votes to begin negotiations with Senate MORE (D-Wis.)  @repmarkpocan They can't even control the spread of coronavirus in the White House. How can they look at us with a straight face and tell us we should be reopening the country? They'll protect themselves. But they refuse to protect this country.  ACROSS THE NATION        South Dakota Sioux refuse to take down “illegal” checkpoints. Sioux tribes in South Dakota are refusing to remove coronavirus checkpoints they set up on roads which pass through their land. South Dakota Gov. Kristi NoemKristi Lynn NoemSouth Dakota will not enforce social distancing at Mount Rushmore Fourth of July event South Dakota governor says she's working with Trump officials on Mount Rushmore flyover South Dakota governor asks Trump to intervene in checkpoint dispute with Native American tribes MORE wrote to several tribal leaders last week saying the checkpoints were illegal. But the Sioux say they are the only way of making sure the virus does not enter their reservations. (BBC)   Percentage of Americans avoiding small gatherings slips in new poll. The number of Americans who said they are avoiding small gatherings amid the coronavirus pandemic slipped in the last week of April, according to a Gallup poll released Monday. Seventy-four percent of Americans said they have avoided small gatherings in the past week, according to surveys conducted between April 27 and May 3, which is about a 10-point drop from the number who said the same a week before, according to the poll. (The Hill) Armed stay-at-home demonstrators visit North Carolina Subway. A group of protesters who demonstrated against North Carolina's coronavirus restrictions gained national attention over the weekend after carrying an assortment of different weapons into a Subway sandwich shop with them as they ordered sandwiches. (The Hill)  WORLD VIEW  U.S. to accuse China of trying to hack vaccine data. The FBI and the Department of Homeland Security are preparing to issue a warning that China’s most skilled hackers and spies are working to steal American research in the crash effort to develop vaccines and treatments for the coronavirus. The efforts are part of a surge in cyber thefts and attacks by nations seeking advantage in the pandemic. (New York Times)     Wuhan sees first COVID-19 cluster since reopening. New coronavirus clusters have been reported in Wuhan city, where the virus first emerged. Wuhan reported five new cases on Monday, after confirming its first case since April 3 on Sunday. Authorities said the small cluster of cases was all from the same residential compound. (BBC)   Ukraine’s hospitals under strain, even with few virus cases. Ukraine’s troubled health care system has been overwhelmed by COVID-19, even though it has reported a relatively low number of cases — 15,648 infections and 408 deaths as of Monday. As COVID-19 patients flood into the struggling hospitals, some doctors and nurses must buy their own protective gear or use improvised equipment. (Associated Press)   SCIENCE New study finds coronavirus can decrease life span by 10 years or more. A new study using a statistical measure called “years of life lost” found that on average, those who died from COVID-19 lost more than a decade of their life to the disease. The recent study conducted by researchers at the University of Glasgow in Scotland, which has yet to be peer reviewed, found that the average male who died from COVID-19 lost about 13 years of potential life, while women who died from the coronavirus lost about 11 years. (The Hill)   Doctors continue to discover new ways the coronavirus attacks the body. Today, there is widespread recognition that the novel coronavirus is far more unpredictable than a simple respiratory virus. Often it attacks the lungs, but it can also strike anywhere from the brain to the toes. Learning about a new disease on the fly, medical professionals have little solid research to guide them. Even the world’s premier public health agencies, including the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, have constantly altered their advice to keep pace with new developments. (Washington Post)   New coronavirus “knowledgebase” uses AI to accelerate COVID-19 research. Artificial intelligence is being used to create a “one-stop shop” of the world’s leading coronavirus research. A team at The Institute of Cancer Research in London has adapted its existing system, which sources data on cancer research and drugs, to improve existing information and accelerate new knowledge into COVID-19. (Science Focus)   Coronavirus delay and early ice melt challenge Arctic science mission. They prepared for icy cold and trained to be on the watch for polar bears, but a pandemic just wasn’t part of the program. Now, dozens of scientists are waiting in quarantine for the all-clear to join a yearlong Arctic research mission aimed at improving the models used for forecasting climate change, just as the expedition reaches a crucial phase. (Denver Post)  BUSINESS Tesla says it will resume operations. Here is the company’s plan to bring employees back to work. Tesla says it has started the process to resume operations and released a plan to bring its employees and contractors back to work, amid an escalating dispute with local health authorities in California over a shelter-in-place order that has kept the automaker’s Fremont factory idle during the coronavirus pandemic. (CNBC)   Factories close for good as coronavirus cuts demand. Factory furloughs across the U.S. are becoming permanent closings, a sign of the heavy damage the coronavirus pandemic and shutdowns are exerting on the industrial economy. Makers of dishware in North Carolina, furniture foam in Oregon and cutting boards in Michigan are among the companies closing factories in recent weeks. Caterpillar Inc. said it is considering closing plants in Germany, boat-and-motorcycle-maker Polaris Inc. plans to close a plant in Syracuse, Ind., and tire maker Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. plans to close a plant in Gadsden, Ala. (Wall Street Journal)    Big food brands, out-of-favor for years, see sales and stock prices jump on stay-at-home grazing. Packaged grocery brands that had run up against Americans’ growing preference for fresh and private-label foods are seeing a resurgence as iconic brands like Goldfish, Oreos, Campbell Soup and Doritos fill the pantries of homebound consumers in search of small pleasures. (Washington Post)  IDEAS, CAUSES, PASSION The internet isn’t broken – but its inequalities need to be fixed. No, the internet isn’t broken. But we agree with Meinrath that it is being tested as never before, exposing serious inequalities in internet availability and utility. It seems to us vital that these inequalities be remedied, not only in anticipation of the next time the world’s population is forced to “shelter in place” but because these inequalities stifle the innovation and productivity that the internet makes possible. (Vinton G. Cerf and David S. Isenberg for The Hill) Are Americans ready to return to normal as states move to reopen? States across the country have started the first stages of reopening, but are Americans ready to resume the “normal” activities taken for granted before the coronavirus? We found that Americans are not quite ready to return to normal just yet. (Douglas SchoenDouglas SchoenSunday shows - Focus shifts to Judiciary impeachment hearing Bloomberg pollster: Candidate's campaign will focus on climate change, guns, education and income inequality Ukraine scandal shows that foreign influence is a bipartisan affair MORE for The Hill)   Sponsored Content Presented by Nokia    GENEROUS SPIRITS Twitter's Jack Dorsey gives $10 million to coronavirus prison relief effort. Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey is giving $10 million to the REFORM Alliance that will be used to deliver protective equipment and coronavirus relief aid to prisons and jails across the U.S. The REFORM Alliance, which was founded by rappers Meek Mill and Jay-Z, and is currently run by Van Jones, has been pushing lawmakers to reduce incarcerations during the pandemic, warning that jails and prisons have become hot spots for the spread of the coronavirus. (The Hill)   New York couple turn a corner, donate plasma. The nurse told Carol Lundergan that 620 milliliters of her plasma, a little under three cups, could save the lives of 1.5 people. Between Carol and her husband, Edward Lundergan, they would be saving three lives, maybe more if they donate multiple times. "This makes me happy," Carol said. In the past two months, the New Paltz, N.Y., couple has tested positive for COVID-19 twice and been quarantined twice. In that time, there were moments when Carol struggled to breathe and thought she might die. (Poughkeepsie Journal)  ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. ROSA DELAURO (D-Conn.) > Steve interviews BIO President and CEO JIM GREENWOOD  > Steve interviews former Surgeon General VIVEK MURTHY  > Steve interviews World Central Kitchen founder chef JOSE ANDRES  > Steve interviews Rep. WILL HURD (R-Texas)    Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.      YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.     VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Sen. John BarrassoJohn Anthony BarrassoHouse Democrats roll out 0B green transportation infrastructure bill IRS proposes guidance for expanded carbon capture tax credit No better time to modernize America's energy infrastructure MORE (R-Wyo.) who says that it's too soon to do another spending bill for states and localities when the $650 billion already appropriated hasn't been spent. Barrasso also says that hydroxychloroquine was one of several potential drugs out of our experience with malaria, and others with HIV/AIDS and Ebola that might have been routes for pursuing a vaccine and says we need to fund studies for all vaccine candidates. Read excerpts from the interview below. Clemons: I want to get a snapshot of the fact that Wyoming is one of those states that's ahead of most. I mean, you've lowered the curve in terms of the incidents of COVID-19 and you've been a proponent of opening. And I'm interested in what lessons can we take from how Wyoming is doing this now?  Barrasso: You know, we always say in Wyoming, we've been socially distancing for the whole 130 years of statehood because there are only about five people per square mile. But people like to get together. Church is a big thing every Sunday, rodeos, fairs, activities and people are still looking forward to doing this summer. But we did socially distance. The state never really completely shut down. We just allowed for people in Wyoming to use their good common sense to try to do what we could to prevent the disease in this and the spread of the disease. And early on the hot spot was Jackson Hole, Wyo., because of travelers coming from other places. They really did shut down quite a bit there. But the surprise to all of us was a nursing home in Lander, Wyo., a fairly small community, which was the first to be hardest hit. That let people realized this can happen anywhere, doesn't necessarily happen in the big cities. People saw on television what was happening in New York, but what we saw in Lander, Wyo., if Lander, Wyo., can be hit, anybody can. Let's take this seriously, and I think it mattered in terms of being able to keep our numbers way down.    Clemons: Is there a partisan divide regarding opening in Wyoming? Or is there a consensus that opening and the way it's happening right now is moving in the right direction?  Barrasso: Well, we think we're moving in the right direction. We want to do it smartly. We want to do it safely. That's what the governor, and that's what all the folks in the state have continued to say. There have been some level of protests of people saying, “Hey, this has affected my life and my livelihood. I don't want to give up my liberties as well," because everybody in America has been impacted with coronavirus one way or the other, for some people the health standpoint has been dramatically worse than the economic standpoint. But in Wyoming, it's the economic side of it that hit us the hardest. We went flat line in terms of energy, in terms of agriculture, tourism. You know 4 million people a year come to Yellowstone National Park, it’s one of the great sites of the world. But we're not gonna have that this summer for sure. Lots of those are always international travelers. So, we’re impacted economically more than from the disease standpoint. So people want to get the economy moving, going again. And people, I think, have been very responsible in the way we've done it in Wyoming. Early on, I was talking regularly to our hospital administrator at the Wyoming Medical Center, where I was the chief of staff. We have 18 respirators. Talked to the head of pulmonary disease on Friday, and they have a total of two people on respirators. So because of the things that we've done, they were worried there wouldn't be enough. And now we're finding that we have more than enough, and we've never used that many in the entire time I was practicing medicine and as the chief of staff of the hospital.    Clemons: Are you seeing some reluctance out there to get tested? Barrasso: The idea was you had to be symptomatic to get the tests. The doctors who were sending patients for tests were ones that were expected to be positive tests. But again, you're right, you talk about the number of tests we’re doing now with 300 a day, and yet only five or six are positive. So, the percentage of those even of suspected people are still a small, small percentage of those testing positive. The general public hasn't been encouraged to get tested this time. We were holding tests back for front-line health care workers, as well as patients who are showing the symptoms. You know, do you have a fever? And they would take your temperature before they give you the test. Do you have any respiratory symptoms? All of those issues that we know are the potential signs of coronavirus. But today there's a national story on so many different ways coronavirus may present in terms of the symptoms. Now we're saying, maybe you don't have to have a fever. There are respiratory signs, yes, gastrointestinal issues related to it, circulatory components, there is so much. And I'm a doctor. I've been studying this. I went to every briefing starting back in January. During the impeachment, Steve, we were having bipartisan Senate briefings in the morning before we’d go to impeachment in the afternoon. We have a number of us in the Senate who've been following this very closely, reading everything we can, studying all we can about this topic, and there is still a great deal we do not know.    Clemons: You’re a doctor, so you have a respect for science. But do you ever worry that as we approach drug development, vaccine development, the drama about hydroxychloroquine and what not, that we're not giving science the right time to play out because of the urgency of this? Barrasso: If you talk to Dr. Fauci and his long history with his scientific background, you know, he wants double blind studies and give people the placebos. There is an urgency and lives matter and time matters, which is why we're saying if the potential to have a vaccine that may work. If they're five different vaccines, make all of them, realizing that only one is going to be the best. That's the one you're going to use. So there's gonna be some waste in that process. The same with medicines. I mean, there was an article two months ago about different things that might work. I've read this, actually in The Economist, the British magazine, and hydroxychloroquine was one of those that was listed as was medicine for AIDS, as was medicine for hepatitis, as well as medicine for SARS and for different components of Ebola. So there were thoughts that let's try a lot of things to see what becomes most likely. And now we have one product that seems not to be a home run, not to be the silver bullet, but to at least be a good step in the treatment.    Clemons: That is remdesivir. Barrasso: Yes, remdesivir. With the vaccine, you know, the routine way scientifically of trying a vaccine out as you come up with something that's safe, you give it to a lot of people and let them go back to their normal lives and see how many people get the disease, whatever it is. Well, now they're saying, let's not try to do that with coronavirus. Let's do challenge tests where you get a number of volunteers, pay them, give them the vaccine, once you find one that you believe is safe, and then expose them directly to coronavirus. Well, that's a riskier proposition, but you're going to know pretty soon if everybody that's had this vaccine, if none of them get the coronavirus after they've been exposed. Or what if all of them get it? That means that vaccine hasn't worked. So, you're taking risks with human lives to get effective vaccines or treatments sooner.    Clemons: You were part of the team that helped sculpt the CARE package, a bipartisan piece of legislation, providing trillions of dollars to the economy. What did you folks get wrong, when you look back at that now? Barrasso: Well, you know, this was done in a bipartisan way, past the Senate, 96 to nothing there, things that we got right, which could have done even better. And I think about these small-business loans that have gone out, the paycheck protection, that has gone out around the country. In Wyoming, we've had over a $1 billion and over 11,000 of these loan, stories every day. People that said this made a big difference for them. But you hear stories about it with the Los Angeles Lakers that got one of these loans or businesses that probably shouldn't have. And in an effort to get the money out to people immediately, there were ways it could have been done better. And some of the regulations that the SBA wrote, weren't part of the original law itself. But the way it's being implemented, I don't think was in the intention, in what 75 percent of the money had to be used for salaries. Well, every business doesn't fit that model. But you want to keep people on the payroll, and that's the goal of it and we've accomplished that significantly. Would have been better to have had a little more time. If you knew that this was going to be done this way, you would have changed it a bit.    Clemons: Are you going to support another stimulus package? Do you think there's more out there that needs to be done? Or do you think you need to take a break?  Barrasso: Well, I think we don't know yet what needs to be done, additionally. We want to see where we are, we spent up to $3 trillion, this is all borrowed money. You want to make sure it's being used wisely. You know, as a doctor and as a state with lots of small hospitals, which operate on very thin margins, you know, a lot of my focus has been on rural hospitals. In most communities, that rural hospital is not just the medical mecca for the community, it's also the economic center. If a hospital closes, and about 200 hospitals have closed in the United States over the last seven or eight years, they're all small hospitals. And if that hospital closes in a rural community, it's harder for that community to attract teachers, nurses, doctors, small businesses. It's a really bad situation for that community. So what we've been doing is working with the administration and bipartisan ways to help hospitals, those that have huge needs, like those in New York where they've been treating lots of patients, and those in rural communities where they've been essentially shut down to preserve the personal protective equipment, haven't done any elective procedures, and somebody said, “Well, why do you need elective procedures?” Well, mammograms are an elective procedure. My wife is a breast cancer survivor, so it's not just somebody that wants to get a total hip replacement. There are a lot of routine medical things, colonoscopies, all of those things have been canceled, which are preventative and are necessary for patients. So what we've been doing in, as you talked about, the CARES Act, we've done another piece of legislation. Another what, $650 billion recently with additional money onto the paycheck protection, but also another $75 billion for hospitals. None of that money has been sent out yet, so we don't know how much is necessary out there. The money to states — $150 billion has been sent to states. Very little of that has been actually spent, so far. I think states should have more flexibility with how they use that $150 billion that they have. But I don't know that they'll need additional amounts, although the Speaker of the House is asking for it right now.   Clemons: When you look at the footprint of COVID-19 in the United States right now, it's staggeringly large. Do we all have to kind of go back and get an accounting somehow of why this was able to spread in the United States to the incredible degree it has? What did we get wrong from your perspective? Barrasso: Well, number one is there's going to be plenty of time to look around and point around, and I would expect that the entire presidential campaign of 2020, Steve, is going to involve some finger pointing. I don't think that solves the problem today. We need a vaccine. We need treatment. We need more testing. We have about 2 million tests a week right now. Dr. Fauci says we need 3 million. There's a hearing on the Hill this week, Lamar AlexanderAndrew (Lamar) Lamar AlexanderMurkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump China stalled reporting genetic information about COVID-19, angering WHO: report Senate GOP chairman criticizes Trump withdrawal from WHO  MORE's HELP committee, and they'll have the panel of experts. Testing will be a big part of that discussion. When can more and more people get tested? What do we need to have in place so schools can open again in the fall? So, yeah, there's going to be a number of things. You know, The Washington Post did a story about the Center for Disease Control and the original round of tests which the Center for Disease Control violated their own procedures, which resulted I believe, in about a five week delay of advanced testing ... but we're going to be capable of doing 2 million tests a week, which moves it from just the symptomatic people that you and I were talking about earlier, to much more broad testing in the society and more frequent. Ultimately, we need to get to the point where you can test for the immunoglobulin to see not just if you have the coronavirus right now that you are a carrier, but also are you in some way immune. They talk about an immunity passport for some people that have the immunoglobulins built up. And how long is that going to last for? If you've had the measles, you know, you're protected for the rest of your life. We know you have the flu, you might get it again next year. So, there are different things that we need to learn. And we're still learning a lot about a disease that has caught the world by surprise and has impacted everyone in one way or the other.WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > Unemployment soars to 14.7 percent, worst rate since Great Depression > Trump administration reportedly scrapped CDC guidelines on reopening   > Faulty lines of communication between Trump officials slowed critical drug distribution  > Origin of California outbreak traced to nail salon, governor says  > Turbulence ahead! Boeing CEO says it could take five years for airlines to see growth  > ‘Plandemic’ conspiracy video removed from Facebook, YouTube  > Rep. Will HurdWilliam Ballard HurdScaled-back Pride Month poses challenges for fundraising, outreach The Hill's Morning Report - Protesters' defiance met with calls to listen GOP Rep. Will Hurd marches with protesters in Houston MORE says we need to advance economy, not just recover; and he claims China engaged in global disinformation campaign  As expected, the April jobs report released Friday by the Bureau of Labor Statistics shows grim statistics that will live in infamy for decades to come. The U.S. lost 20.5 million jobs in April amid the economic devastation of the coronavirus pandemic as the steepest recorded surge in American unemployment nearly wiped out a decade of job gains. The unemployment rate spiked to 14.7 percent from 4.4 percent in March as thousands of businesses closed and laid off or furloughed workers they could no longer afford to employ. The one-month rise in the unemployment rate between March and April is the largest ever recorded by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. (The Hill)   THE INTERVIEW Rep. Will Hurd (R-Texas) says we need to advance our economy — not just recover. He points out that his district has a surplus of test kits as people are not showing up for tests and he accuses China of a global disinformation campaign on the origins of the novel coronavirus.         Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Friday, May 8.  Editor’s Note.   Today I asked Rep. Will Hurd (R-Texas) when we are all going to stop talking about testing because we’ll eventually find it all around ourselves, ever present, all the time. He said the picture is uneven. The Texas Republican made the remarkable comment that, in his district, there is actually a surplus of testing kits as many are made there and not enough people are showing up to get tested. Maybe San Antonio can quickly set itself up as a coronavirus testing tourist destination as it remains ridiculously difficult — no matter what the White House says — to get tested in most places.     Hurd also made another zinger comment that deserves highlighting here. He said we need to think less of “recovery” — of returning things to the way they were in November — and more about thinking of this as “advancement” of our economy and society. There are a lot of stress points in society such as people once again being left behind, systemic racism clear as day, children in school food programs not getting their two square meals a day, cyber predators exploiting the surge of newbies online and compounding the grief and stress many families are experiencing. Hurd said we need to shore up our infrastructure, modernize it, improve security and access — and make this the recovery plan, but call it “advancement.” I like this framing and think it’s right.   Finally, not only are there two bit criminals out there preying on those new to the cyber world, and taking advantage of people’s fears in the time of coronavirus, but nations are, too — and he specifically pointed to China whom he charged with engaging in a global disinformation campaign to accuse other nations, like the United States and Italy, of concocting this virus. He said China’s leadership is trying to distract from its own weaknesses and its own responsibilities in the early life of this pandemic. Hurd, a former CIA officer who is not seeking reelection, said we do need to collaborate globally and work with all nations, including China, in combating COVID-19. But that requires nations to be truthful and transparent. He said today China is working to sow doubts about the U.S. and this has to be challenged.    – Steve Clemons   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE       We’re bringing you insight on the issues of the day from Washington’s top policymakers and thought leaders via our virtual, 3D journalism platform: The Hill Virtually Live.  Follow @TheHillEvents and watch this space for news on upcoming virtual programs. And keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.  CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 3,889,841 cases of the coronavirus around the world. 271,732 lives have been lost to the virus.    The United States is reporting 1,263,052 cases and 76,032 COVID-19 deaths. Spain is reporting 221,447 cases. 217,185 in Italy. 212,626 in the U.K. 187,859 in Russia. France 174,918. Germany 169,430. Brazil 138,121. Turkey 133,721. 83,976 in China. Saudi Arabia is reporting 35,432 cases. 29,616 in Mexico. 3,526 in Nigeria. 3,178 in Hungary. 3,091 in Ghana. 3,000 in Thailand. 129 cases are being reported in Haiti.    New York’s reported 327,469 cases are far higher than any nation in the world. New Jersey 133,991. Massachusetts 73,721. 62,630 cases in California. 56,901 in Pennsylvania. 45,745 in Michigan. 39,199 in Florida. 31,784 cases in Connecticut. 31,732 in Georgia. 23,149 in Indiana. 22,342 in Virginia. 18,371 in Colorado. 13,953 in North Carolina. 11,457 in Iowa. 6,359 in Kansas. 4,493 in New Mexico. 635 in Wyoming.    8,105,513 test results are being reported in the U.S and 195,036 have reported full recoveries from COVID-19 in the states.   WASHINGTON WATCH        Guidelines drafted by CDC were rejected by Trump administration citing religious freedom, economic concerns: report. The Trump administration rejected guidelines proposed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on how to take public health precautions to safely reopen the economy, according to The New York Times. One Department of Health and Human Services official rejected any guidance on churches, claiming the measures would infringe on religious liberties. (The Hill)   Harris, Sanders, Markey propose $2,000 monthly payments amid coronavirus pandemic. A trio of senators is introducing legislation to provide $2,000 in monthly payments during, and in the immediate aftermath of, the coronavirus pandemic. The bill, from Sens. Kamala HarrisKamala Devi HarrisPaul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  Rand Paul holding up quick passage of anti-lynching bill Minority caucuses call for quick action on police reform MORE (D-Calif.), Bernie SandersBernie SandersOVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump signs order removing environmental reviews for major projects | New Trump air rule will limit future pollution regulations, critics say | DNC climate group calls for larger federal investment on climate than Biden plan Google: Chinese and Iranian hackers targeting Biden, Trump campaigns Sanders: Police departments that violate civil rights should lose federal funding MORE (I-Vt.) and Ed MarkeyEdward (Ed) John MarkeySenate Dems introduce bill to keep pilots and bus and train operators safe Markey, Harris, Booker to introduce resolution calling for elimination of qualified immunity GOP Massachusetts governor: Trump's compassion 'nowhere to be found' MORE (D-Mass.), would provide a $2,000 monthly payment to individuals who make up to $100,000 per year. (The Hill)    Republicans not sold on new round of relief checks. The White House and Democrats are signaling support for doing at least one more round of checks. GOP senators, however, say they aren’t sold yet on the need for a second round, and several said they are strongly opposed to the idea. “Well people in hell want ice water, too,” said Sen. John KennedyJohn Neely KennedyMORE (R-La.), asked about another round of checks. “I mean, everybody has an idea and a bill, usually to spend more money. It’s like a Labor Day mattress sale around here.” (The Hill)    Trump officials’ communication breakdown slows COVID-19 drug distribution: report. Faulty lines of communication within the Trump administration hampered the distribution of remdesivir, a drug shown to be a potential treatment for COVID-19. Gilead Sciences, the company that produces remdesivir, gave large quantities of the drug to the federal government after the Food and Drug Administration fast-tracked its authorization as an emergency treatment for areas where hospitals are experiencing large coronavirus patient counts. However, internal errors reportedly resulted in thousands of the doses going to “less impacted counties,” according to Axios. (The Hill)    LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. Todd YoungTodd Christopher YoungThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  Is the 'endless frontier' at an end? Hillicon Valley: House FISA bill in jeopardy | Democrats drop controversial surveillance measure | GOP working on legislation to strip Twitter of federal liability protections MORE (R-Ind.) @SenToddYoung Fiscally irresponsible states can’t be bailed out for reckless spending prior to the pandemic. Today, I joined @IndianaAFP for a discussion on ensuring we have a targeted approach to #coronavirus relief that doesn’t pass the burden to future generations.   Rep. Haley StevensHaley Maria StevensThe Hill's Campaign Report: Buzz builds around Warren for VP Gun control group rolls out House endorsements  Human Rights Campaign rolls out congressional endorsements on Equality Act anniversary  MORE (D-Mich.)  @RepHaleyStevens I will keep fighting to get much-needed federal funding to Livonia, because it is absolutely unacceptable for a city with the second-most coronavirus deaths in Michigan to rank toward the bottom in CARES Act funds received.   Rep. Dan CrenshawDaniel CrenshawGOP lawmakers call for new sanctions on senior Chinese officials Michigan suspends license of barber who vowed to keep his shop open 'until Jesus comes' The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Hurd says China engaged in global disinformation campaign; US unemployment highest since Great Depression  MORE (R-Texas) @RepDanCrenshaw Speaker Pelosi & Dems will say the only solution is to keep you locked up & spend trillions of your taxpayer dollars on a partisan bill drafted in secret. In truth, the solution is to reopen society & get people back to work ASAP. Any politician saying otherwise is lying to you.  ACROSS THE NATION  California Gov. Newsom: State identified nail salons as source of coronavirus community spread. California Gov. Gavin NewsomGavin NewsomChief Justice Roberts wisely defers to California governor in church challenge  Senior citizens deserve better than to be left in isolation Supreme Court denies California church's challenge to state restrictions MORE (D) on Thursday said the state's first case of community spread in the coronavirus pandemic happened in a nail salon. “This whole thing started in the state of California, the first community spread, in a nail salon,” Newsom said at his news briefing. “I’m very worried about that.” The governor on Thursday announced that the Golden State would be entering into the second phase of its four-phase reopening plan. (The Hill)    Seattle to bar traffic from 20 miles of streets so residents can exercise. Seattle Mayor Jenny Durkan (D) announced Thursday that the city plans to permanently bar 20 miles of roads from car traffic to leave room for people to use bikes and walk. The measure is part of a larger initiative that began in April called Stay Healthy Streets, a temporary relief program providing more space for residents to leave their houses while practicing social distancing guidelines amid the coronavirus pandemic, according to a press release. (The Hill)   Facebook, YouTube remove viral “Plandemic” video that links face masks to getting sick. Facebook, YouTube and other social media platforms have removed a viral documentary-style video titled "Plandemic" that promoted conspiracy theories about the coronavirus. The 26-minute video, which was framed as part of a longer documentary on the coronavirus pandemic, promoted several false claims, including that wearing a face mask makes it easier to get the virus and that shelter-in-place orders hurt the immune system. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW   Inside the dystopian, post-lockdown world of Wuhan. Wuhan’s answer has been to create a version of normal that would appear utterly alien to people in London, Milan or New York — at least for the moment. While daily routines have largely resumed, there remain significant restrictions on a huge range of activities, from funerals to hosting visitors at home. Bolstered by China’s powerful surveillance state, even the simplest interactions are mediated by a vast infrastructure of public and private monitoring intended to ensure that no infection goes undetected for more than a few hours. (Bloomberg)   Indonesia eases travel bans earlier than planned. The country two weeks ago put in place bans on certain domestic travel with the intention to keep restrictions in place until the end of May. The government has lifted those restrictions for Indonesians who work in security, defense and health services; those who have emergency health reasons; and migrant workers returning home, Reuters reported. (CNBC)   SCIENCE Sorrento Therapeutics, Mount Sinai develop antibody cocktail. Biopharma company Sorrento Therapeutics and Mount Sinai Health System in New York City announced they have joined forces to develop an antibody cocktail called COVI-SHIELD they hope will shield against COVID-19 infection for up to two months.This therapy is designed to be resistant to future virus mutations since it uses three neutralizing antibodies to ward off the disease. (CNBC)  After recovery from coronavirus, most people carry antibodies. A new study offers a glimmer of hope in the grim fight against the coronavirus: Nearly everyone who has had the disease — regardless of age, sex or severity of illness — makes antibodies to the virus. The study, posted online Tuesday but not yet reviewed by experts, also hints that anyone who has recovered from infection may safely return to work. (New York Times)   BUSINESS Boeing CEO says it could take five years for airlines to experience growth again. Boeing CEO David Calhoun said Friday it could take years for the aviation industry to return to normal traffic levels and resume growth, both of which have been decimated by the novel coronavirus pandemic. "If I survey all of our customers and I start here in the U.S., and of course we do ... most are trying to dial in a return of about 30 to 50 percent by the end of this year," Calhoun said. "A lot's going to depend on how the public responds to the safety of airline cabins, etc." (Fox Business)   IDEAS, CAUSES, PASSION COVID-19 exposes much about us. COVID-19 has ripped away the veneer that masked American society. Many took refuge behind the glossy façade that all communities are well-served by today’s economy, health care infrastructure, educational system and social services. But the virus’s tempestuous, tragic wrath exposed the truth. No longer can anyone hide behind the patina that colored everything rosy. (Bradford Kane for The Hill)    Aging in place: Many of us feel way older than we did just weeks ago. The novel coronavirus pandemic has exhausted us. Time feels heavy and draining. Tuesday was a week. April seemed an eternity. Grief, anxiety, tedium, loss of control, restriction of movement, none of them rejuvenating, are part of our regimen. (Karen Heller for The Washington Post)   GENEROUS SPIRITS       In an early celebration of Mother’s Day, meet the mom and daughter working together as nurses. A mother and daughter who are nurses in the same hospital are fighting the novel coronavirus pandemic together on the front lines. Cindy Pascalo, 60, has been a registered nurse at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago for 39 years. Her daughter, Jessica DeBrocke, was inspired to get into the medical field after watching her mom throughout her childhood. Pascalo says working alongside her daughter during this pandemic has been helping her get through this difficult time. (Good Morning America)   ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Sen. CHRISTOPHER COONS (D-Del.)  > Steve interviews Edelman Public Relations CEO RICHARD EDELMAN > Steve interviews Rep. DONNA SHALALA (D-Fla.)  > Steve interviews Rep. TREY HOLLINGSWORTH (R-Ind.)  > Steve interviews former Secretary of State MADELEINE ALBRIGHT  > Steve interviews Rep. ROSA DELAURO (D-Conn.) > Steve interviews BIO President and CEO JIM GREENWOOD  > Steve interviews former Surgeon General VIVEK MURTHY  > Steve interviews World Central Kitchen founder chef JOSE ANDRES  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.    VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons speaks with U.S. House Representative Will HurdWilliam Ballard HurdScaled-back Pride Month poses challenges for fundraising, outreach The Hill's Morning Report - Protesters' defiance met with calls to listen GOP Rep. Will Hurd marches with protesters in Houston MORE (R-Texas) about reframing the way we think about national and economic recovery to more "advancing the economy." Hurd is also a supporter of the José Andrés-supported FEED Act, and believes that school meal programs should be transferred to SNAP. Hurd also charged China with engaging in a global disinformation campaign on the origins of this coronavirus. Read excerpts from the interview below.  Clemons: What this coronavirus has done is it has shaken up the system. It's shown us what is wobbly, shown us what is vulnerable. And I know you and I were talking the other day that recovery is the wrong way to look at this. Tell me how you look at it.  Hurd: When people say recovery that makes me think that we want to get back to a place in time, let's say November of 2019. And I get that. And we talked about getting back to normal. Once we get out of this, I want to be better than when we went through it. And we have the opportunity to do that. You talked about how malware attacks are up, spammers are increasing their activity, people are clicking on scams where it's saying, “If you are a sales person you can get additional money in your stimulus refund.” And so these scammers are continuing to operate, and we should be putting things in place to take advantage and protect ourselves from this. And use some of this, the federal dollars that we're gonna be spending to help states, cities and municipalities better defend themselves against these kinds of scams. But also how can we help modernize the infrastructure of states, cities and counties to deliver better citizen facing services? We know the decisions that we made when it came to unemployment. We increased the federal piece of unemployment $600 a month for I believe it was three or four months. But what happened was the states’ workforce commissions, who deliver and take in the request for unemployment — they didn't have the capacity to deal with the increase. Some of them didn't even have the ability to do a 1-800 number for people to check in on their request. We should be making sure that these workforce commissions are moving into the cloud so that you have data in a way that can be used in the better fashion, where you can check on your claim, these are some of the ideas we should be thinking of. Let's take education. How do you do teaching in an online environment? Some schools, I was talking to some folks that run a charter school in New York City, they had 98 percent attendance everyday in their digital classes. I've talked to some schools in Texas where you have 3 percent. We need to make sure we have the infrastructures so that we can do this online class. And so when I talk about where we’re going, I get the term "recovery," and that's the last phase of dealing with the pandemic, but I want to think about advancements, right? And how to become better out of this.    Clemons: I think that's an important frame. I know that people are stressed right now. You and I were talking about food bank lines. We were talking about you visiting a mask cleaning factory. What is the temperature like of people, their frustration or their confidence that things are going begin moving forward in your district? Hurd: I would say people are just unsure. Folks want to get back to their routines. They want to get out of their house. A lot of people now want to get back to work. They realize how much they liked being around people multiple hours out of the day. And they're looking for guidance and making sure that our elected officials are using the advice from our medical professionals and scientists to make sure that we can get back to our way of life in a smart way. And let’s just take testing. We all know the importance of testing. I'm right now in my hometown of San Antonio. We have additional testing capacity, meaning we could be testing more people. Not enough people are coming out and testing. So how do we make sure that our communities get to a point where anybody can get tested? Because that's important because it's the asymptomatic people that have COVID-19 that are contributing to community spread. And so being able to be in a place where you have the infrastructure to do that. This mass cleaning facility that I saw, they could do 80,000 masks in six hours and the N95 masks, which are needed for health workers, can be cleaned 20 times. So we're basically increasing our supply by a factor of 20. And how do we make sure that hospitals that know about this are using it and getting access to these kinds of things. So we need to be putting these processes in place. But look, I've been out and seen people going and doing take out. Restaurants are open, many restaurants are open in Texas, and they are social distancing and seeing people do that in a smart way.    Clemons: I'm interested in how you would critique the government. If you were in an executive role, how would you say here are the things we need to begin moving right now. Hurd: So, I think it's not been uniform. I think that's the frustration. I just gave the examples of how here in Texas, we have an oversupply of tests because we're not having enough people come in and getting tests where in some communities you don't have that access. Part of that is the interaction between the federal government and state and municipalities. My perspective of dealing with HHS, Health and Human Services, CDC and FEMA, here on the ground in Texas, I would give them — I have had great experience with them when we needed. You know, I had a community that literally ran out of PPE at a hospital. They literally had only hours of supplies left. We were able to help them get the resources and that was working through FEMA that were based here in Texas. I recognize that those relationships are not the same in other places. I think here locally, the relationships between cities and counties are incredibly important and San Antonio has a great working relationship. So I think some of this has come down on those relationships on the ground. And look, making sure that right information is being communicated. Let's take what the federal government did when it came to PPP, the Paycheck Protection Program. The whole point of the Paycheck Protection Program was to make sure small businesses were able to keep people on the payroll. And if you keep people on the payroll, they don't have to go on unemployment. Yes, where some people applied and got access to those funds that shouldn't have? That happened. It shouldn't have happened. It did. But the secretary of Treasury is taking steps to get that money back, so it goes to people that need it. But in that first tranche of Paycheck Protection Program loans, 134,000 came to Texas businesses and the average payroll of those businesses was less than $60,000 a month. And so those programs are working. And the fact that we were able to distribute $350 billion with a “B” in eight days? I think that was a success. Did the program need to be tweaked? Absolutely. So if I was doing this, the goal should be anybody can show up to a drive-thru facility, and they can get the diagnostics test, which is the COVID-19, do you have COVID-19 or not, and you get the serological test, the test for the antibodies. And you process the COVID-19 test first. If it's positive, then you're notified. If it's negative, then you do the analysis on the serological test. I think we need to improve the way we do contact tracing, and you can do greater notification of a community. So if you know somebody who gets COVID-19 was shopping at one store at a particular time, should that entire community be notified of that? You can do this in a way where you're protecting the civil liberties of that individual. Apple and Google are working on how do you do this in a technological way so we can move that faster. But these are the areas that we should be trying to get online as quickly as possible.   Clemons: Now I know you've been worried also about the food supply chain, vulnerable communities. What do you think needs to happen by way of securing supply chains but also looking at people who are just really on the precipice of disaster, of not being able to access food? Hurd: Food security is national security. That's why I'm concerned and pay attention to it. And I'm especially concerned about our kids. No kids should go hungry. And so what is happening in a lot of communities, the only time a kid gets a square meal is when they're at school, right? And now that schools are closed, how do you ensure those kids are getting those two square meals? Well, the way the system, the free and reduced lunch program, is designed, it's designed to provide that kid a “meal”, not food, an actual meal, right? And so now that, you know, many school districts, like one of the school districts here in San Antonio, Northside Independent School District, has gone through some Herculean efforts to try to deliver those meals to those kids. But we're seeing that in some places less than 25 percent of the kids that are on free and reduced lunch are actually accessing these programs. How do we fix that? It's a thing called the Pandemic EBT, Pandemic Electronic Benefits Transfer. This is basically SNAP funding.   Clemons: And so that's the SNAP program?Hurd: In Texas, it's called a Lone Star Card. It's a card that has, you know, your food stamps on it. You can go to a grocery store and use it like a credit card. So what PEBT does, it says if you have a child that is on free, reduced lunch, we're gonna add additional money to that, to your ability to go out and buy that food in the grocery store to make sure kids are fed. And that is if a parent is already on SNAP. Now, if you're not, then through this PEBT designation, which goes state-by-state, if your kid is on free and reduced lunch then you're gonna be able to get a SNAP benefit in order to make sure your kids eat. You know, this is something again we should be able to do this with the click of a switch. The infrastructure for the state entities that deal with this, the money comes from the federal government, but the state entities are the ones that run it. And how do you have systems that talk to each other and can move quickly? This is important. Because you know, the reason you're having now more people go to the food banks. As you know they're either on unemployment, their kids can't get it, and you are having these long lines, and my fear is when you have these long lines at food bank and the food bank runs out of money, what happens? Right? When you lose hope of being able to feed your children, you know, that's where pandemonium starts, and so making sure we know these are, in essence, inefficiencies within the system that we can improve. This is something that I'm working on. And I'm glad there is guys like José Andrés that are working on this as well, too. And there's a little nuance, we're working on with FEMA making sure FEMA can pay for the food 100 percent and not have a match from the local communities, which is how it works. Clemons: How much culpability does China have in all that we're seeing here? We know that the virus came from there, but this is beyond that. And what should we be doing now? Many people are saying, “Hey, this is the wrong time to have a trade war.” We need a global cooperative effort to deal with the virus. Where are you right now in both? What do you think of China and what our actions now should be? Or should we be delaying action so that we can get some global coordination and collaboration in rolling back the devastation of this virus? Hurd: We need that global collaboration in order to deal with this virus, which means you need transparency from all governments, including the the government of China. And we know that the government of China hasn't been transparent at the beginning of this crisis because we know it originated there. I think organizations like the WHO are important to deal with this global pandemic. But we should be getting our allies and the other members of the WHO to be asking the WHO to get these answers from China. And we also now have to understand what is China trying to do right now. We know that the Chinese government is trying to surpass the United States of America as the sole superpower in this world by 2049. 2049 is important because that's when they mark 100 years of Communist rule in mainland China. And we now are seeing their increase in aggressive disinformation campaigns saying this started by the U.S. government and the Army, saying this originated in Italy, trying to distract not only their own populous from the Communist Party's response to this, but also trying to erode trust within Europe and with some of our other allies of saying “Hey, the United States is not a reliable partner to deal with this. We’re the better partner.” So, this disinformation campaign that we're seeing coming from the China should be viewed in their long-term geopolitical interests of surpassing the United States. And they view that where we are right now in this global pandemic is an opportunity for them to supercharge their activity to surpass the United States. So, if we're all gonna be cooperative in dealing with this, then everybody has to be cooperative, and that includes the Chinese government. And that's where I think we should be strengthening our alliances with the EU and those individual countries and using international forum like the WHO to press for greater transparency. WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > 3.2 million more Americans join jobless rolls, 33 million unemployed since mid-March  > Schumer, Pelosi set to release ‘Rooseveltian’ relief package  > Early New York cases seeded countrywide outbreak, researchers say  > UN warns of global coronavirus ‘boomerang,’ urges wealthy nations to support relief for developing countries > Sen. Alexander says nation needs ‘millions’ more tests to safely reopen  > Chef José Andrés says most political leaders today are not acting with urgency, we have the technology to do high-quality contact tracing now and we must bolster our food chain or face a national security crisis  It’s Thursday. And that means more sobering news about the state of the country’s workforce. Just under 3.2 million more Americans filed for unemployment last week, according to data released by the Department of Labor. Although the number of new jobless claims is the lowest since the country went into lockdown, the picture remains bleak. More than 33 million Americans have filed for unemployment benefits since mid-March and the April jobs report set to be released Friday is expected to shatter records for the largest single month decline in jobs and highest recorded unemployment rate in United States history. As the economy slowly begins to reopen, 77 percent of laid-off or furloughed workers remain confident that they will be rehired by their previous employer, according to a nationwide Washington Post-Ipsos poll. The unemployment numbers are unprecedented and certainty staggering. For context, only 7,759,771 in the U.S. have been tested for COVID-19 – and let’s not forget that 73,573 in the U.S. are not just jobless, they are dead.   THE INTERVIEW Chef José Andrés says most political leaders today are not acting with urgency, we have the technology to do high-quality contact tracing now and we must bolster our food chain or face a national security crisis         Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Thursday, May 7. Editor’s Note.   Chef José Andrés is loved by many because he brings an earthy, worldly, human charm to his food and restaurants as well to his causes like World Central Kitchen and feeding those in need after natural disasters like earthquakes and hurricanes. We have a different kind of national disaster today in the era of COVID-19, and his network helped feed some of the first high-profile victims of this crisis — the passengers and crew of the Diamond Princess anchored off Yokohama, Japan. Celebrity restaurateur Nobu Matsuhisa teamed up on that front-line effort as well. But to think that Andrés is just a sentimental man of heart who springs to action during crises misunderstands his success. Both during my interview today and in some off interview chatting, Andrés made clear he is a strategist willing to break bread with anyone — Republican, Democrat, whatever — to move the cause of saving America’s food chain, protecting restaurant and food workers, and feeding the needy and vulnerable.    During my interview, he demurred on some of the political questions and would say “I’m just a chef,” but the truth is his acts have political weight and consequence — and he’s lining up folks like Sens. Kamala HarrisKamala Devi HarrisPaul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  Rand Paul holding up quick passage of anti-lynching bill Minority caucuses call for quick action on police reform MORE (D-Calif.) and Tim ScottTimothy (Tim) Eugene ScottPaul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  Rand Paul holding up quick passage of anti-lynching bill With capital, communities of color can lead our economic revival MORE (R-S.C.), and Reps. Jim McGovern (D-Mass.), Rodney DavisRodney Lee DavisThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump visits a ventilator plant in a battleground state The Hill to interview Mnuchin today and many other speakers  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mastercard CEO Ajay Banga says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now; Teva's Brendan O'Grady says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like Strategic Oil Reserve MORE (R-Ill.) and Mike ThompsonCharles (Mike) Michael ThompsonThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  Gun control group rolls out House endorsements  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Chef José Andrés says most political leaders today are not acting with urgency; Dems crafting 'Rooseveltian' relief package MORE (D-Calif.) on his FEED Act working to link the Federal Emergency Management Agency, restaurants and food preparers, to feeding those hungry and in need. And he’s talking to and working with others including Reps. Rosa DeLauroRosa Luisa DeLauroCOVID-19 workplace complaints surge; unions rip administration Lack of child care poses major hurdle as businesses reopen Frustrations grow over incomplete racial data on COVID-19 cases, deaths MORE (D-Conn.), Collin PetersonCollin Clark PetersonFrom farmers to grocery store clerks, thank you to all of our food system Group of House Democrats asks for 0 billion for testing The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Chef José Andrés says most political leaders today are not acting with urgency; Dems crafting 'Rooseveltian' relief package MORE (D-Minn.) and Will HurdWilliam Ballard HurdScaled-back Pride Month poses challenges for fundraising, outreach The Hill's Morning Report - Protesters' defiance met with calls to listen GOP Rep. Will Hurd marches with protesters in Houston MORE (R-Texas), and Sen. Lindsey GrahamLindsey Olin GrahamBill aims to help farmers sell carbon credits Graham postpones Russia probe subpoena vote as tensions boil over Graham pushes back on Mattis criticism of Trump: 'You're missing something here, my friend' MORE (R-S.C.). I asked him who the villains and heroes of the day are — and as tempting a target as the villains list might be to him, he said no — he’d only share the heroes. Andrés listed front-line medical workers, those serving meals in food kitchens, the UPS delivery person keeping packages moving, and others on the front end of trusted networks that are threatened today.   This was an important interview that makes clear Andrés’s frustration with politicians who aren’t acting with the urgency “of yesterday.” And he believes it’s crazy we haven’t achieved a tighter capability on contact tracing through our smartphones. This is a powerful conversation, worthy of your time.    – Steve Clemons Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE       We’re bringing you insight on the issues of the day from Washington’s top policymakers and thought leaders via our virtual, 3D journalism platform: The Hill Virtually Live.  Follow @TheHillEvents and watch this space for news on upcoming virtual programs. And keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.  CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 3,784,085 cases of COVID-19 in the world. 264,679 are dead from the virus.    The U.S. is reporting 1,231,992 cases of the coronavirus and 73,573 deaths. Spain is reporting 220,325 cases. Italy 214,457. 202,359 cases in the U.K. 177,160 cases in Russia — where three doctors have fallen out of windows amid growing concerns over the lack of protective equipment for medical staff. Iran 103,135. China is reporting 83,974 cases. 64,733 in Canada. 54,817 in Peru. India 53,045. Saudi Arabia 33,731. 3,091 cases in Ghana. 2,992 in Thailand. 2,663 in Greece. 1,489 in New Zealand. 1,445 in Slovakia.    New York is reporting 323,978 cases. New Jersey 131,890. Massachusetts 72,025. 60,616 in California. Pennsylvania 54,800. 38,002 reported cases in Florida. Texas 34,982. Maryland 29,374. Ohio 21,576. Virginia 21,572. 15,905 in Washington. 13,053 in North Carolina. 5,654 in the District of Columbia. 5,595 in Utah.    7,759,771 COVID-19 tests have been recorded in the U.S. 1,255,685 have recovered from the virus around the world.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE under mounting GOP pressure to boost state aid. The Kentucky Republican last month said “this whole business of additional assistance for state and local governments needs to be thoroughly evaluated,” which his office later characterized as “stopping blue state bailouts” for states such as California, Illinois and New York. But his GOP colleagues are now joining calls for more federal aid to states, arguing their red states also face dire fiscal challenges caused by the deadly pandemic. (The Hill)    Schumer, Pelosi set to unveil “Rooseveltian” relief package. Senate Minority Leader Charles SchumerCharles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerGOP lawmaker calls on Senate to confirm Michael Pack as head of US media agency McConnell blocks resolution condemning Trump over treatment of protesters House Democrat demands answers from Secret Service about role breaking up White House protests MORE (D-N.Y.) said Thursday that he and Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE (D-Calif.) will soon unveil a coronavirus relief package that he described as “Rooseveltian” in its scope and size. “We need big, bold action," Schumer said in an MSNBC interview with Stephanie Ruhle, adding that he and Pelosi "are working very closely together on putting together a very strong plan, which you will hear shortly.” (The Hill)    GOP health chairman says nation needs “millions” more tests to safely reopen. Senate Health Committee Chairman Lamar AlexanderAndrew (Lamar) Lamar AlexanderMurkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump China stalled reporting genetic information about COVID-19, angering WHO: report Senate GOP chairman criticizes Trump withdrawal from WHO  MORE (R-Tenn.) said Thursday that the United States needs “millions more tests” to safely reopen the economy. The comments about the significant need to ramp up testing from a Republican chairman are in contrast with statements from President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE, who has repeatedly downplayed the need for more tests and said testing capacity is already strong. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  House Minority Whip Steve ScaliseStephen (Steve) Joseph ScaliseClyburn: Cowed GOP ascribes 'mystical powers' to Trump Top GOP lawmakers invite Blue Dogs to meet with China Task Force Top GOP lawmakers invite Blue Dogs to meet with China Task Force over coronavirus probe MORE (R-La.) @SteveScalise I'm determined to focus our work on 3 areas Dems continue to avoid: 1) Hold China accountable 2) Help ensure the success of America’s largest relief effort 3) Provide guidance on re-opening our economy Our goal: Get people healthy, secure, and back to work. I hope Dems join us.   Rep. Rashida TlaibRashida Harbi TlaibPelosi: George Floyd death is 'a crime' Overnight Defense: Pentagon memo warns pandemic could go until summer 2021 | Watchdog finds Taliban violence is high despite US deal | Progressive Dems demand defense cuts Progressives demand defense budget cuts amid coronavirus pandemic MORE (D-Mich.)  @RepRashida Bottom line: As we continue to respond to the #COVID19 crisis, we must always put people—especially our frontline workers—first. The billionaires *do not* need our help, especially when they don’t seem interested in helping the rest of us.   Sen. Ed MarkeyEdward (Ed) John MarkeySenate Dems introduce bill to keep pilots and bus and train operators safe Markey, Harris, Booker to introduce resolution calling for elimination of qualified immunity GOP Massachusetts governor: Trump's compassion 'nowhere to be found' MORE (D-Mass.)  @SenMarkey #COVID19 has shown us that our work is far from done to ensure universal connectivity. We need to update the National Broadband Plan so we can continue to invest in our nation’s future by bringing the power and promise of broadband to us all.  ACROSS THE NATION        Early N.Y. cases seeded U.S. outbreak, researchers say. New York City’s coronavirus outbreak grew so large by early March that the city became the primary source of new infections in the United States, new research reveals, as thousands of infected people traveled from the city and seeded outbreaks around the country. The research indicates that a wave of infections swept from New York City through much of the country before the city began putting social distancing rules in places. (New York Times)    Florida emerges as bright spot in COVID-19 fight. Florida has reported 38,002 positive coronavirus cases and 1,539 deaths, ranking it eighth in the U.S. for the number of confirmed cases despite being the nation’s third most populated state. The case and death numbers point to something many may find surprising: Florida has not become as much of a hot spot as other states such as New York, California and Michigan. (The Hill)   Maryland regulators fine nursing home with most virus deaths $10,00 a day. Maryland regulators are fining Sagepoint Senior Living, the nursing home that has reported the state’s highest coronavirus-related death toll in the state, for failure to use appropriate personal protective equipment, failing to separate residents with suspected or known COVID-19 cases and not obtaining lab results in a timely manner, according to a letter to the facility.   Two McDonald's workers shot by customer irate dining room closed over coronavirus. Two McDonald's employees in Oklahoma City were injured in a shooting after police say a woman became irate after they were told that the store's lobby was closed for dine-in customers. (The Hill)  WORLD VIEW   U.N. official warns of global coronavirus “boomerang.” A top United Nations official warned Thursday that the coronavirus pandemic could "boomerang" and return to wealthier nations such as the U.S. and its European allies unless countries work together to contain the virus's spread. USA Today reported that the U.N.'s under-secretary for humanitarian affairs, Mark Lowcock, told the newspaper that he will ask wealthier contributors to the international organization such as the U.S. to donate to a $6.7 billion effort to fight the spread of coronavirus in developing countries, particularly in Latin America. (The Hill)     France unveils final plan on easing COVID-19 lockdown. French Prime Minister Édouard Philippe on Thursday detailed his government’s plan for easing COVID-19 lockdown measures that go into effect on May 11, ending France’s nearly two-month confinement. But Philippe has warned the easing will be gradual and targeted to stem a resurgence of the viral outbreak.  (France 24)    Saudi Arabia forms police unit to enforce coronavirus curbs on social gatherings. Saudi Arabia has formed a police unit to monitor violations of rules banning gatherings of more than five people imposed to curb the spread of the coronavirus, the state news agency SPA said Thursday. (Yahoo Finance)  SCIENCE Evidence mounts that outside is safer when it comes to COVID-19. Being outside shouldn’t be seen as completely safe, health experts say. People should continue to avoid crowds and maintain 6 feet of distance from others to keep away from the virus. But experts are increasingly confident in evidence showing that the coronavirus spreads much more readily indoors than outdoors. (The Hill)  Details of a new anti-coronavirus neutralizing antibody. There’s a lot of work being done on antibodies for the coronavirus and on the protein domains they recognize. The particular protein that everyone believes is the natural target for such things is the famous “spike” because it’s well-exposed on the surface of the viral particle and is crucial for the virus to enter human cells. That’s had a huge amount of work directed toward it, much of which is informed by the work done on SARS and MERS. (Science Translational Medicine)  BUSINESS Neiman Marcus files for Chapter 11 bankruptcy. Neiman Marcus Group, the 113-year-old chain known for its high-end department stores, filed for bankruptcy Thursday, making it the second major retailer to do so during the coronavirus pandemic. (Washington Post)    WeWork members demand deferment of fees during coronavirus. WeWork customers are uniting in a group action to demand the company not charge their membership fees during the coronavirus pandemic when state stay-at-home orders prevent them from using the work spaces. Customers in Washington, D.C., New York, Los Angeles and other cities hired a law firm to threaten to pursue arbitration in a letter Thursday. (The Hill)  Tin Ear-itis? Frontier drops planned fees for social distancing on flights after criticism. Frontier Airlines is dropping its proposed $39 to $89 fee to allow customers to purchase the middle seat on flights to socially distance on Wednesday after the airline received a flood of criticism. CEO Barry Biffle announced the airline was ditching its “More Room” proposal on Wednesday night in a letter to congressional members that was obtained by The Denver Post. Critics had condemned the program as a way for the airline to profit over anxieties in the coronavirus age. (The Hill)  IDEAS, CAUSES, PASSION What coronavirus reveals about securing encryption backdoors. Ultimately, our government’s efforts to secure encryption backdoors undermines U.S. credibility. We are certain to learn many lessons as a result of this pandemic — and the fundamental importance of encryption to protecting our digital society should be one of them. (Michael Hayden for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS       New Banksy artwork appears at Southampton hospital. The largely monochrome painting, which is 1 square meter, was hung in collaboration with the hospital's managers in a foyer near the emergency department. It shows a young boy kneeling by a wastepaper basket dressed in overalls and a T-shirt. He has discarded his Spiderman and Batman model figures in favor of a new favorite action hero — an NHS nurse. (BBC News)    Lin-Manuel Miranda and chef José Andrés: A bromance that will save us all. When it comes to feeding a world in need, empathy is the key ingredient. And with these two cooking (on Skype) together, you know it's going to be good. Given all that’s going on in the world, a good old-fashioned bromance feels oddly reassuring — especially when it’s between two hermanos with heart: Lin-Manuel Miranda, the Broadway megastar behind Hamilton and In the Heights, and José Andrés, the acclaimed chef and leader of World Central Kitchen, which has produced millions of meals over the past several weeks in response to the COVID-19 crisis. (InStyle)  ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Sen. CHRISTOPHER COONS (D-Del.)  > Steve interviews Edelman Public Relations CEO RICHARD EDELMAN > Steve interviews Rep. DONNA SHALALA (D-Fla.)  > Steve interviews Rep. TREY HOLLINGSWORTH (R-Ind.)  > Steve interviews former Secretary of State MADELEINE ALBRIGHT  > Steve interviews Rep. ROSA DELAURO (D-Conn.) > Steve interviews BIO President and CEO JIM GREENWOOD  > Steve interviews former Surgeon General VIVEK MURTHY  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.    VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews chef José Andrés. Read excerpts from the interview below:  Andrés: Well I'm very excited about this FEED Act because I don't see myself on the business of influencing Congress with the right ideas that they may endorse. I only see myself as one guy, one boy with boots on the ground, making things happen. So we see that what we're doing at World Central Kitchen, where we have more than 1,000 restaurants in our network, thousand restaurants, that the money we get donated by so many supporters, World Central Kitchen, in an emergency usually, we open our own kitchens in hurricanes, when everything is destroyed and we feed people immediately. Here there is not destruction. The electricity is OK. The buildings are OK. The issue is that we have the entire system shut down. We have restaurants, we have amazing chefs, restaurant owners. They love to feed people. they love to feed people in the good times and especially in the hard times, so we are partnering with them to feed people in need one community at a time. What this act is? Precisely to support this simple idea, Gov. [Gavin] Newsom already partnered with FEMA to feed elderly people in the state of California. This is a re-enactment of the Stafford Act which precisely will empower states, in partnership with FEMA, to make sure that with NGOs, with restaurants, we can use put the restaurants to work and take care of the local problems in a very simple movement. We take care of the hunger problem at the same time we put America to work. All of the sudden the small farmers can keep selling to the restaurants. All of the sudden the co-ops, the restaurants can go back to work and be part of the response to this humanitarian crisis. Before we know it, we go back to normal but in the process we are already putting America to work.   Clemons: How have you made Republicans and Democrats to come together? Andrés: I don't think I made it happen. I think quite frankly we have great American senators and congressmen. I don't see so much if they're Republican or they are Democrats. I just see great men and women that they want to serve their people, their states with smart ideas. So quite frankly, I always say that the best moment is when you can break bread. And I think in this moment food should be bipartisan and is bipartisan. I see many people in both sides of the aisle supporting this simple idea: Let's make sure through this humanitarian crisis food is not gonna be an issue. Let's take care of the health crisis, let's take care of the economic crisis. But let's make sure that we don't have a humanitarian crisis, make sure that we will not have civil unrest. How do we do that? With smart ideas. And it takes a 360 approach. This simple idea of putting restaurants to work to take care of local issues is one cornerstone of everything we have to be doing. It's not they should be released in more ways. They should be able to be used in restaurants for hot food. They should be able to buy produce online. They should be able to be used in supermarkets to buy fruits and vegetables. They should be used in farmers markets. We should make sure that when the federal government wants to try to help the people the money doesn't go directly into, what I would say, subsidies that sometimes is taking care of the problem. We should be making sure that we invest into the solution. We don't want subsidies to pay the farmer for food that is being wasted. We want investing into the system so farmers can sell to the federal government and in the process channel that food to food banks, to churches, to restaurants, to NGOs, to school systems. That’s what I've been trying to do. And believe me I do believe that this is the moment where we can bring Republicans and Democrats with their smart ideas together. America needs them to be working together and food can be what brings all of them together.   Clemons: Do you think there is a danger out there that the small farmers are going to be wiped out?  Andrés: I think we need to realize that any small business in America is in danger. Obviously the one I know a little bit and I cared the most are the food people of America. And the food people are more than just the cooks, and the waiters, and the sommelier in the restaurant. Restaurants very much we are the end of an amazing, magical system that starts with our farmers, our fishermen, our cow and lamb producers, our egg producers those men and women that work the land that provide to us the goodness of the earth and many of them they are small businesses. People forget that the vast majority of people that work and own businesses are the small business of America. Together we're a very powerful army. We empower and give work to so many people together. So yes, we need to be taking care of them. They don't want our pity, they want our respect. The way that Congress, the way the White House should be showing respect to those men and women is precisely putting good ideas, but supported by the federal government, to make sure that those small farmers don't go under the water. And how you do this is? Making sure that we recognize that food is a national security issue, making sure that our farmers keep being productive. And if they don't have restaurants to sell to right now, let's find new ways to make sure that that food is not wasted from the field but gets to the places that people need that food. And already the system, we don't need to reinvent them. They've been created. We know how food goes from the farm all the way to the restaurant, and to the houses of people. Let's only keep investing to make sure that the distribution systems don't stop and we make sure that every American in need will have a plate of food. In the process of solving the problem you solve every other problem because this is a 360-degree problem with a 360-degree solution.   Clemons: Didn't you feed the people on the Diamond Princess ship that was the first major ship with coronavirus-infected passengers and crew? They were screaming for help. No one would go on and your people went on and fed those people on that ship. Andrés: We did 18,000 meals a day for over a month. We partnered with great people, chef Nobu Matsuhisa gave us help, many people, the Princess cruise ship, obviously, we went there to help. Why us? Because we had the experience with cholera before — Haiti, Mozambique. But the men and woman from World Central Kitchen did a very good job. I was so proud of them. Then, Oakland where I joined my team. We did the same for Gov. Newsom. That ship was handled much better than the one in Japan I can tell you that. So we've been already thinking about these from a long time that's why World Central Kitchen was able to deliver N95 masks and face shields to many hospitals around Virginia, Maryland, Washington, D.C., because we bought them to prepare our teams for what we saw in a real crisis in the making. We didn't realize that we were having to stock to be providing hospitals with N95. ... So if you ask me as a father, if you ask me as a husband, as a friend, as a leader that has to keep my employees healthy. It’s very simple. When I closed my restaurant I was able to be taking care of everybody full salary, full benefits for over five, six weeks because my main role is, I don't know what's coming and we need to adapt. So the best way to be a leader is to stay home, stay home because I don't want you sick. And so I will say that I want to open my business. I cannot wait to go back to cooking in my restaurant. I can't wait to have my streets and my restaurant full of people. But the reality is that we have this virus that if we don't handle this health crisis, our nurses, our doctors will die in a number that is not necessary. They didn't join the medical services to die. They joined the medical services to take care of people and that's the reality. So we need to be somehow conservative in the approach to reopening but making sure that everybody's healthy and that we have the systems in place. So number one thing, why we don't have contract tracing already in place? We have all the information we want in this iPhone. Should not be a reason that every person in America should have already and not by now that we can do contact tracing immediately. In this day and age, just to think, like nobody has come up with a system where you know if you are sick and then you know very quickly who has been next to you and we can be informing. And we can stop this virus in a few weeks, not in a few months, in a few weeks, to me makes me very upset. Because if we did contact tracing, plus the quarantine we've been going through, there is no reason why we cannot get ahead of this virus. Unfortunately, we've been behind of this virus. And sometimes, I'm not going to lie to you, we have smart people, but sometimes the smart people is not enough we need people of action and I feel our leaders in general have not been people of action. With the necessities we needed right now. The emergency of now is yesterday. And in that sense I do believe we fail.  Clemons: As you step back, who are the heroes you see out there that we ought to be paying attention to? Who are the villains that deserve to be known as villains? Andrés: I don't think for me, it’s the time now to talk about villains. But yes, I think of the heroes. But I would say that I'm very sad in certain ways because we saw what happened in 1918-1919 and you don't need to be an MBA expert, you don't need to have a doctorate in public health, you just read what happened in '18 and '19 over a century ago. Where are the lessons learned? Bill Gates was telling us over five years ago that the pandemic will be coming. President Obama was telling us five years and six months ago about the pandemic coming probably in five years. Everybody's been talking about this. We know what happened over a century ago. Read "The Jungle," Upton Sinclair. We know what happened in our slaughterhouses. If you think about it everything that is unfolding now, because everything is exponential, because when you have a little problem everything else becomes bigger, has been things that humanity has gone through it before in the past. So I will say that everybody is being a bad person, a bad leader in this sense, because what did we learn from the past? And why do we go to university, and why we know about history. We know, not to claim, and brag, that we’re smart, we should know history so we can learn from the past and make actions and smart decisions today. So with this I'm going to say that the heroes are many, obviously. My mom was a nurse. My dad was a nurse. They passed away two years ago. I have some family members that right now they are nurses working in the front lines. All those nurses and doctors around the world without a doubt they are our heroes. But we have to remember the woman working in the supermarket, cashier, taking care of families, taking their orders and their payments. That woman right now that sometimes we didn't even care to look at her in the eyes, she's a hero. The guy at UPS and the post office he/she is the hero. Those farmers, right now many of them undocumented, working on the farms of America without protection bringing food to every supermarket so you and I we can be providing food to our children, those are the heroes. Those Dreamers that right now they may be by a Supreme Court order put away from our country, but they show up every day to a hospital to take care of people, Americans, that are right now sick. Those are heroes. Right now we are learning that those men and women, that sometimes they are voiceless; those men and women that sometimes think they don't seem to count in our society; those men and women we are learning that actually they are essential people, the essential workers that keep America running and for that empathy hopefully towards those men and women is what is gonna be showing us the way. Everybody matters. We need everybody and a solution for the few must be the solution for the many. We cannot reopen America without making sure that everybody is taken care of, not only the ones that can stay behind in a big home, but everybody will be safe and everybody can enjoy this beautiful country of ours.New York had fewer new cases of COVID-19 on Tuesday than California did, a positive step for the Empire State, which has been the epicenter of the U.S. outbreak. New York had 2,292 new coronavirus cases on Tuesday, while California reported 2,515, a new one-day record. In his daily press conference, New York Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) said that both the total number of hospitalizations and the number of new hospitalizations in the state were down.  Tuesday was the first day that New York didn't lead the country in the number of new cases in more than a month. About 27 percent of America's confirmed COVID-19 cases have come from New York, with roughly 35 percent of virus-related deaths occurring there as well. With its new cases on Tuesday, California is poised to have more than 60,000 sometime this week — only Illinois, Massachusetts, New Jersey and New York have more. Despite having more new cases, the Golden State reported substantially fewer deaths Tuesday than New York, tallying 89 compared with New York's 230. Death tolls have typically lagged behind confirmed cases as the virus can take weeks to progress. Gov. Gavin NewsomGavin NewsomChief Justice Roberts wisely defers to California governor in church challenge  Senior citizens deserve better than to be left in isolation Supreme Court denies California church's challenge to state restrictions MORE (D) announced this week that some low-risk retailers would be able to reopen Friday, California's first major restriction rollback. Cuomo has outlined a reopening plan as well, with his stay-at-home order set to expire May 15 if it isn't extended.WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > Trump says coronavirus task force will ‘evolve’  > China hits back at Pompeo, Washington for claims virus leaked from lab > House pushes forward with $2T more in relief, McConnell calls for ‘pause’  > Former top vaccine scientist files whistleblower complaint  > Sound familiar? Congress weighing aid to auto industry as car sales continue to plummet  > Where is Surgeon General Jerome Adams?  > Former Surgeon General Vivek MurthyVivek Hallegere MurthyCoronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Jerome Adams The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Former Rep. Harman says Russia is trying to exploit America; Mylan's Heather Bresch says US should make strategic reserve in medicines; Trump unveils leaders of 'Warp Speed' The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Moniz says U.S. needs energy jobs coalition and Manchin says Congress is pushing Wall Street solutions that don't work for Main Street; Burr to step aside MORE says public health threat of loneliness compounded by COVID-19, says public health infrastructure underfunded to defend against pandemic   “There will be more death.” The decision to reopen is likely to define a generation. ABC News' David Muir interviewed President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE Tuesday in Arizona, a rare sit down with the president not on Fox News. When pressed on how to find the delicate balance between saving American lives and jumpstarting the plummeting economy, Trump conceded that “it’s possible there will be some” deaths as states roll back restrictions and work toward reopening their economies. The president also acknowledged that there will be some who are “affected badly” by the decision to reopen. Trump urged Americans to view themselves as “warriors,” telling a country riddled with fear and uncertainty: “I love you. I want to say that we’re doing everything we can.”   Trump says coronavirus task force will remain “indefinitely” but will evolve. President Trump signaled Wednesday that the White House coronavirus task force would not be dissolved entirely but would evolve, saying it would remain in place “indefinitely” but that he may “add or subtract” officials. The president said that the task force will now focus on safety and reopening the United States amid the novel coronavirus pandemic. Trump did confirm that Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE and Deborah Birx will still be involved in the administration’s efforts to combat the virus.  In a series of tweets on the issue, the President said that he “may add or subtract people” to the task force:          THE INTERVIEW Former Surgeon General Vivek Murthy says public health threat of loneliness compounded by COVID-19, calls on administration to find trusted voices and social media influencers outside main channels to convey seriousness of this pandemic, notes U.S. underfunded and cut funding for the infrastructure needed to protect Americans from a widely predicted pandemic           Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Wednesday, May 6. Editor's Note.    Where is Surgeon General Jerome Adams? He is one of the key voices that the nation needs to hear from. Along with White House coronavirus task force members Deborah Birx and Anthony Fauci, Adams’s voice matters. He experienced some whiplash in the past couple of months — tweeting to the public to stop buying masks because that demand was interfering with front-line health workers being able to access the much-needed personal protective equipment (PPE) material. Shortly after his statement, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the White House advised people to wear masks in stores, when walking in neighborhoods, and when interacting with anyone other than one’s sheltering pals. At that moment though, the surgeon general was right. The U.S. government had failed to lead and coordinate PPE distribution and thus many localities, states and health care systems had to go to the open market to secure their masks. Adams was right THEN that health care workers and caregivers needed priority access.   Adams also said, “The chronic burden of medical ills is likely to make people of color, especially, less resilient to the ravages of COVID-19. And it is possible, in fact, likely that the burden of social ills is likely contributing.” It has been reported that these comments about the susceptibility of communities of color to the novel coronavirus got Adams in hot water, and we’ve barely heard a word from him since.    The left had problems with Adams’s language and message to communities of color. Progressives accused him of toadying up to Trump by slurring the African American and Hispanic communities with gratuities references saying, “Avoid alcohol, tobacco and drugs. ... We need you to do this, if not for yourself, then for your abuela. Do it for your granddaddy. Do it for your Big Mama. Do it for your Pop-Pop."    As the nation’s top doctor, Adams should tell every American that smoking, drugs, perhaps alcohol and various endemic underlying conditions make them more vulnerable than those with less incidence. Certainly, the drug comment could easily apply to the broad swath of desperate white American men who are dying in record numbers from opioid abuse. All that aside, systemic racism in America and the drivers of substance abuse won’t be turned over in a night — and reaching them to try and engage in behaviors now that will save their and their family’s lives is not a mistake.   The Hill’s Daily Coronavirus Report has tried hard to secure time with Adams, but has thus far not succeeded though his team has not said no. Again, from our vantage point, the surgeon general has made statements that were constructive and are consistent with the role of his office. The White House should stop squelching him and other members of the Coronavirus task force from speaking publicly.   Take the Navy rank off. Take the fancy suit of the surgeon general off. Adams shared an intimate detail of his personal vulnerability. On April 10, trying to encourage members of the Native American, African American, Hispanic and Asian communities to take COVID-19 seriously and to understand some of their respective health vulnerabilities, he said: “African Americans and Native Americans develop high blood pressure at much younger ages, and it’s less likely to be under control, and does greater harm to their organs. Puerto Ricans have higher rates of asthma and black boys are three times as likely to die of asthma as their white counterparts. As a matter of fact, I’ve been carrying around an inhaler in my pocket for 40 years out of fear of having a fatal asthma attack. And I hope that showing you this inhaler shows little kids with asthma all across the country that they can grow up to be surgeon general one day.”   This is what needed to be said because of systemic racism in this country and certain types of jobs are disproportionately occupied by people of color. It had to be said because of the disproportionate share of those incarcerated coming from the black community and the black maternal mortality in the U.S. has been surging. It had to be said because chronic illnesses of all sorts are clustered in dense urban environments among the poor. What Adams said was on target and true. It is those kind of comments, the sort that Fauci makes about the dangers of reopening America before the carnage of the coronavirus has stopped growing, or CDC Director Robert Redfield makes that the second wave of this virus could be devastating, that secures trust and confidence from the American people when a horrible storm is hitting.   Who knows when the surgeon general will be allowed to speak to the media again. We are waiting. His words were valuable — and his silence has been noted.   Today, we interviewed former U.S. Surgeon General Vivek Murthy and explored themes in his new book, “Together: The Healing Power of Human Connection in a Sometimes Lonely World.”   –  Steve Clemons     Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE       We’re bringing you insight on the issues of the day from Washington’s top policymakers and thought leaders via our virtual, 3D journalism platform: The Hill Virtually Live.  Follow @TheHillEvents and watch this space for news on upcoming virtual programs. And keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 3,711,425 reported cases of coronavirus in the world. 259,796 have died due to the virus.    The U.S. is reporting 1,212,123 cases and 71,526 deaths as of the time of this newsletter. Spain continues to have the most cases in Europe with 219,329. Italy is close behind with 214,457. The U.K., which has surpassed Italy for the most European deaths, is reporting 202,355 cases. France 170,694. Germany 167,372. Russia 165,929. 31,938 in Saudi Arabia. 31,881 in Ecuador. 26,182 in Portugal. Mexico 26,025. 20,198 in Singapore. 16,314 in Israel. 12,438 reported cases in Indonesia. 10,806 in South Korea.    321,192 cases are being reported in New York. 130,593 in New Jersey. 70,271 in Massachusetts. 65,889 in Illinois. 58,794 in California. 54,513 in Pennsylvania. 44,451 in Michigan. 20,257 cases in Virginia. Tennessee 13,690. 10,404 in Iowa. 10,205 in Rhode Island.    7,544,328 COVID-19 tests have been conducted in the U.S. More than 1.2 million people have reported full recoveries from the coronavirus around the world.   WASHINGTON WATCH        House hits gas, Senate pumps brakes on $2T more in relief. Congress is under the gun to pass yet another massive round of coronavirus relief, as small-business funds dry up, state budgets are ravaged and unemployment claims soar to record highs. Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE (D-Calif.) and House Democrats are planning to unveil an enormous CARES 2 package in the coming days, with a possible floor vote as early as next week. (The Hill)    Battle brewing over how to get more relief money to Americans. A fight is emerging in Washington over how best to get more money into people’s pockets to weather the coronavirus pandemic. President Trump is making a payroll tax cut a priority for a future recovery package, but Democrats, as well as some Republicans, are not keen on that idea. (The Hill)  Rick Bright, former top vaccine scientist, files whistleblower complaint. The federal scientist who was ousted last month as director of the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority has filed a whistleblower complaint with the U.S. Office of Special Counsel. In the complaint, Bright alleges a range of government wrongdoing by Robert Kadlec, the assistant secretary for preparedness and response at the Department of Health and Human Services, and others. (NPR)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Rep. Brenda LawrenceBrenda Lulenar LawrenceFormer Surgeon General Vivek Murthy says public health threat of loneliness compounded by COVID-19; Trump says task force will 'evolve' Black Caucus moves to front and center in COVID fight House reverses, but Senate to return despite COVID threat MORE (D-Mich.)  @RepLawrence Our nation’s nurses have shown us time and time again what true dedication, compassion and hard work really mean. In times of crisis, true heroes rise to help those in need. Happy #NationalNursesWeek to the dedicated Americans protecting our communities. Thank you.   Rep. Chuck FleischmannCharles (Chuck) Joseph FleischmannFormer Surgeon General Vivek Murthy says public health threat of loneliness compounded by COVID-19; Trump says task force will 'evolve' GOP Congressman calls for more testing for coronavirus, shutting down Southern border House Republican: Coronavirus shows we need to be more 'domestically independent' on pharmaceuticals  MORE (R-Tenn.) @RepChuck Renee Mills, a Chattanooga nurse, has sewn 225 masks for people in her community. God bless people like Renee who have gone above and beyond to help the community.   Rep. Joaquin CastroJoaquin CastroOusted watchdog says he told top State aides about Pompeo probe CHC says George Floyd death shows 'tiny fraction' of what people of color confront in their daily lives Julián Castro launches PAC to support progressive candidates MORE (D-Texas)  @JoaquinCastrotx It's unconscionable that hardworking Americans who desperately need this assistance simply won't receive it just because they're married to an immigrant. I'm fighting this injustice so that all mixed-families get what they deserve.  ACROSS THE NATION  Native health center says it received body bags after it asked for supplies to fight coronavirus. The Seattle Indian Health Board, a community health center that services the Native American population in Seattle and King County in Washington state, said it received an order of body bags earlier this year when it asked for more medical supplies. NBC News reports. (The Hill)  Over half of workforce at Iowa Tyson plant tests positive for coronavirus. More than half of the workforce at a Tyson Foods pork processing plant in Perry, Iowa, has tested positive for COVID-19. The Iowa Department of Public Health reported on Tuesday that a total of 730 workers at the plant had contracted the virus, representing 58 percent of its staff, according to local news reports. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW   / China assails United States over Wuhan lab leak allegations. A spokeswoman for China’s Foreign Ministry delivered a scathing criticism on Wednesday of Secretary of State Mike PompeoMichael (Mike) Richard PompeoMurkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump Pepper spray fired during Tiananmen Square memorial in Hong Kong The Hill's 12:30 Report: NYT publishes controversial Tom Cotton op-ed MORE over his assertion last weekend that the coronavirus that has killed hundreds of thousands of people around the world originated in a Chinese laboratory. (Washington Post)     Forecasts predict Europe’s worst depression ever. The European Union’s economy is set to shrink by 7.4 percent this year, investment is expected to collapse and unemployment rates, debts and deficits will balloon in the brutal aftermath of the coronavirus pandemic, the European Commission said Wednesday. (New York Times)     Britain surpasses Italy with most reported coronavirus deaths in Europe. Britain reported the highest coronavirus death toll in Europe on Tuesday, surpassing Italy, even as officials cautioned that it was difficult to compare figures across nations. (Washington Post)   SCIENCE Scientist whose coronavirus model is used by CDC warns states may have to close again. A scientist whose coronavirus model is cited by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, warned Tuesday that states may have to close again if cases jump following the easing of guidelines meant to prevent the spread. Youyang Gu told CNN that states should not rush their reopenings because “by the time you realize what’s happened, it’ll be too late to reverse the decision.” (The Hill)  Coronavirus vaccine enters human testing in U.S. Researchers have begun giving healthy volunteers in the U.S. an experimental coronavirus vaccine developed by Pfizer Inc. and partner BioNTech SE, the latest study exploring a potential defense against the respiratory disease. (Wall Street Journal)    BUSINESS Another auto bailout? A massive drop in car sales sparks new push in Congress to aid the industry. A precipitous decline in car sales amid the deadly coronavirus outbreak has caught the attention of Capitol Hill, where some lawmakers are now urging Congress to authorize new aid for the auto industry. (Washington Post)  Uber to layoff 3,700 employees amid coronavirus pandemic. Uber is laying off 3,700 employees as the coronavirus pandemic drives down demand for its service, the company announced Wednesday. (The Hill)   IDEAS, CAUSES, PASSION Individual choice will be the key to economic recovery after the crisis. In the interim, our best hope may be an ancient legal doctrine that extends back to Roman law in the 6th century. “Volenti non fit injuria” means “no wrong is done to one who consents," and it became the foundation for what we know today as “assumption of the risk.” The doctrine encapsulates the concept of personal responsibility and choice. That is precisely what an economic reopening will require: not liability, but choice. (Jonathan Turley for The Hill)           A virtual Congress? America’s founders would have approved. Tens of millions of Americans are working from home amid the coronavirus pandemic. Not Congress. The House of Representatives recently abandoned a plan to allow lawmakers to cast votes remotely. Yet the nation’s founders confronted a similar crisis when a yellow fever outbreak in Philadelphia almost caused a constitutional crisis — and they left behind a blueprint for Congress to do its job safely and effectively in spite of contagious illness. (National Geographic)   GENEROUS SPIRITS During Teacher Appreciation Week, students, parents and many others are finding creative ways to honor their teachers. A group of students banded together to bid their teacher farewell after her course was discontinued for distance learning. Sophomore Bella Watkins,16, of Bryant High School in Bryant, Ark., invited 11 of her friends to share selfie footage as they said goodbye to Heather Hare. (Good Morning America)   ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews BIO CEO JIM GREENWOOD  > Steve interviews Sen. CHRISTOPHER COONS (D-Del.)  > Steve interviews Edelman Public Relations CEO RICHARD EDELMAN > Steve interviews Rep. DONNA SHALALA (D-Fla.)  > Steve interviews Rep. TREY HOLLINGSWORTH (R-Ind.)  > Steve interviews former Secretary of State MADELEINE ALBRIGHT  > Steve interviews Rep. ROSA DELAURO (D-Conn.) > Steve interviews BIO President and CEO JIM GREENWOOD  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.      VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVESteve Clemons asks former Surgeon General Vivek MurthyVivek Hallegere MurthyCoronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Jerome Adams The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Former Rep. Harman says Russia is trying to exploit America; Mylan's Heather Bresch says US should make strategic reserve in medicines; Trump unveils leaders of 'Warp Speed' The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Moniz says U.S. needs energy jobs coalition and Manchin says Congress is pushing Wall Street solutions that don't work for Main Street; Burr to step aside MORE about his new book, “Together: The Healing Power of Human Connection in a Sometimes Lonely World,” and about the state of loneliness in America.  Read excerpts from the interview below. Murthy: Several years ago, when I was surgeon general, I was finding in the stories I was hearing all across America where there were stories of addiction or loneliness or violence — or whether it was parents concerned about their children — they were often threads of loneliness. People would say, "I feel I have to carry all of these burdens on my own," or "I feel that if I disappear tomorrow, nobody would even notice," or "I feel invisible." And what I started to realize as I delved into the research around loneliness was that it is more than just a bad feeling. Number one, it's extraordinarily common with more adults in America struggling with loneliness than have diabetes or smoke. But it's also really consequential for our health. We now know that loneliness is associated with an increased risk of heart disease and depression and dementia and premature death. Loneliness is important. It's common, and it's extremely important that we address it, especially at moments like this during COVID-19 when the loneliness that we were experiencing even before has been compounded by the physical distancing that we’re asked being asked to observe.   Clemons: What do we do with that? Because everything you just laid out was a pre-existing condition for the nation. And then COVID-19 has come in as you said, it's compounded the situation. How should we deal with this? Murthy: It turns out that during major stressors like hurricanes and tornadoes and other natural disasters that we see a spike in mental health concerns, in depression, anxiety. And it's important to think of these as trauma-related events. And COVID-19 is an even deeper trauma, in a sense, because it is not only transformed our lives and often in very, very difficult ways. But there's also no clear end in sight. You don't have a specific date when the storm is ending, so that makes it even more stressful for us. But I think what we have to remember is that in moments of stress, one of the most powerful tools we have for restoring our sense of wellness and for reducing the adverse impacts of stress are our relationships. This is why we naturally turn to other people during critical moments in our life, when we've had a major disappointment or a heartbreak. And in times like this, it could be pretty really difficult to stay in touch with people because we're being asked to visibly separate from them. And we also may feel that in our moments of stress we don't have enough emotional energy to give to our interactions with others. But I do think that there are some simple steps we can take to strengthen and to reconnect with others in this moment. So number one, we can spend just 15 minutes a day reaching out to someone we love. That could be video conferencing with them. It could be writing to them to say, I'm thinking of you. We can also focus on the quality of time that we spend with others. We can eliminate distraction, for example, when we're talking to others, putting away our email and our social media feeds so that we're just focusing on them. Five minutes of high quality conversation when we're fully present can often be more powerful than 30 minutes of distracted conversation. Finally, we can focus on service. It turns out that one of the things that I learned during the writing of this book on loneliness and social connection was that one of the most powerful antidotes we have to loneliness is service. When we serve other people, we shift the focus from ourselves to someone else in the context of a positive interaction, and we also reaffirm for ourselves we have value to bring to the world. If we look around us right now, we'll find that there are many opportunities to serve. Could be our neighbor who might be struggling to get groceries. It could be a friend who's struggling to telework and actually home school their kids at the same time. We could offer to be virtually baby sitters just for 10 or 15 minutes. There are many ways that we can serve other people, and in doing so, we will strengthen our social connections at a time where we desperately need them.   Clemons: I would love you to share what you did when we were in the pre-coronavirus era and noticed people in your office didn't know each other. How can carry that to today? Murthy: I will tell you that as human beings, all of us have a need to be seen as who we are, to know that we matter and to be loved. Those are common human needs across cultures and one of the ways that we can strengthen connection with people, and in groups in particular, is to create opportunities for people to get to know each other beyond their skill set. Opportunities for them to be open and vulnerable with each other. What we did when I was in the Office of the Surgeon General is very, very simple. We took five minutes during our all-hands meetings, and we did something called our "inside scoop" exercise where we gave one person during that meeting the floor to share pictures of anything they wanted to in their life as long as it wasn't related to their current job. And people brought in pictures of their family, they brought in pictures of hobbies that they had engaged in in the past, all kinds of things. But in those five minutes we got to see a dimension of them that in many cases we hadn't seen despite having worked with him for a year. And so what I noticed after that exercise was that people felt more comfortable with each other than before, because they weren't sure if they mattered if anyone cared what they said. They started raising their hands more and participating because they felt more seen. And so these are things we can do online and offline. But what they all involved is creating opportunities and spaces for people to see and understand each other in a human way.   Clemons: You called in early March for national stay-at-home order. Would you issue that again now or do you think we're getting to where we can mix reopening and staying at home? Murthy: Well, I think we've made uneven progress across the country, and clearly the pandemic is hitting different states at different paces. But what I worry about is that we have still not in the vast majority of the country fulfilled the key steps that we need in order to open up safely. Look, everybody wants to open back up, and I'll say as somebody who's struggling also to figure out how to manage a 3-year-old and a 2-year-old and do work and take care of family at the same time. ... But you know, as somebody who is also trying to balance things, you know, and I have it probably better off than most people. I know. A lot of us are struggling and a lot of people need to open up. But if we don't do so safely then we risk another flare of infection, that could be even worse than the first. So what do we need? We need to, number one, make sure that the number of new cases are coming down and are at very low levels. Number two, we’ve gotta have broad based testing, not just a number of tests, but make sure that the distribution of tests is even across the country and that the turnaround time is quick. And finally we have to make sure that we have the ability to trace contacts. So once we find somebody who is ill, we need to know who they were in touch with and be able to, in a sense, put a net over that infection so we can contain it. Right now, we do not have this capacity to do this effectively in most of the country, and what that means is that if we open up without the capacity than we risk further spread and this has been traumatic already to the country, I would hate to see us have to go through multiple spikes because we weren't prepared.   Clemons: Now you may be famous for many reasons, but one of the reasons you're famous is your relationship with Elmo. The messaging when you were surgeon general of the United States was around vaccines. I am interested in your advice on creative messaging to reach key communities today. Murthy: I think when you're trying to communicate in the modern era, you have to think about different messages, different messengers and different channels to reach the broad population. We can't just assume because we're on a major network, that we're reaching people. And so in this time, I think what's especially important is to harness the power of trusted voices in communities. It's often people who we trust that we listen to more and those could be teachers, it could be faith leaders in our community, it could be business leaders, it could be others. And so what we need to do, I think in this moment, is think really creatively. We, for example, should be partnering with YouTube influencers and other social media influencers to bring a message that's palatable to people about the precautions we have to take. We've got to partner with faith leaders as well. We should be forming strong partnerships with teachers and with workplaces to make sure that we're communicating consistent messages to them about how to be safe. The truth is, this is not like the 1980s where we could have one singular figure who everyone would listen to and trust, and that would get the message out. We need a coordinated strategy to partner with a broad swath of people. For example, when when I issued the e-cigarette report when I was in office in 2016 — instead of going on all of the major network shows, we realized that we needed to do to reach youth was actually to go to YouTube influencers and others who had the reach on social media. And that's what we did. This is a time where everyone needs to get the core messages about COVID-19 so they know how to protect themselves and their families. You gotta pull out the stops on building those kind of partnerships.   Clemons: Why we were caught so flat-footed with this pandemic? Murthy: Absolutely, and each time were hit with a major outbreak, whether it's Ebola or Zika or H1N1, we learns, and then we've got to incorporate steps to get better. What's important to recognize also is that the improvements that we make have to be across the nation, not just in the federal government, but also at the state and at the local level. On a federal level, we did take steps to improve the system after Ebola and Zika, and part of that came in a massive investment in a global health security agenda. Recognizing that we've gotta build partnerships across the world, we gotta strengthen health care systems around the world because of a disease, you know breaks out in, you know, part of Africa or Asia or Europe, it can quickly spread to the United States in modern times. The other thing that we did is we began to invest more now on the research side as well, so that we could have the scientific apparatus in place to be better prepared the next time something came around. But what matters here also are two other things. One is local and state funding. Even now, we rely on local health departments and state departments to enforce and to implement contact tracing, just as an example. And so if we've got a great federal apparatus but were massively underfunding local and state health departments then the actual on the ground contact tracing we need to contain an infection isn't happening effectively. And for decades we have been underfunding public health in local and state regions. We cut their budgets massively after the great recession in 2008 and we still have not built those budgets back up and we're paying the price of that right now. But lastly, I should say the only thing that really matters is however much you invest, in terms of money, you have to have a consistent strategy and consistent leadership that goes across parties and recognizes that we've got to keep the ball moving when it comes to pandemic preparedness. I mean, strengthen your institutions, keeping our funding in a good place and also building partnerships with other countries around the world. And I think we have been uneven in that respect. I don't think we have seen the kind of coordinated leadership that we need to ensure that the pandemic response here is strong and also that we’re set up for the future. I don't think it's too late for us to recover. But it is true that we’re behind right now. And if we don't catch up, we will pay the price in terms of further human suffering and lives lost.WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > Trump cheers on governors who are reopening and ignoring White House guidelines > White House blocking Fauci testimony to House: ‘Just a bunch of Trump haters’   > US noticeably absent from worldwide virtual vaccine summit > NYC health officials: Mysterious syndrome affecting children could be linked to COVID-19 > French scientists discover country treated coronavirus patient in December  > Starbucks to open 85 percent of US cafes by end of week  > Bipartisan senators & House members ally with chef José Andrés to introduce FEED Act to pay restaurants to feed vulnerable populations > BIO CEO Jim Greenwood vows biopharmaceutical industry will do everything possible to make sure everyone gets needed therapies and vaccines   Children may not be safe from COVID-19 concerns. Fifteen children, many of whom had the coronavirus, have recently been hospitalized in New York City with a mysterious syndrome that doctors do not yet fully understand but that has also been reported in several European countries, health officials announced on Monday night. Former FDA chief Scott Gottlieb told CNBC on Tuesday morning that the “unusual phenomena” affecting children could potentially be linked to the coronavirus, demonstrating that “we don’t understand this virus well.” New York City health officials describe the condition as a “multisystem inflammatory syndrome potentially associated with COVID-19.”  Trump won’t allow Fauci to testify before House because it's “a bunch of Trump haters.” President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE on Tuesday said Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE will be allowed to testify before the Senate next week, but that he would prevent the government's top infectious diseases expert from appearing before the House because he believes it's full of "Trump haters." (The Hill)   THE INTERVIEW BIO CEO James Greenwood says U.S. failed for years to heed warnings of coming pandemic. Greenwood vows that biopharmaceutical firms will do everything possible to make sure everyone gets needed therapies and vaccines and says China, followed by the U.S., were slow to act on spreading virus         Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Tuesday, May 5.  Editor's Note.            On Monday, I spoke to Rep. Rosa DeLauroRosa Luisa DeLauroCOVID-19 workplace complaints surge; unions rip administration Lack of child care poses major hurdle as businesses reopen Frustrations grow over incomplete racial data on COVID-19 cases, deaths MORE (D-Conn.) who heard about crops being plowed over, milk being destroyed, piglets being aborted and more -– all at a time when vulnerable communities in the United States are going hungry. She teamed up with House Agriculture Committee Chairman Collin PetersonCollin Clark PetersonFrom farmers to grocery store clerks, thank you to all of our food system Group of House Democrats asks for 0 billion for testing The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Chef José Andrés says most political leaders today are not acting with urgency; Dems crafting 'Rooseveltian' relief package MORE (D-Minn.) as well as chef José Andrés, former Secretaries of Agriculture Dan Glickman and Tom VilsackThomas James VilsackUSDA: Farm-to-school programs help schools serve healthier meals OVERNIGHT MONEY: House poised to pass debt-ceiling bill MORE to put together an action plan to save America’s stressed out food supply chain and connect it to the food programs that serve communities in real need today. This is a good news story.    Another “maybe it gets better” story is that World Central Kitchen and Andrés have helped cobble together a bipartisan alliance with Sen. Tim ScottTimothy (Tim) Eugene ScottPaul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  Rand Paul holding up quick passage of anti-lynching bill With capital, communities of color can lead our economic revival MORE (R-S.C.), Sen. Kamala HarrisKamala Devi HarrisPaul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  Rand Paul holding up quick passage of anti-lynching bill Minority caucuses call for quick action on police reform MORE (D-Calif.), Rep. Mike ThompsonCharles (Mike) Michael ThompsonThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  Gun control group rolls out House endorsements  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Chef José Andrés says most political leaders today are not acting with urgency; Dems crafting 'Rooseveltian' relief package MORE (D-Calif.), Rep. Jim McGovern (D-Mass.), and Rep. Rodney DavisRodney Lee DavisThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump visits a ventilator plant in a battleground state The Hill to interview Mnuchin today and many other speakers  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mastercard CEO Ajay Banga says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now; Teva's Brendan O'Grady says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like Strategic Oil Reserve MORE (R-Ill.) to introduce today the FEMA Empowering Essential Deliveries (FEED) Act. According to a release on the effort, “This bill allows the Federal government to pay 100 percent of the cost to states and localities that partner with restaurants and nonprofits to prepare nutritious meals for vulnerable populations, such as seniors and underprivileged children” who have suffered due to the coronavirus.   The question is why is this needed? Why can’t state and local governments get this sort of bridge built between restaurants willing to help and vulnerable communities now? The answer is simple. The finances of local and state governments are cratering at the moment — hit by the earthquake of surging public health expenditures and the tsunami of collapsing tax revenue while the economy is in a coma. Getting the federal government to foot the bill of this food will feed the hungry, keep some restaurants alive, and give some of that agricultural product — the milk, pork, corn and soy that DeLauro was speaking about — a channel to those who will buy and use that food. Congrats to Andrés for convincing both Republicans and Democrats to understand the need for this support now.   On Wednesday, José Andrés will be joining me for my daily Coronavirus Report interview.   – Steve Clemons Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.     THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE       We’re bringing you insight on the issues of the day from Washington’s top policymakers and thought leaders via our virtual, 3D journalism platform: The Hill Virtually Live.  Follow @TheHillEvents and watch this space for news on upcoming virtual programs. And keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 3,628,824 confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the world. 254,430 have died from the virus.    The U.S. is reporting 1,192,119 and 70,115 deaths as of the time of this newsletter. 218,011 reported cases in Spain. 213,013 in Italy. The U.K. is reporting 196,238 cases. 169,583 in France. Russia 155,370. 108,620 in Brazil. 99,970 in Iran. 83,966 in China. 62,052 in Canada. 46,476 in India. 23,216 in Sweden. 17,142 in Qatar. 16,268 in Israel. 1,799 in Iceland. 1,486 in New Zealand, where Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has declared “victory” over the first wave of the virus.    New York and New Jersey continue to see cases with rise with 321,192 and 130,690 cases respectively. 69,087 reported cases in Massachusetts. 63,777 in Illinois. 56,168 in California. 53,434 in Pennsylvania. 43,990 in Michigan. 37,439 in Florida. 32,879 in Texas. 7,850 in Minnesota. Nebraska is reporting 6,036 cases. 5,630 in Nevada. 1,226 in Maine. 621 in Hawaii. 145 in Guam.    7,285,178 coronavirus tests have been conducted in the U.S and 187,180 full recoveries from COVID-19 have been reported.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Trump cheers on governors even as they ignore White House coronavirus guidelines in race to reopen. States across the country — such as Texas, Indiana, Colorado and Florida — are moving swiftly to reopen their economies despite failing to achieve benchmarks laid out by the White House for when social distancing restrictions could be eased to ensure the public’s safety. These governors’ biggest cheerleader is President Trump who is hailing the broad economic reopening that health experts worry has started too quickly. (Washington Post)    Bipartisan group of senators and House members ally with chef José Andrés to introduce FEED Act to pay restaurants to feed vulnerable populations.  Rep. Mike Thompson (D-Calif.), Jim McGovern (D-Mass.) and Rodney Davis (R-Ill.) and Sens. Kamala Harris (D-Calif.) and Tim Scott (R-S.C.) joined chef José Andrés and World Central Kitchen in introducing the FEMA Empowering Essential Deliveries (FEED) Act. This bill allows the federal government to pay 100 percent of the cost to states and localities that partner with restaurants and nonprofits to prepare nutritious meals for vulnerable populations, such as seniors and underprivileged children. These partnerships will support businesses and small farmers as the coronavirus pandemic continues. (The Hill)   Numbers keep going up! Trump runs into trouble with expectations game. President Trump is mired in controversy over projections about the total number of deaths from COVID-19. His detractors accuse him of pulling figures out of thin air, giving the nation false hope and seeking to boost his reelection odds. Trump’s defenders, however, assert he is simply fulfilling the traditional role of a president in trying to bolster morale during a crisis. (The Hill) Pelosi slams White House for blocking coronavirus task force members from testifying: “They might be afraid of the truth.” Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE (D-Calif.) blasted the White House's move to restrict officials leading the nation's coronavirus response from testifying before Congress, suggesting that the Trump administration "might be afraid of the truth." (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Rep. Virginia FoxxVirginia Ann FoxxThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO CEO Greenwood says US failed for years to heed warnings of coming pandemic; Trump: Fauci won't testify to 'a bunch of Trump haters'  Hillicon Valley: Amazon VP resigns in protest | Republicans eye university ties to China | Support rises for vote by mail Republicans seek information on Chinese ties to US universities MORE (R-N.C.) @virginiafoxx House Democrats are complacent with inaction and indifference. China’s influence continues to grow. Americans are losing their jobs. Small businesses have growing weight on their shoulders. Meanwhile, House Democrats are nowhere to be found. We cannot allow any more delay. Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.) @SenBlumenthal Carnival must focus on making real, systemic change, not planning when they can set sail again. This pandemic highlights what many of us already knew—cruise lines require major health & safety reform.   Rep. Will HurdWilliam Ballard HurdScaled-back Pride Month poses challenges for fundraising, outreach The Hill's Morning Report - Protesters' defiance met with calls to listen GOP Rep. Will Hurd marches with protesters in Houston MORE (R-Texas) @HurdOnTheHill If @RepRatcliffe had been in Congress during the time I was an undercover CIA agent & I’d had the fortune to meet him, I would have stayed in the CIA because I would have found someone I trusted to make our nation’s laws & support what we were doing.  ACROSS THE NATION  Coronavirus protests take aim at scientists, elites. After weeks of stay-at-home orders, millions of lost jobs and trillions in emergency government spending, conservative agitators have begun to turn their ire on the scientists themselves, blaming them for overhyping a health crisis and in the process creating an economic one from which it will take years to recover. (The Hill)   Push to reopen national parks sparks pandemic concerns. National parks are starting to reopen as they seek to balance public safety concerns with responding to the White House's push to start reopening sites. Ahead of the busy summer season for national park visits, the Everglades National Park in Florida reinstated access to some roads Monday. (The Hill)   2020 Edelman trust barometer spring update: Trust and the COVID-19 pandemic reveals a remarkable shift. Amid the COVID-19 pandemic, government trust surged 11 points to an all-time high of 65 percent, making it the most trusted institution for the first time in the 20 years of study. Despite a 4-point increase in trust in business and several high-profile actions taken by companies and CEOs to help those in need, there is marked disappointment in how the private sector has performed during the crisis. This is a moment of reckoning for business, which must now deliver on the promise of stakeholder capitalism. (Edelman Trust Barometer Update)  How about mannequins at sports stadiums? In an interview with Peter Hamby of Snapchat’s Good Luck America, Seattle Mayor Jenny Durkan said, “I don't think you're going to see crowds in stadiums. I don't know if you saw it, but in Taiwan they had their first games and they actually had mannequins in the seats. You may get virtual fans, but I think there's going to be enough challenges trying to get players to different cities. So I don't see crowds in our near future, but I think we can be innovative.” (Good Luck America)  WORLD VIEW         The world came together for a virtual vaccine summit. The U.S. was conspicuously absent. World leaders came together in a virtual summit Monday to pledge billions of dollars to quickly develop vaccines and drugs to fight the coronavirus. The online conference, led by European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and a half-dozen countries, was set to raise $8.2 billion from governments, philanthropies and the private sector to fund research and mass-produce drugs, vaccines and testing kits to combat the virus. Missing from the roster was the Trump administration. (Washington Post)     French scientists discover nation treated coronavirus patient in December. French scientists have identified the earliest-known case of COVID-19 in the nation: a patient was treated in a hospital near Paris in December, an indication that the virus has been spreading across the world for far longer than had previously been known. The doctors from the Groupe Hospitalier Paris Seine in Saint-Denis said a sample taken from a 42-year-old fishmonger, admitted to the emergency room on Dec. 27, had tested positive for the coronavirus. (The Hill)    This drug may cause birth defects. Japan’s pushing it for coronavirus. The supposed beacon of hope is an antiviral medicine known as Avigan, a Japanese-made medication with little evidence to prove it effectively combats COVID-19. Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has pushed the homegrown drug in news conferences and in meetings with world leaders, including a call with Trump and the other heads of the Group of 7 nations. (New York Times)     Venice Film Festival surveys industry to gauge concerns, participation. Venice Film Festival organizers have sent a letter to a wide range of film industry executives to survey concerns and suggestions about the upcoming edition, which is still scheduled to run Sept. 2-12. The letter, which was signed by Venice’s artistic director Alberto Barbera, is meant to gauge how many filmmakers, actors and producers are willing to turn up at the event before a decision is taken at the end of the month on whether to hold this year’s event. (Variety)  SCIENCE Fauci dismisses “circular argument” coronavirus originated in Chinese lab. Anthony Fauci shot down theories that the coronavirus was man-made or released accidentally from a Chinese lab. In a wide-ranging interview with National Geographic, Fauci said available research indicated the virus evolved naturally. (The Hill)   Pfizer and BioNTech dose first participants as part of global COVID-19 MRNA vaccine development program. Pfizer and BioNTech announced Tuesday that the first participants have been dosed in the U.S. in the phase one/two clinical trial for the BNT162 vaccine program to prevent COVID-19. The trial is part of a global development program, and the dosing of the first cohort in Germany was completed last week. (Pfizer release). [See Steve Clemons’s recent interview with Pfizer chief scientist Mikael Dolsten here.]   Alnylam has its top pick for a COVID-19 drug. Alnylam Pharmaceuticals and Vir Biotechnology said Monday that, after evaluating hundreds of potential drugs for COVID-19, they have selected one to move forward into human testing. In theory, the drug would interfere with the genetic instructions the novel coronavirus uses to replicate. According to Alnylam and Vir, preclinical tests indicated that their drug, even at low concentrations, is highly potent against the virus. (BioPharmaDive)  BUSINESS Consumer debt surged to $14.3T before worst of coronavirus crisis, Fed says. Household debt surged by more than $150 billion to a new record high in the first three months of the year, just before the worst of the coronavirus pandemic began to batter Americans' finances, according to the New York Federal Reserve. The results don't capture the full extent of the pandemic's impact because the data was collected through March 31, just two weeks into the virus-induced lockdown. (Fox Business)    Venti please! Starbucks to open 85 percent of US stores by end of week. Starbucks CEO Kevin Johnson said that more than 85 percent of the U.S. company-operated locations will be reopened by the end of the week, with modified operations and hours. The chain plans to have more than 90 percent of cafes open by early June. (CNBC)    NFL announces release date for 2020 schedule. The National Football League will release its regular-season schedule on Thursday night as it continues conducting business mostly as usual amid the coronavirus pandemic. The schedule will be revealed in a three-hour telecast on NFL Network starting at 8 p.m. (New York Post)   IDEAS, CAUSES, PASSION If there was no cover-up, why is China opposing an inquiry? China insists it has been fully transparent and hidden nothing on the killer coronavirus, whose international spread from Wuhan has turned into the greatest global disaster of our time. So why is Beijing rancorously opposing an independent international inquiry into the origins and spread of the coronavirus? (Brahma Chellaney for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS The Obamas to headline YouTube virtual graduation ceremony with BTS, Lady Gaga and more. YouTube is pumping up the 2020 virtual pomp-and-circumstance circuit with a video graduation ceremony, including commencement addresses delivered by former President Obama and Michelle ObamaMichelle LeVaughn Robinson ObamaMichelle Obama celebrates seniors, tells them to 'breathe deep and dance your heart out' at virtual prom The Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Mnuchin: More COVID-19 congressional action ahead Michelle Obama working with 31 mayors on increasing voter participation MORE. YouTube’s “Dear Class of 2020” original special will feature other celebrities and notable names including BTS, Lady Gaga and former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice. (Variety)    Chance the Rapper hosting virtual award show for Teacher Appreciation Week. Chance the Rapper has a few surprises in store for educators across the nation in honor of Teacher Appreciation Week. The Grammy Award-winning artist is hosting his very own virtual awards show, dubbed "The Twilight Awards," on his Instagram channel to surprise 10 teachers from schools in the U.S. and recognize them for their work. (Good Morning America)   ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Sen. CHRISTOPHER COONS (D-Del.)  > Steve interviews Edelman Public Relations CEO RICHARD EDELMAN  > Steve interviews Rep. DONNA SHALALA (D-Fla.)  > Steve interviews Rep. TREY HOLLINGSWORTH (R-Ind.)  > Steve interviews former Secretary of State MADELEINE ALBRIGHT  > Steve interviews Rep. ROSA DELAURO (D-Conn.) Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.      VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews BIO President and CEO James Greenwood. Read excerpts from the interview below:   Clemons: Can you give us a snapshot of what the road to a vaccine looks like?      Clemons: Some have said that chaos is necessary to bend the curve of how long it takes to get to that creative therapeutic, that breakthrough. I'm interested in whether you think it's chaos. Or are things going the right direction?  Greenwood: It's not chaos. In fact, the first thing that BIO did, when this whole thing began in mid-February, we sent a letter to all 800 of our biotech members who are in the drug discovery business, asking which of them have the scientific capacity, the drug development experience, and/or the manufacturing capacity to get involved in fighting COVID. About 60 of our companies have responded in the affirmative, and then we held in mid-March a virtual summit with 500 people, including from the industry as well as from the government. And we have what we call the BIO Coronavirus Collaboration Initiative, which is designed to make sure that we're not in chaos, that we share what we're doing, we share data, we coordinate like never before, and we're doing that globally.   You've been worried about biodefense issues for a long time. Can you grade the literacy of your former House colleagues right now? Are they making the right decisions? Do they understand the seriousness of the moment?   Greenwood: Well, if I were to editorialize, I would begin by saying that unfortunately, not enough members of Congress and not enough people in this administration and previous ones have taken seriously the inevitability of a global pandemic. You referenced that bipartisan commission on biodefense co-chaired by Tom Ridge, the former secretary of Homeland Security, and former Sen. Joe Lieberman. I serve on it, Tom Daschle, former senator, serves on it. And in October of 2015 we put out a blueprint for biodefense, and we said there will be a global pandemic, here are some things you should do. Immediately appoint the vice president to be in charge of planning for that pandemic, not responding after it happens, but planning for it years in advance. That didn't happen. We said, in each urban area let’s create a system of stratified hospitals. Decide in each area, New York, Chicago, San Francisco, etc., which will be the hospital best equipped first to take the first wave of patients from the pandemic. And let's make sure they have huge storage capacities, stockpiles of ventilators, PPE, gloves, masks, everything, and then have the next hospital, and the next hospital down the line prepared. So there was much we could have done.   Clemons: You worried that the investment in science was lapsing so that innovation was really going to be negatively impacted. We're at a moment where people are seeing the biopharmaceutical industry as one of the key hopes for them. Do you think that the criticism of the pharmaceutical industry has changed because of the timing that we're in now?  Greenwood: Well, what's been remarkable about the moment in history we're in right now is that the science has never been better. I mean, science always gets better because it builds upon itself. But when you think about gene therapy and cell therapy and immunotherapy and the ability to use CRISPR-Cas9, etc., our capability of defeating every disease known to man has never been greater. At the same time, we face the most harsh political headwinds the industry has ever faced. People are angry at the drug industry. Now in my opinion, what they're really angry about is the fact that their insurers impose larger and larger deductibles on them. So when they go to the drugstore they end up paying hundreds and hundreds of dollars that they may not have or worse yet they leave their drug behind. So what I would hope comes out of this is as people watch, praying every day, when are we going to get treatments? When we going to get vaccines? That it will be completely visible that the biopharmaceutical industry — large, middle size and small — are working 24/7. And we will solve this problem. We will save lives by the hundreds of thousands by the millions. And I hope there's a little bit more of a hesitancy to condemn the industry and a little bit more interest in figuring out how do we actually protect patients with regards to what they're forced to pay out of their pockets.    Clemons: When we see vaccines and antivirals develop, do you think your industry needs to do anything different by way of how costs are figured out, how accessibility is managed. Can everybody who needs this get it, as opposed to just those who can pay for it? Greenwood: So I'm absolutely certain that the industry will do everything in its power to make sure that no one goes without the upcoming vaccines because they can't afford what's required to come out from their pocket. That's a moral principle by which we should live. And I think that you'll see that in spades here. But again, I have to remind everyone, it's not just about what the price is, it’s about what comes out of pocket. So let's make sure that we don't have ever increasing deductibles that cause people not to be able to afford the health care that they need.   Clemons: How do they look at how this unfolded in China and with the WHO, which is so much in the news now, about the origins and about the importance of being transparent with data. It looks like nobody was transparent early on. So even when the signals were there, sometimes they weren't grabbed quickly enough. But you folks are another form of intelligence establishment. How do you look at how this unfolded and who the villains are?  Greenwood: Well, the villain is the virus. Let’s start there. Look, the virus would have been in a bat, no matter what anybody did. The virus, if you assume it jumped from a bat to a human, and I'm not making any guesses about whether that's exactly what happened or whether it came from the laboratory. I think we just don't know. But having said that, I think the Chinese were slow to share with the world and with their own people what was going on. That is the nature of a totalitarian state. I think that we were slow to respond in some regards, and there were too many people who were downplaying the severity of this thing. And when you have data that showed about a month or so ago that when you asked people, do you think someone you love or someone you know will have the COVID-19 disease: It was like 35 percent of Republicans said yes, and 70 percent of Democrats said yes. And I'm a Republican. And so when we get to the point where a global pandemic becomes the subject of partisanship, that's a real sign that our whole electoral system needs to change.    Clemons: I'd like you to speak to someone in Bartlesville, Okla., and tell them what BIO and your member can do to change this environment and change their lives.  Greenwood: Well, I think what the biotechnology industry is going to do for everyone in Oklahoma and across the world, is first make sure we have the best diagnostics so we can sort out those people who have been exposed to the virus and have recovered and those who have not. We're going to develop antivirals to stop the ability, like remdesivir, I think you'll be seeing that used earlier in the course of the disease, it will stop the virus from replicating inside of your body once you're infected. We'll have treatments to treat the symptoms. So, through diagnostic and good therapies, good treatments, people will begin to inch their way back to normalcy. And then we'll have a vaccine. Whether that's nine months from now or 18 months from now, we don't know. But we'll have a vaccine that eventually will protect all of us, everyone on the planet, so that we can put this officially behind us in history and then prepare better for the next pandemic, which will come.WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > Tensions rise between Washington and Beijing as Trump casts blame on China > Administration projecting 3k daily coronavirus deaths by June > Senate back in Washington as ‘new normal’ takes shape on Capitol Hill  > DOJ sides with Virginia church, argues stay-at-home order interferes with free exercise of religion  > US airline stocks tumble as Buffett sells stake > Rep. Rosa DeLauroRosa Luisa DeLauroCOVID-19 workplace complaints surge; unions rip administration Lack of child care poses major hurdle as businesses reopen Frustrations grow over incomplete racial data on COVID-19 cases, deaths MORE surprised administration afraid of having Dr. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE bring science and facts to House committee, says White House putting politics over public health while people are dying, asks what happened to $16 billion House appropriated to strategic national stockpile, says we need to stop destroying milk, meat and crops and get to hungry people in need, wants Speaker Pelosi to stay on into next Congress             President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE steps up his criticism of China. President Trump accused the Chinese government of making a “horrible mistake” in its coronavirus response and of then orchestrating a cover-up that allowed the pathogen to spread around the world. “My opinion is they made a mistake. They tried to cover it, they tried to put it out. It’s like a fire,” Trump said Sunday night during a virtual town hall on Fox News. “You know, it’s really like trying to put out a fire. They couldn’t put out the fire.”   THE INTERVIEW Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-Conn.) asks what the administration is afraid of in having Dr. Anthony Fauci bring science and facts to House Committee, says White House putting politics over public health while people are dying, wants Speaker Pelosi to stay on into next Congress         Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Monday, May 4.  Editor’s Note.         Warren Buffett just sold his investments in United Airlines, Delta Air Lines, American Airlines and Southwest Airlines — all of it. This morning, I snapped a picture of the intersection at 16th and K Street, NW. This is a block from the White House and normally an insanely busy place on any non-pandemic weekday morning, and it looked like a neutron bomb (remember those?) had wiped everyone out, leaving only the buildings unscathed, and the parked cars — but almost no human beings at all. Berkshire Hathaway is predicting it will take a long time to get full planes flying again — and I’m guessing it’s going to take a long time to fill up this people-missing corporate landscape, not only in the nation’s capital but all over the country.    Today I interviewed Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-Conn.) and she’s got a lot to say regarding how we navigate public safety for the massive number of Americans out there who are struggling to survive the double mugging of their health safety and their economic foundation. DeLauro chairs the Labor-HHS-Education Subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee and was planning to have Anthony Fauci testify Wednesday along with former Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Tom Frieden and Senior Associate at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Caitlin Rivers. The White House blocked Fauci from testifying before her panel, but gave him a green light to appear before the GOP-controlled Senate committee. What that tells me is that the 68,000 dead in America thus far — and the 30,000 or more predicted — have not yet focused the attention of some politicians enough to get beyond political games. Yes, games. If there is anything clear about Fauci is that he doesn’t mince words and he’d say the same things whether at a Senate hearing, a House hearing or even appearing on The Hill’s Coronavirus Report, which I hope he soon does. The key here is that we all try to take the high road, promote high quality information and debate, and engineer policy decisions to save lives now.   DeLauro has also helped shine a spotlight on other overcapacity in agriculture today as many families, homeless folks and others in need are going hungry and “at the same time,” DeLauro says, “farmers are plowing crops under, euthanizing pigs and dumping milk.” Along with House Agriculture Committee Chairman Collin PetersonCollin Clark PetersonFrom farmers to grocery store clerks, thank you to all of our food system Group of House Democrats asks for 0 billion for testing The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Chef José Andrés says most political leaders today are not acting with urgency; Dems crafting 'Rooseveltian' relief package MORE (D-Minn.), and with public support from chef José Andrés and former Agriculture Secretaries Dan Glickman and Tom VilsackThomas James VilsackUSDA: Farm-to-school programs help schools serve healthier meals OVERNIGHT MONEY: House poised to pass debt-ceiling bill MORE she has released an action plan to help these farmers and to keep intact the American supply chain of food. This seems pragmatic to me, a win-win for both political parties, farmers and communities in need.   My colleague at The Hill Marty Johnson caught this poignant clip of something powerful and worthy of repeating from former President George W. Bush from Oprah’s “The Call to Unite” on Saturday:    “We serve our neighbor by separating from them. We cannot allow physical separation to become emotional isolation. This requires us to not only be compassionate but creative in our outreach. Let us remember empathy and simple kindness are essential, powerful tools of national recovery. Even at an appropriate social distance, we can find the way to be present in the lives of others. ... In the final analysis, we are not partisan combatants. We're human beings, equally vulnerable and equally wonderful in the sight of God."   President Trump wasn’t impressed with Bush’s words, but I was. And I think that whether folks are devout supporters of the president’s brand of leadership or support former Vice President Joe BidenJoe BidenOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Davis: 72 hours cementing the real choice for November OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump signs order removing environmental reviews for major projects | New Trump air rule will limit future pollution regulations, critics say | DNC climate group calls for larger federal investment on climate than Biden plan MORE, or if they like neither, this is the time for personal magnanimity. The shocks of this pandemic won’t just be dumped airline stocks, a glut of corporate offices or millions of aborted piglets, it will also be many people without a clear path to keep themselves and their families from sinking into the sludge of these times.   – Steve Clemons   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE       We’re bringing you insight on the issues of the day from Washington’s top policymakers and thought leaders via our virtual, 3D journalism platform: The Hill Virtually Live.  Follow @TheHillEvents and watch this space for news on upcoming virtual programs. And keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 3,544,281 cases of COVID-19 around the world. 249,079 have died from the virus.    The U.S. is reporting 1,166,083 cases and 68,046 deaths as of the time of this newsletter. Spain is reporting 217,466 cases. Italy 211,938. 191,827 in the U.K. 168,962 in France. 145,268 in Russia. 126,045 in Turkey. 101,826 in Brazil. 98,647 cases are being reported in Iran. 83,965 in China. Canada 60,577. Mexico 23,471. Pakistan 20,884. 5,000 in Morocco.    New York’s 318,953 cases remain the highest anywhere in the world. 128,269 cases in New Jersey. 68,087 in Massachusetts. 61,499 in Illinois. 54,994 in California. Pennsylvania is reporting 52,816 cases. Florida 36,897. Texas — which is set to enter the first phase of reopening today — 32,343 cases. 13,177 in Tennessee. 9,703 in Iowa. 8,699 in Missouri. 6,626 in South Carolina. 3,437 in Arkansas.    7,123,222 coronavirus tests have been conducted in the U.S. 1,137,265 have reported full recoveries from COVID-19 worldwide.   WASHINGTON WATCH  The “new normal” takes shape on Capitol Hill. Congressional lawmakers hoping for a return to pre-coronavirus life on Capitol Hill might find themselves waiting awhile.The pandemic has already upended daily routines and legislative calendars during the extended recess, forcing lawmakers to adapt to Zoom hearings and cloistered campaigning. But now Congress’s leading medical authority is warning that the upheaval will extend to virtually all facets of life in the Capitol complex. And those changes are likely to last years. (The Hill)    Trump administration projecting 3K daily new coronavirus deaths by June: NYT. The Trump administration is projecting that the United States could see up to 3,000 deaths per day from the coronavirus on June 1, according to internal documents obtained by The New York Times. The president also predicted during a Fox News virtual town hall Sunday that up to 100,000 Americans could die. He nonetheless emphasized the need to reopen businesses and get Americans back to work by lifting certain measures intended to slow the spread of the virus. (The Hill)  DOJ argues Virginia stay-at-home order interfered with church’s free exercise of religion. The Department of Justice is siding with a Virginia church that filed a lawsuit against the state over Gov. Ralph Northam's (D) stay-at-home order restricting in-person religious services to no more than 10 people amid the coronavirus outbreak. On Sunday, lawyers from the Justice Department filed a statement of interest supporting the church's action. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Rep. Matt GaetzMatthew (Matt) GaetzHillicon Valley: Zuckerberg on the defensive over Trump posts | Twitter labels another lawmaker's tweet | USTR opens probe into digital taxes GOP lawmaker wants probe of UPenn's Biden Center for Diplomacy and Global Engagement Twitter restricts tweet from Gaetz for glorifying violence MORE (R-Fla.)  @RepMattGaetz I was talking to one of my constituents recently who said, "It doesn't matter what businesses open. America will not open until the schools are open."   Rep. Debbie Wasserman SchultzDeborah (Debbie) Wasserman SchultzVA initiates process to remove headstones with Nazi symbols Overnight Defense: Trump extends deployment of National Guard troops to aid with coronavirus response | Pentagon considers reducing quarantine to 10 days | Lawmakers push for removal of Nazi headstones from VA cemeteries VA secretary stops short of agreeing to remove Nazi headstones MORE (D-Fla.)  @RepDWStweets To all of you inspiring young minds, To all of you sparking creativity, To all of you changing lives forever, And to everyone now doing it from a distance, Thank you, and happy #TeacherAppreciationWeek!    Sen. Ted CruzRafael (Ted) Edward CruzTexas Republicans call on county GOP chair to resign for saying Floyd's death was staged Rosenstein takes fire from Republicans in heated testimony Clyburn: Cowed GOP ascribes 'mystical powers' to Trump MORE (R-Texas) @SenTedCruz        ACROSS THE NATION  COVID-19’s class divide creates new political risks. The COVID-19 outbreak ravaging the United States is exacerbating the nation’s class divide, closing small businesses and bankrupting households while many in the nation’s elite emerge relatively unscathed.The disparity was highlighted in April when stock markets enjoyed a banner month even as 22 million people were added to the unemployment rolls. It is a divide that has political ramifications for both parties, but especially so for Republicans, who hold the White House and the Senate majority. (The Hill)  Utah starts to reopen as number of coronavirus cases continues to rise. Utah Gov. Gary Herbert (R) placed the state under “moderate risk” protocols starting Friday, allowing certain establishments including gyms and salons to reopen and restaurants to begin offering dine-in options with precautions in place. The state is still recording new confirmed COVID-19 cases, however, with a total of 5,175 infections reported as of Sunday. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW   The risk of rich countries neglecting poorer ones during the pandemic. The pandemic is not a great leveler. The novel coronavirus outbreak has exposed socioeconomic divides within countries, disproportionately affecting the working class, minorities and other vulnerable communities. It has also exposed the gulf between the world’s wealthy nations and poorer ones. Though countries in the West have been ravaged by the virus, they are more prepared to fend it off than countries with much weaker health systems and no social safety nets. That gap will only be exacerbated as the virus spreads deeper into the global South. (Washington Post)     EU official says Europe has been “naive” about China. European Union foreign affairs chief Josep Borrell said Europe has been “a little naive” in dealing with China but that it was beginning to take a more pragmatic approach. Borrell told France's Le Journal du Dimanche that China and the EU are “on the same side” in that they both promote multilateralism. However, he said, that commonality does not necessarily mean they see eye-to-eye on global governance in general, according to Politico Europe. (The Hill)     / With virus under control, Australia and New Zealand may form a travel “bubble.” With their coronavirus outbreaks under control, New Zealand and Australia are discussing forming a "travel bubble" that would allow people to resume international journeys across the Tasman Sea without quarantine restrictions. The move, which is still weeks if not months away, would enable both countries to take a step toward normality and help their tourism industries, while serving as a potential template for other governments as they emerge from the crisis. (Washington Post)   SCIENCE What happens if a coronavirus vaccine is never developed? Instead of wiping out COVID-19, societies may instead learn to live with it. Cities would slowly open and some freedoms will be returned, but on a short leash, if experts' recommendations are followed. (CNN)   BUSINESS US airline stocks tumble after Buffett sells his stakes. U.S. airline shares were down sharply again on Monday, this time after Warren Buffett said Berkshire Hathaway sold its entire stakes in the four largest U.S. carriers as coronavirus devastates travel demand. Berkshire was among the largest investors in the four — American, Delta, Southwest and United. (CNBC)  J.Crew files for bankruptcy, the first national retail casualty of the coronavirus pandemic. J.Crew Group, the apparel chain known for its preppy basics, filed for bankruptcy protection Monday, becoming the first national retailer to do so during the coronavirus pandemic. (Washington Post)   IDEAS, CAUSES, PASSION How to protect the right to vote. The coronavirus pandemic has exposed many weaknesses in institutions and governing systems, but it has reminded Americans that we are in this crisis as one people, battling a common scourge and united by the ties that bind us together. Perhaps the most fundamental of these ties is the right to vote, which must be protected from the ravages of this disease in the coming months and beyond. (Glenn Nye and Chris Condon for The Hill) Will open office spaces become a thing of the past? Most companies are only just beginning to think about how they might change their corporate workspaces, with some experts saying the open floor plan could be redone with better consideration for personal space and stricter cleaning schedules. Others, however, say the pandemic is the final straw for the open office. (National Geographic)   GENEROUS SPIRITS Sidney Crosby donates 100,000 meals to Pittsburgh Community Food Bank. Pittsburgh Penguins captain Sidney Crosby has donated 100,000 meals to the Greater Pittsburgh Community Food Bank. The donated meals translate to 120,000 pounds of food that will be distributed across the organization’s 11-county area in southwestern Pennsylvania. (KDKA)    Customer leaves $1,300 tip to support Texas restaurant on day it reopened. A man and his family, who had visited the restaurant before, on Friday ordered a filet mignon, scallops, grilled steak and other items. The check came out to a hefty $337. But then the customer asked his server to double charge him. But after the customer received his updated check with the double charge, he then added a $300 tip for the 18-year-old waiter and another $1,000 "for the house," according to a picture of the check. His total came out to be $2,029. (CNN)   ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Sen. CHRISTOPHER COONS (D-Del.)  > Steve interviews Edelman Public Relations CEO RICHARD EDELMAN  > Steve interviews Rep. DONNA SHALALA (D-Fla.)  > Steve interviews Rep. TREY HOLLINGSWORTH (R-Ind.)  > Steve interviews former Secretary of State MADELEINE ALBRIGHT  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES        Life on pause. Neil Banton shared his photo of the eerily empty Oculus at New York City’s World Trade Center. Under normal circumstances, the Oculus is one of the busiest transportation hubs in the country — but not today, as the coronavirus has ground the largest U.S. city to a halt.  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Rep. Rosa DeLauroRosa Luisa DeLauroCOVID-19 workplace complaints surge; unions rip administration Lack of child care poses major hurdle as businesses reopen Frustrations grow over incomplete racial data on COVID-19 cases, deaths MORE (D-Conn.)WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > Armed demonstrators storm Michigan Capital in protest of stay-at-home order  > Fauci warns states against ‘leapfrogging’ reopening guidelines  > Trump tells DOD to ready reserves for cartel fight > New research warns pandemic could drag on for two years > Kayleigh McEnany, new White House press secretary, holds first briefing   > Madeleine Albright claims Trump’s America First policies hurt at a time when we need global collaboration, says WHO needs fixing and notes nations successfully dealing with COVID-19 are led by women           Is this what we’ve come to? Thursday was a remarkable day in Lansing, Mich., where armed demonstrators stormed the State Capitol to protest Gov. Gretchen Whitmer’s (D) stay-at-home order. Combine the armed protests with impassioned speeches by Republican lawmakers threatening to sue to challenge Whitmer’s power and you have outright political mayhem. In the face of the chaos, however, Whitmer refused to bend to pressure and took further executive actions which extended business closures and the state’s emergency declaration to May 28. This morning, President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE is urging Whitmer to negotiate and “make a deal'' with the protesters, tweeting, “The Governor of Michigan should give a little, and put out the fire. These are very good people, but they are angry. They want their lives back again, safely! See them, talk to them, make a deal.” But what kind of deal can be made when an unpredictable, vicious virus has the world on lockdown? In the end, it won’t be Trump, Whitmer or the protesters who usher in a return to normalcy — it will be the demise of the coronavirus.   THE INTERVIEW Former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright discusses new book, ‘Hell and other Destinations;’ says Trump’s America First strategy is hurting the U.S. with a virus that knows no borders; when global collaboration is vital, states WHO needs fixing; and points out nations successfully dealing with COVID-19 are led by women         Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Friday, May 1.  Editor’s Note.    V! Former secretary of State Madeleine Albright told me in my interview with her today that when she and her parents were in exile from Czechoslovakia and listening in London to the BBC during the bombing raids of WWII, the broadcasts always started with the first five notes of Beethoven’s Fifth, “da da da dum,” which in Morse code means “V” for victory. And so she is wearing a big “V for victory over the virus” broach in my interview.   There are pessimists out there that vaccines and antivirals will take far longer to develop that anyone can currently imagine and others who suggest that we can have drug options by the end of the year. The truth lies somewhere in the middle most likely, but as Albright shared, there is not much most people can do to battle the virus beyond what they are doing — good hygiene, washing hands, social distance. But the bigger thing is to be resilient, tough it out — know that this is a time when people need to summon their energy and formidable will to hang in there while scientists get us the cure to kill this vicious plague.    One of my political science professors long ago said that you really don’t know the norms of a society until you see it under stress. With the exception perhaps of the photos of armed protesters clamoring to get near the governor of Michigan, the images of heroism, of sacrifice, of resilience of front-line health workers, parents educating their children at home, people helping to deliver food to our seniors have been so heartening about the core goodness in our society. Perhaps it is a good thing to start our mornings with a bit of Beethoven, “da da da dum.” V for Victory over the virus.   – Steve Clemons   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE     On Wednesday, our 3D journalism platform — The Hill ‘Virtually’ Live — hosted Safeguarding Seniors: Healthcare in a Health Crisis with House members Doris MatsuiDoris Okada MatsuiDozens of Democrats plan to vote remotely in a first for the House Hillicon Valley: Experts raise security concerns about online voting | Musk finds supporter in Trump | Officials warn that Chinese hackers targeting COVID-19 research groups Democrats introduce legislation to ensure internet access for college students MORE (D-Calif.), Bill JohnsonWilliam (Bill) Leslie JohnsonThe Hill's Campaign Report: Republicans go on the hunt for new convention site Police unions coalition director: Biden 'off the deep end' in calls for reform Ex-CBO director calls for more than  trillion in coronavirus stimulus spending MORE (R-Ohio) and Fred UptonFrederick (Fred) Stephen UptonBipartisan Senate group offers new help to state, local governments Bipartisan bill aims to help smallest businesses weather the coronavirus crisis Lawmakers press HHS for answers on coronavirus drug distribution MORE (R-Mich).         Dr. Patrice Harris of the American Medical Association, AARP’s Nancy LeaMond, Karen Freeman-Wilson of the Chicago Urban League and Alliance for Aging Research’s Sue Peschin also joined us for a discussion on supporting seniors, tackling disparities and the role of innovation in the age of COVID-19. > Keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive and follow @TheHillEvents for news on upcoming programs.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 3,303,296 reported cases of coronavirus in the world. COVID-19 has claimed 235,290 lives at the time of this newsletter.    According to our colleague at The Hill, Reid Wilson: “More than a thousand in America died every day in April, according to The Covid Tracking Project, an independent consortium of journalists and data scientists. The death toll topped 2,000 ten times, including over the last three days of the month. On Wednesday, 2,700 people in America died — the single largest one-day tally so far. And the number of cases continues to rise. The United States confirmed an average of between 28,000 and 29,000 new cases per day over every week in April. If there is cause for optimism, it is that the past five days has seen that average drop, but to a still-staggering 25,700 new cases per day.”    And some tracking context courtesy of Reid Wilson — Alaska has gone 18 days with only single-digit case growth. Arizona had its worst day so far on Thursday, +446 cases, up to 7,648. California had its worst day so far on Wednesday, +2,334 cases, up to 50,407. Washington, D.C., had its worst day so far Thursday, +217 cases, up to 4,323. Georgia added 1,131 new cases on Thursday, not their worst day but notable because Gov. Brian Kemp is opening things. Hawaii has gone 12 days with only single-digit case growth. Illinois has had its two worst death days this week, Tuesday and Thursday, +140 each day. They have 52,918 cases and 2,361 dead. Kansas had its worst day yet on Thursday, adding 492 cases, up to 4,291 confirmed. Minnesota had its worst day ever Wednesday, +463 cases, and then again Thursday, +492 cases, up to 5,136 total. Important to note Minnesota has VASTLY expanded testing, no symptoms required. Montana has gone 14 days with single-digit case growth. Nebraska had its worst day yet on Thursday, +456 cases, up to 4,332. New Mexico had its worst day yet on Wednesday, +238 cases, up to 3,411. New York and New Jersey have seen less than 2 percent daily case growth for the past few days. That's great news, though the raw numbers are still very high. Pennsylvania had its worst day yet on Thursday, +2,033 cases, up to 48,224 total. Texas had 1,236 new cases on Thursday — not a record, but notable now that Gov. Greg Abbott is trying to reopen things. Virginia had its worst day yet Thursday, +885 new cases, up to 15,846 total. Wisconsin had its worst day yet Thursday, +334 cases, up to 6,854.   1,039,588 around the world have successfully recovered from COVID-19.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Administration describes a dash for a coronavirus vaccine that could be available in January. The Trump administration is racing to develop a coronavirus vaccine that could be fielded nationwide by January, officials said Thursday, as national stay-at-home guidance expired. The January timeline represents a fast pace for vaccine development but still means there would be no fail-safe protection from the novel coronavirus until long after most Americans are likely to have returned to work or school and until after the November elections. (Washington Post)    China will be held accountable for coronavirus, says Kudlow. National Economic Council Director Larry KudlowLawrence (Larry) Alan KudlowMORE told CNBC on Friday that the United States would hold China accountable for the coronavirus pandemic. “On the China business, it’s up in the air. They are going to be held accountable for it. There’s no question about that. How, when, where and why — I’m going to leave that up to the president,” Kudlow said on CNBC’s “Squawk on the Street.” (CNBC)   Trump authorizes Pentagon to ready reserves for cartel fight. President Trump on Thursday announced he has issued an executive order authorizing the Department of Defense to activate select reserve of the armed forces as part of a counternarcotics operation. Trump sent a letter to Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE (D-Calif.) alerting her that he has instructed Defense Secretary Mark EsperMark EsperOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Black Lives Matter, protesters sue Trump admin over aggressive crowd clearing Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal MORE to provide up to 200 additional personnel for the operation. (The Hill)   AG Barr signals DOJ support for lockdown protesters. When Attorney General William BarrWilliam  Pelham BarrFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report Davis: 72 hours cementing the real choice for November Black Lives Matter, protesters sue Trump admin over aggressive crowd clearing MORE this week directed prosecutors to safeguard civil liberties amid state-level pandemic orders, he signaled Justice Department support for lockdown protesters by highlighting religious and economic rights. (The Hill)   Veterans Affairs ordered nearly $300,000 in body bags due to coronavirus. A contract document first reviewed by Politico shows that the VA ordered the body bags from a major contractor called ISO Group on April 15. The VA has seen its number of COVID-19 cases and deaths rise. As of Thursday, 8,500 VA patients had tested positive for the virus and nearly 500 had died. (The Hill)  LAWMAKERS TWEET  Rep. Katherine Clarke (D-Mass.) @RepKClark Forcing employees to work without the proper protective equipment is reckless and puts all of us at risk. Stand with workers- today, and every day. #EssentialWorkersDay #MayDay2020 #MayDay #InternationalWorkersDay #ProtectAllWorkers   Sen. Steve DainesSteven (Steve) David DainesSenate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion The Hill's Campaign Report: Biden on the cusp of formally grasping the Democratic nomination  Daines wins GOP Senate primary in Montana MORE (D-Mont.)  @SteveDaines ICYMI: Helena is receiving a 3D printer that will print swabs to help with Coronavirus testing. This is a critical tool as we work to safely reopen Montana.   Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.) @SenBlumenthal The only people threatened by oversight are the ones trying to game the system or hide something. Getting relief to those who need it—small businesses & struggling families—means keeping an eye on the corporate fat cats who are trying to cut them in line.  ACROSS THE NATION  Fauci warns states against “leapfrogging” guidelines on reopening. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE said Thursday evening that he's concerned some states are “leapfrogging” federal guidelines for reopening. The White House guidelines for cities and states recommend a 14-day decline in cases and deaths before “you can even think about going to phase one” of reopening, Fauci said on CNN. (The Hill)          Texas set to reopen under political shadow. Texas will begin to reopen an economy shuttered by the coronavirus pandemic on Friday, an event with outsized implications in the political world given the Lone Star state’s importance to both political parties. Restaurants and retailers will begin to open under an order from Gov. Greg Abbott (R), whose directive will override local coronavirus lockdown orders. (The Hill)   Americans more comfortable with small steps as states reopen: survey. Americans are wary of participating in a variety of activities as a number of states prepare to reopen sections of their economy, a new survey released by the Democracy Fund + UCLA Nationscape Project shows. Respondents to the poll said they are more comfortable with small steps than full returns to normal life following stay-at-home orders and self quarantines that have taken place nationwide amid the coronavirus pandemic. (The Hill)  WORLD VIEW   China refuses WHO requests to participate in coronavirus investigations: report. The World Health Organization is complaining publicly that China should allow it to participate in investigations of the origins of the coronavirus. "We know that some national investigation is happening but at this stage we have not been invited to join," Gauden Galea, the WHO’s representative to China, told Sky News in an interview published Friday. (The Hill)    France maps Covid-19 impact to aid in easing lockdown. French health authorities released a map showing the areas of the country that are the most affected by the virus. The map is set to serve as a reference when the country eases lockdown measures after May 11. (France 24)     Japan to extend coronavirus state of emergency into June. Tokyo Prime Minister Shinzo Abe confirmed Friday that the state of emergency in the country over the coronavirus pandemic that was initially scheduled to end next week will instead be extended into June.  (The Hill)  SCIENCE More than 70 U.S. labs join CDC initiative to study coronavirus genome. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on Thursday announced that at least 75 public health, academic and commercial institutions are coming together to increase research on the spread of coronavirus throughout the country. (The Hill)   Infectious disease research warns coronavirus pandemic could last two years. A new report is predicting that the coronavirus pandemic may last as long as two years and that it could take up to two-thirds of the global population being immune to effectively control the spread of the virus. The report released Thursday from the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy (CIDRAP) at the University of Minnesota said that due to the coronavirus’s ability to spread among people who appear to be asymptomatic, it may be harder to control than flu outbreaks or other pandemics. (The Hill)  BUSINESS Wall Street tumbles as tech stocks take a hit. U.S. stocks fell Friday as investors reeled from earnings reports by Apple and Amazon that showed the depth of the coronavirus’s impact on big business. The S&P 500 was down nearly 2 percent in early trading, dragged lower by shares of tech companies. (New York Times)    Public companies received $1 billion in stimulus funds meant for small businesses.  Publicly traded companies have received more than $1 billion in funds meant for small businesses from the federal government’s economic stimulus package. Nearly 300 public companies have reported receiving money from the fund, called the Paycheck Protection Program, according to the data compiled by The Washington Post.   How many 3M N95 respirators are on the way? Beginning in January, 3M doubled global output of N95 respirators to 1.1 billion per year, or about 100 million per month — including 35 million per month in the U.S. 3M is now working with Department of Defense to double annual production to 2 billion by the end of the year, with additional capacity already beginning to come online. In the United States, 3M will be producing N95 respirators at a rate of roughly 50 million per month. 3M and the U.S. government announced a plan to import 166 million respirators, primarily from 3M’s plant in China. 20 million have already shipped via the FEMA air bridge, with 40 million expected by the end of this month.  (3M earnings call)  IDEAS, CAUSES, PASSION What American life will look like after the coronavirus crisis ends. Much like the generation born after the First World War was shaped by that conflict and the Spanish flu, strengthening them to take on the Great Depression and the Second World War, here is the anvil on which the strength of our young people will be tested or broken. But for all of our current struggles, there is an opportunity for each of us — and one that we will persevere through. Only our actions will show how we define this period, and not how coronavirus defines us. (Kristin Tate for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS Chef José Andrés gives 15K meals to Boulder restaurants donating meals. Internationally acclaimed Chef José Andrés and his nonprofit World Central Kitchen have donated 15,000 meals to Blackbelly, Santo and Arcana, three Boulder, Colo., restaurants that will distribute meals to vulnerable communities across Colorado throughout the COVID-19 crisis. (303 Magazine)  ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews NATO Deputy Secretary General MIRCEA GENONA  > Steve interviews Vanda Pharmaceuticals President and CEO MIHAEL POLYMEROPOULOS > Steve interviews Seattle Mayor JENNY DURKAN > Steve interviews Pfizer’s chief scientist MIKAEL DOLSTEN  > Steve interviews UAE Ambassador to U.S. YOUSEF AL OTAIBA  > Steve interviews Sen. CHRISTOPHER COONS (D-Del.)  > Steve interviews Edelman Public Relations CEO RICHARD EDELMAN  > Steve interviews Rep. DONNA SHALALA (D-Fla.)  > Steve interviews Rep. TREY HOLLINGSWORTH (R-Ind.)  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES        A reader from Japan, Sooim Kim, heard that Steve Clemons’s big willow tree in Chestertown, Md., was destroyed by Thursday’s heavy wind and rain storm. She sent him this, “If you need some talisman for your next young willow tree, we can send you the “Abe-no-masks” we got from the Japanese government. We don’t need them. You can place them around the trunk so that the young tree won’t be cold. We will send you these Abenomasks as soon as the international mailing system is recovered.” Abenomasks have become somewhat a subject of comedy shows and light ridicule in Japan as they refer to the government-distributed masks with a play on the old term, “Abenomics” in Japan.   SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.  VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill’s Steve Clemons interviews former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright. Read excerpts from the interview below:  Steve Clemons: The timing and the titling of the book couldn't be more appropriate. “Hell and Other Destinations: A 21st-Century Memoir.” So, describe for us the import, the characteristics of this tough time as you see it right now. Former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright: I do think that when I wrote the book, it was before the virus. And the statement Hell came from one of my most famous sayings, “That there's a special place in hell for women who don't help each other.” But it never occurred to me how relevant the title is for today, because we are exactly the way you described it in the introduction in terms of a lot of confusion and decisionmaking in this country, and how it relates to other countries, and how we deal with something that really does know no borders, and what our institutional structures are that can deal with this. And you referred to something out of my past, which is, I believe, that as my parents had no control over where the bombs fell in London, their behavior made all the difference. They had control only over their behavior. I think now, as individuals, we ourselves cannot figure out about the virus. All we have is control over our behavior and how we approach this and how we figure out how to solve it — to be problem solvers.   Clemons: One of the things that occurs to me is that Donald Trump's America First policy is something where you know the consequences of that may be coming to roost. And I'd love to get your thoughts on it. I remember hearing you one time saying America will have its dark days. It will need its neighbors. It will need support. What are your thoughts? Albright: Well, I think that the current policy of America First or America alone, or America thinking that it's a victim, is totally wrong and counterproductive when especially we do know that there's nothing about this virus that says it stays in one country or that we're not interconnected in terms of supply lines. And so I do think that President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE's policy has hurt us in terms of how we're supposed to resolve this now, when we have to work with other countries, when we have to make sure that we are dealing with a virus that, as I said, knows no borders, but also needs to be dealt with by countries working together, sharing intelligence information, and not trying to take advantage of each other, but to understand that the only resolution to this is cooperation.   Clemons: I'd love to hear a bit more about your book and why you wrote it. Albright: I have recently had to describe myself in six words — worried optimist, problem solver and grateful American. And what I really do think is all of them are relevant. But I think the way that the issue is taking hold is very, very complicated, which is that there clearly are economic problems — just the numbers of people that are unemployed and what it has done to not only our economy but other economies. At the same time, there are the disease issues and the humanitarian aspect and the number of people that are not employed because they are helping on the front lines. They are needed in order to make sure that the social distancing takes place and so the analysis of this is important. But then I think we need to understand that we have two issues that are almost in conflict with each other — that you have to be able to solve both and not decide that the most important thing is getting everybody re-employed and that the business and the economy is important and it doesn't matter whether more people get infected. And the other way around that we can't just decide that we can't open up at any point and what the rules are. So the problem solving part of this is to understand the issue itself and then recognize that the institutional structures that we have in the United States need to be looked at more carefully in terms of the coordination and the planning. And then that even though Americans don't like the word multilateralism because it has too many syllables and ends in an -ism but basically it will require international cooperation through the institutional organizations that exist and those have to be modified and fixed to deal with issues. So I'm in no way underestimating how difficult this is. This is very difficult and requires leadership that doesn't flip-flop around, that is not providing any kind of I think predictable guidance for this, and that's what worries me.   Clemons: How do you look at the World Health Organization and the early days with China and what rolled out because there's a lot of blame-gaming going on right now? Albright: Well, I do think that it needs some fixing. I've said that people and institutions in their 70s need refurbishing. The U.N. is 75 years old, and it really does need some help. And the WHO is tasked with a very difficult set of issues, and it does need looking at. This is where I've decided, though, that America's approach is totally counterproductive and dangerous. I know from my own experience when we decide not to pay an organization, we don't have the leverage that we need in order to make changes. And there is no other set up like the WHO, one can rethink and decide to create something totally new — we don't have time for that.   Clemons: When you were secretary of state in the Clinton administration, I can imagine if you had been hit with the same kind of challenge at that time, you would have called world leaders together, you would have called other global secretaries together, you might have put together an international platform. Do you worry that that doesn't seem to be happening today? I don't see a global platform of coordinated effort around the coronavirus. Albright: I don't either. And I think you point out that we can't do this alone and those relationships, because they have the same problems. And let me just tell you, when you call together a group of foreign ministers, everybody is conscious of national sovereignty, but also conscious of the issues that you're trying to solve. And so I think that it's unfortunate. And in fact it’s worse than that, because, as I understand it, the U.N. Security Council is trying to follow something that the secretary general has suggested, a cease-fire and working to solve this issue and not criticize the WHO, and the U.S. is blocking that Security Council resolution. So, we are not only not cooperating, not reaching out, we're doing the opposite. And I find it stunning that the secretary of state of the United States would be taking that kind of a position.   Clemons: As we approach November, what should we be on the alert for? Albright: What I am worried about is that we do know that the Russians were involved in the 2016 election. We also know that there already have been criticisms about mailing in ballots and all the various aspects, and there is a sense of trying to undermine the credibility of this election before we ever begin. And so, I think we know that a lot of it goes through the states. We have time. We have to prepare. We have to make clear to people that the election will happen, has to happen.   Clemons: I want to ask you just about women right now — women and this virus, women in America, women in politics. Are you heartened? Are you happy where this is, or do you feel like yet again, the interests and the leadership of women are being shuttled to the side? Albright: Well, I do think that there were, the primaries and everything in the Democratic Party were fair and went well. I think [former] Vice President [Joe] Biden has made clear that he's going to have a woman vice president. I do think that we can't forget about the various problems that are out there that often are carried at the expense of women and that some of the things that are happening in the U.S. and also in other countries, it brings domestic violence and the variety of issues that we have always been concerned about. What I find interesting is that there were articles about the fact that the countries in which they have been able to deal with the virus are those that are run by women: New Zealand, Taiwan, Norway, Germany. And the question is why? And some of it has to do, I think, with women's capabilities in multitasking and having peripheral vision, understanding that one of our main jobs as officials is to take care of people.WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > US jobless claims top 30 million  > Intelligence agency says COVID-19 ‘not manmade or genetically modified’  > LA becomes first major US city to provide free coronavirus testing  > Cuomo suspending NYC subway service at night to disinfect cars  > Pentagon moves to double output of testing swabs > DC health chief breaks with Trump, says city may not reopen for another three months in worst-case scenario   THE INTERVIEW         Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Thursday,    Editor’s Note.     Richard Edelman’s special coronavirus edition of the Edelman Trust Barometer is packed with insights (see interview here), some quite obvious but they deserve repeating. One of the most important takeaways is that people around the world, but also those in the U.S., are looking to scientists for leadership and direction and less to politicians and presidents. If I were President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE, I would surround myself with physicians and doctors such as White House coronavirus task force members Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE, Deborah Birx, Jerome Adams and others.   Trump has tapped those excellent advisers, but rather than posturing in a way where he signals that he is hearing them, he contradicts them. On Wednesday, Trump told business executives that America could wipe out the coronavirus without drugs. He said, “If you don't have the vaccine, if the virus is gone, we're like we were before, but having a vaccine would be a great thing."     Trump continued to assert, “It's gonna go, it's gonna leave, it's gonna be gone, it's gonna be eradicated, and it might take longer, it might be in smaller sections, it won't be what we had.” But as Fauci and many others have said, this virus will not go away on its own.    I think the American public is distinguishing today between government officials like Fauci, Birx, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Robert Redfield, Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Stephen Hahn on one hand and politicians on the other. Their trust in government direction and leadership may be solid while politicians, rightly or wrongly, are looked at as another tribe. Hopefully, leaders in both political parties will look at what Edelman has shown about their tarnished brands and whether craven or not, at least position themselves so they appear allied with science and the desperate needs of citizens today rather than an opponent of it.   – Steve Clemons     Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE     On Wednesday, our 3D journalism platform — The Hill Virtually Live — hosted Safeguarding Seniors: Healthcare in a Health Crisis with House members Doris MatsuiDoris Okada MatsuiDozens of Democrats plan to vote remotely in a first for the House Hillicon Valley: Experts raise security concerns about online voting | Musk finds supporter in Trump | Officials warn that Chinese hackers targeting COVID-19 research groups Democrats introduce legislation to ensure internet access for college students MORE (D-Calif.), Bill JohnsonWilliam (Bill) Leslie JohnsonThe Hill's Campaign Report: Republicans go on the hunt for new convention site Police unions coalition director: Biden 'off the deep end' in calls for reform Ex-CBO director calls for more than  trillion in coronavirus stimulus spending MORE (R-Ohio) and Fred UptonFrederick (Fred) Stephen UptonBipartisan Senate group offers new help to state, local governments Bipartisan bill aims to help smallest businesses weather the coronavirus crisis Lawmakers press HHS for answers on coronavirus drug distribution MORE (R-Mich).    Dr. Patrice Harris of the American Medical Association, AARP’s Nancy LeaMond, Karen Freeman-Wilson of the Chicago Urban League and Alliance for Aging Research’s Sue Peschin also joined us for a discussion on supporting seniors, tackling disparities and the role of innovation in the age of COVID-19. Watch the full program video here.  Keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive and follow @TheHillEvents for news on upcoming programs.       CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 3,247,648 reported cases of coronavirus cases around the world. 230,615  have died from the virus. 61,547 have died in America.   The U.S. is reporting 1.053,036. Spain 239,639. Italy 205,463. 166,628 cases in France. 166,443 in the U.K. 120,204 in Turkey, Russia is now reporting 106,498 cases. Iran 94,640. China 83,944. 16,117 in Pakistan. 3,037 in Bahrain. 2,954 cases in Thailand — where daily infections have stayed in the single digits for four consecutive days.    New York is reporting 304,372  cases. New Jersey 116,365 cases. Massachusetts 60,265. 50,538 in Illinois. 48,870 in California. 46,458 in Pennsylvania. Iowa is reporting 7,147 cases. 6,950 in Alabama. 6,520 in Wisconsin. 5,136 in Minnesota. Nevada reports 5,025.  With testing capabilities now at the center of the national reopening debate, the U.S. has conducted 6,065,570 coronavirus tests. 124,449 in the US have reported full recoveries from COVID-19.   WASHINGTON WATCH  US intelligence agency says COVID-19 “not manmade or genetically modified.” The top U.S. spy agency in a rare public statement Thursday said it agreed with "the widespread scientific consensus" that the coronavirus was "not manmade or genetically modified," but also said it was investigating whether it emerged from a laboratory in Wuhan, China. (The Hill)    Pentagon moves to increase production of coronavirus testing swabs. Pentagon spokesman Lt. Mike Andrews said in a Wednesday statement, Puritan Medical Products “will quickly establish a new manufacturing facility capable of doubling its current monthly output of 20 million to 40 million swabs." (The Hill)   Bipartisan group of lawmakers back efforts to expand telehealth services for seniors. Lawmakers on both sides of the aisle are throwing their support behind efforts to expand telehealth services, especially for elderly patients, to help combat the coronavirus. Speaking at The Hill’s first virtual event on Wednesday, Reps. Doris Matsui (D-Calif.) and Bill Johnson (R-Ohio) highlighted how telehealth allows elderly patients to receive proper medical care and checkups during the pandemic while staying at home. (The Hill)  LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. John CornynJohn CornynGOP chairmen stake out turf in Obama-era probes Cornyn presses DOJ to release results of investigation into Larry Nassar probe Minority caucuses call for quick action on police reform MORE (R-Texas)  @JohnCornyn Little bit of encouraging news: 46% of confirmed #COVID__19 cases in Texas have recovered so far.   Rep. Karen BassKaren  Ruth BassHouse Judiciary Committee to hold hearing on police brutality next week Minority caucuses call for quick action on police reform Hoyer: Gassing of protestors 'worthy' of Trump censure MORE (D-Calif.) @RepKarenBass Pregnant women who are incarcerated should not be in tiny prison cells during a global pandemic. Andrea Circle Bear should not be dead right now and neither should the 30 other federal prisoners who have passed away due to COVID-19.   Rep. Greg WaldenGregory (Greg) Paul WaldenGOP lawmakers say Steve King's loss could help them in November Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating Bipartisan lawmakers press Trump administration to get COVID-19 aid to Medicaid providers MORE (R-Ore.)  @repgregwalden For rural healthcare providers, #COVID19 and the ban on elective procedures have been a financial one-two punch. I'm grateful to @HHSGov for pushing out $394,606,116 from the CARES Act to Oregon hospitals and providers.  ACROSS THE NATION        All LA County residents, even those without symptoms, can now get tested for COVID-19. Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti has long characterized expanding COVID-19 testing to all Angelenos, including those without symptoms, as a critical milestone that needed to be met before leaders could consider lifting some restrictions. And now, he says, that milestone is a reality. (Los Angeles Times)    D.C. health chief says city may not reopen for another three months in worst-case scenario. A top Washington, D.C., health official said late Wednesday that it could be another three months before the city resumes normal operations in a worst-case scenario. LaQuandra Nesbitt, director of the District of Columbia Department of Health, said in a virtual town hall that the “most stringent” plan for stemming the spread of the coronavirus would prevent the city from reopening for at least three months, NBC4 Washington reported. (The Hill)    Michigan court rules governor’s stay-at-home order does not violate constitutional rights. A Michigan court on Wednesday ruled that Gov. Gretchen Whitmer's (D) stringent stay-at-home order in response to the coronavirus outbreak does not violate residents' constitutional rights, denying a motion for a preliminary injunction. Five Michigan residents filed a lawsuit against the governor and other state officials claiming that the quarantine measures infringed on their constitutional rights to procedural and substantive due process. (The Hill)    How might coronavirus reshape society? Will the commercial real estate market collapse as more people work from home? Will elbow bumps replace handshakes and hugs? Or, more darkly, will there be rampant discrimination against people wrongly thought to be carriers of the pathogen? Medical historians and experts say humanity's past experiences with diseases have shaped the world we know today, from the way our cities are constructed to modern privacy laws and even the way people think about sex. (The Hill)  WORLD VIEW   Trump: Sweden paying “heavily” for not locking down nation. President Trump defended his decision to support social distancing measures and states that have implemented stay-at-home orders on Thursday, pointing to coronavirus deaths in Sweden, which has largely allowed businesses to remain open during the pandemic. (The Hill)    Anger rises among Russia's doctors as coronavirus hospitals get put on lockdown. The coronavirus pandemic has put the spotlight on the risks faced by front-line health workers, and Russia is no exception. Medical facilities in the country have emerged as one of the main breeding grounds for COVID-19, and two dozen hospitals have had to shut down for long quarantines, with many doctors falling sick. The numbers are stark. On Thursday, Russia's total number of reported coronavirus cases surpassed the 100,000 mark, exceeding numbers reported from Iran and China. (CNN)    Chile backtracks immunity claims amid outcry over “passports” for recovered patients. Health Minister Jaime Mañalich is backtracking earlier remarks that suggested most people who recover from coronavirus infections will remain immune for a “minimum of three months” — a claim that directly contradicts the World Health Organization and other experts who say it is far too early to determine whether all recovered patients will gain immunity and, if they do, for how long. (Washington Post)   SCIENCE VA still using hydroxychloroquine. Veterans Affairs Secretary Robert WilkieRobert Leon WilkieVA initiates process to remove headstones with Nazi symbols On The Money: Trump signs order targeting social media firms' legal protections | 2M more Americans file new jobless claims, pushing total past 40M | White House to forgo summer economic forecast amid COVID-19, breaking precedent Overnight Defense: Trump extends deployment of National Guard troops to aid with coronavirus response | Pentagon considers reducing quarantine to 10 days | Lawmakers push for removal of Nazi headstones from VA cemeteries MORE defended the department's use of an unproven anti-malaria drug for treating patients with COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, saying the drug was only being administered to high-risk veterans. (The Hill)  BUSINESS 3.8 million more Americans file for unemployment benefits. Initial unemployment claims reached 3.8 million last week, the sixth consecutive week with millions of new claims as the coronavirus pandemic continues to wreak havoc on the U.S. economy. The new figure brings the six-week total of new claims to more than 30 million, by some estimates one-fifth of the entire American workforce. (The Hill)   Only half way there on job losses? McKinsey says 57 million jobs vulnerable in U.S. and 59 million in Europe to coronavirus shock. While leisure and hospitality accounted for most of the earliest layoffs and furloughs, the share from industries such as retail trade, manufacturing, nonessential healthcare and professional services has been growing. McKinsey Global Institute estimated that up to 57 million U.S. jobs are now vulnerable, including more and more white-collar positions. By way of context, some 59 million jobs are at risk in the European Union, the United Kingdom and Switzerland, which have a considerably larger population. (McKinsey Global Institute)   Liability shield for businesses emerges as new fight over reopening. The business community is pressuring the White House and Congress to shield companies from lawsuits as they seek to reopen. Democrats, labor unions and trial attorneys have voiced fierce opposition to a liability shield for employers. But top Republican lawmakers and the Trump administration appear eager to extend businesses of all sizes a layer of legal protection from any coronavirus-related litigation. (The Hill)  IDEAS, CAUSES, PASSION We need to take a cold hard look at the World Health Organization. The United States is the largest contributor to the WHO, so the loss of America’s assessed dues or voluntary donations means a lot. Doesn’t that mean that the United States should get its way and that the WHO should change its tune when the U.S. says it must? (Roger Cochetti for The Hill)  COVID-19 crisis: Wake-up call for the world to go digital. More than 26 million Americans filed for unemployment in the past four weeks due to COVID-19. Digitalization and automation are filling some gaps, but when the dust settles, will digital agents and robots have replaced those jobs for good? Was COVID-19 the wake-up call for the world to go digital? (Mark Minevich and Chetan Dube for The Hill)  GENEROUS SPIRITS British veteran promoted by the Queen on his 100th birthday after raising millions to fight coronavirus. The veteran known as "Capt. Tom," who raised tens of millions of dollars for the British National Health Service, turned 100 Thursday, receiving a promotion from the Queen to the rank of colonel and a special flyover to commemorate his achievements. (Good Morning America)  You better watch out, you better not cry — Santa Claus is coming to FaceTime. Santa Claus is taking some time out of his busy list-checking schedule to host virtual meetings with children across the nation, reminding them to stay positive and well-behaved during the ongoing coronavirus pandemic. (Fox News)   ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews NATO Deputy Secretary General MIRCEA GENONA  > Steve interviews Vanda Pharmaceuticals President and CEO MIHAEL POLYMEROPOULOS > Steve interviews Seattle Mayor JENNY DURKAN > Steve interviews Pfizer’s chief scientist MIKAEL DOLSTEN  > Steve interviews UAE Ambassador to U.S. YOUSEF AL OTAIBA  > Steve interviews Sen. CHRISTOPHER COONS (D-Del.)  > Steve interviews Edelman Public Relations CEO RICHARD EDELMAN  > Steve interviews Rep. DONNA SHALALA (D-Fla.)  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES      Wedding bells, reimagined. Congratulations to our reader Joseph Casavecchia and his wife, Emma, who – despite their long-anticipated wedding being canceled due to the pandemic – were still able to tie the knot at an audience-free destination wedding in the Grand Canyon. Read the full story here.   SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.    VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Rep. Trey HollingsworthJoseph (Trey) Albert HollingsworthThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Hurd says China engaged in global disinformation campaign; US unemployment highest since Great Depression  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Chef José Andrés says most political leaders today are not acting with urgency; Dems crafting 'Rooseveltian' relief package Former Surgeon General Vivek Murthy says public health threat of loneliness compounded by COVID-19; Trump says task force will 'evolve' MORE (R-Ind.), formerly a small-business owner. Read the interview below: Clemons: Where is the right equilibrium between what you see as a public health standard we should meet and getting the economy going. How are you approaching this?     Clemons: This is a kind of nefarious disease and nefarious virus that people don't see and don't feel until it hits them. And so how do we get reopening right?  Hollingsworth: Steve, you are exactly right we need to listen to the scientists. But what we need to develop from the scientists is a rubric of those populations that are most susceptible and those populations that are least susceptible. Those industries that have the most contact, and those industries that have the least contact, those geographies that are the most likely to have a high incidence rate of infection. And those geographies that are having a low incidence rate of infection. I absolutely believe that the shelter-in-place order put in place a month ago made sense, tooflatten the curve, made sense to delay the onset of significant health care capacity consumption by COVID-19 patients. But shelter in place is not a long-term strategy. The long-term strategy should derive from real and material scientific advancement both and biologically pushing back against this disease. Anti-virals — we've seen some great news on that in the past few weeks, obviously continue with the vaccine. But also ensuring that we talk about those people that are the least susceptible. How do we get them back? Those industries where there's less contact, how do we get them back engaged? Those geographies where there's less incidence rate. How do we get them back to more of their normal life? We don't have to say to the American people, “All of you need to stay in your homes, living healthily but not necessarily happily, or there'll be widespread casualties from coast to coast.” What we should tell them is this is “This is a challenging situation. We have the best biologists in the world. We have the best economists in the world, and we're going to get the most amount of people back to the most amount of their normal life and the normal economy as possible, while keeping the susceptible populations as safe as possible while minimizing transmissions even while we do that. “   Clemons: Take your congressman hat off for a minute and imagine yourself back in your old job. As I understand it, you had an aluminum manufacturing a small business, something along those lines. How would you go about doing it if you were back in that role of running that company? Hollingsworth: Well, it's a great question, right? The first thing that we need from government is certainty. What are the rules of the road? What are the best practices? We need the CDC, we need others to come out and say, “Here's the best practices for how to approach getting back to work.” That certainty is really, really important. And I think we've seen some firms that are taking what they know already and beginning to develop protocols on how they're gonna keep their employees safe. It includes things like wearing a mask any time that you're indoors and around people, having still virtual conferences, even if you're in the same building, even if you're in the same room, having virtual conferences versus getting close together. It includes temperature checks for everyone who walks through the door. It includes extra rigorous cleaning every single night. It includes staggering shifts, so we have fewer people in office buildings, fewer people in factories at any given point in time. All of these can contribute to lowering that transmission mechanism. It also includes, by the way, ensuring that those older populations which by and large have been more susceptible, that they continue to telework while we bring younger populations and their counterparts in to continue work inside the office or inside the factory at the same time. These are all parts of a solution. We need the private sector to continue to innovate and develop biological cures, biological treatments, but also the best practices to biologically minimize the transmission between people.   Clemons: The issue about testing has become kind of a blur for me. Where does as as a person in your community and talking every day to small businesses and your constituents, but also as a member of Congress, can you help me understand where we're at with getting a regular and predictable testing foundation that everyone says we need to proceed?  Hollingsworth: You know, Steve, I'm so glad, you are really, really thoughtful about this issue to say it is getting muddled. We're talking about all different types of tests at the same time, all different manner by which of getting results. There are two separate tests that need to happen at the same time, and we have to build capacity for, right. The first test is testing to see if you have the actual disease, a diagnostic test to determine if you have the disease. What we have struggled with is how long it takes to get the results of that. We've seen some tremendous innovations that brought those results in a very, very short amount of time, so that if you go and get a test, you can know in the next hour, in the next two hours, in the next day, whether you have it, whether you need to quarantine yourself, whether you need to stay away from other people. ... That's one big testing category that we've done a good job of ramping up. We can do even better. I know the president said he wants to get to the point where we’re doing 5 million a day. We've reached the max of doing 314,000 a day roughly. That is more than any other country around the world. But we're gonna continue to expand that. We've got a lot of locations and districts that are just stepping up and starting their more robust testing as well at local Wal-Marts, local community colleges, etc. That's one big area testing. The second big area of testing is we need to find out where this is in our community. Right now you have to show symptoms. Walk through a physician’s door, prove to that physician that you've shown symptoms, then you get tested. But the big thing we need to transition to is let's go find this it in our communities. We need to start testing out there for who has this but is asymptomatic? Who has had it in the last couple of months and is not likely to get reinfected? Once we know the underlying incidence rate not just of the sick population but in the general population, we can begin to understand the trajectory of any potential outbreak going forward. That is critical going forward to ensure that we allow the right geographies, the right populations to get back to work without risking a larger scale epidemic.   Clemons: Heroism is not being hung on D.C. right now. It's emerging in other places. And I'm wondering, given what you just said, who do you see as the heroes in this time? Hollingsworth: The reality is I go around the district and talk to people all the time. Now it's been virtually, it's been over the phone over the last month or so, but I have never once in any of my town halls in any of my meetings, in any of my round tables, I have never once heard somebody respond when I asked the question, "Where is the greatness of America? What creates America's greatness?" I’ve never once heard anybody, whether they're in elementary school or whether they are a senior citizens group in a nursing home, I’ve never heard them say it's 535 politicians in D.C. Nobody thinks that Washington is the reason this country is great. What I hear from people is that it is hard working Americans getting up every single day, doing their jobs, creating their better futures, leading their churches, leading their communities, helping out in health care, giving of their time to help our senior citizens, that is what makes this country great, it is what has always made this country great. In this crisis that has come to the forefront is our health care heroes have stepped up and said, “I will stand between America and the widespread epidemic.” As our firefighters, our police officers do what they can to get food to our senior citizen so that they don't have to get out and risk it themselves. I've seen unbelievable acts of small businesses that have stopped making alcohol and started making hand sanitizer and giving that away. We have seen tremendous examples of Americans stepping up, and it is what has made this country great for 240 years and what will make this country great for the next 240 years. It's Americans, generation after generation, continuing to step up in spite, not because of, but in spite of what they see in Washington, D.C.VIEW BREAKING NEWS ON CORONAVIRUS    WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > Promising data on treating coronavirus; Fauci calls it “quite good news” > Approval of Trump’s handling of crisis drops 10 points > Trump orders meat plants to remain open amid health concerns  > 3 in 4 Americans favor continued social distancing   THE INTERVIEWRep. Donna ShalalaDonna Edna ShalalaThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Former NIC Director Greg Treverton rips US response; WHO warns of 'immediate second peak' if countries reopen too quickly  Treasury has not disbursed B in airline support: oversight panel We can't afford to let local news die MORE (D-Fla.), former Health and Human Services secretary, says America’s plans to reopen are erratic and need to be science-informed, says President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE is ‘literally dangerous to our health,' says Florida Gov. Ron DeSantisRonald Dion DeSantisDeSantis pushing to host Republican National Convention in Florida Florida bars and theaters to reopen starting Friday, DeSantis says DeSantis says he's sending 500 National Guard troops to DC MORE is a'rookie'       Watch the full interview here.         ICYMI: Richard Edelman talks about TRUST. Worth the watch.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Wednesday, April 29.  Editor’s Note.    Gilead roused the stock market because of promising results on one phase of a clinical trial of the drug, Remdesivir. Over the weekend, Oxford University released news about positive results of a potential vaccine in rhesus monkeys. Each day, we are waiting for some glimpse of promise in vaccines and antivirals that may quickly end this era of COVID-19. But this kind of hope is potentially destructive. It has led the president of the United States and some members of his team to quickly tout them in the hope that they might work. Witness hydroxychloroquine, which is being stockpiled by some nations around the world. What needs to temper hope is scientific method, double blind tests, control groups for vaccines and antivirals. As Sen. Christopher CoonsChristopher (Chris) Andrew CoonsCoronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Michelle McMurry-Heath Republicans turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks Voting rights, public health officials roll out guidelines to protect voters from COVID-19 MORE (D-Del.) reminded me the other day, there has “never” been an FDA-approved, efficacious vaccine developed to fight any coronavirus. That's not to say there won't be. The world's best minds and lots of economic and scientific resources are focused on the same vital challenge for mankind. But a daily hit of news that ticks us up or down on what the scientists have found — before these results have been appropriately, scientifically vetted — will yield false hopes, illusion and I believe depression. What we can do in the meantime as we wait for real results is to focus on those damaged today — those who are ill, and those who are vulnerable like our seniors and homeless and those who have lost paychecks. My interview with Rep. Donna Shalala (D-Fla.) will focus on paycheck protections in the next round of economic stimulus and also about how to manage a science-informed reopening of the American economy,     And should you have time, check out the recording of a live event “The Hill Virtually Live” hosted this afternoon: Safeguarding Seniors: Healthcare in a Health Crisis with Reps. Doris MatsuiDoris Okada MatsuiDozens of Democrats plan to vote remotely in a first for the House Hillicon Valley: Experts raise security concerns about online voting | Musk finds supporter in Trump | Officials warn that Chinese hackers targeting COVID-19 research groups Democrats introduce legislation to ensure internet access for college students MORE (D-Calif.), Bill JohnsonWilliam (Bill) Leslie JohnsonThe Hill's Campaign Report: Republicans go on the hunt for new convention site Police unions coalition director: Biden 'off the deep end' in calls for reform Ex-CBO director calls for more than  trillion in coronavirus stimulus spending MORE (R-Ohio) and Fred UptonFrederick (Fred) Stephen UptonBipartisan Senate group offers new help to state, local governments Bipartisan bill aims to help smallest businesses weather the coronavirus crisis Lawmakers press HHS for answers on coronavirus drug distribution MORE (R-Mich.). (More details below.)    We have a lot of gaps in our social safety net today that will remain whether a miracle drug is found tomorrow or not — and likely not — so it's important to maintain a wide aperture in how we think of “curing ourselves” in this coronavirus era.   – Steve Clemons   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE       Earlier today, our 3D journalism platform — The Hill ‘Virtually’ Live — hosted Safeguarding Seniors: Healthcare in a Health Crisis with House members Doris Matsui (D-Calif.), Bill Johnson (R-Ohio) and Fred Upton (R-Mich).    Dr. Patrice Harris of the American Medical Association, AARP’s Nancy LeaMond, Karen Freeman-Wilson of the Chicago Urban League and Alliance for Aging Research’s Sue Peschin also joined us for a discussion on supporting seniors, tackling disparities and the role of innovation in the age of COVID-19. Watch this space for the full program video.    Keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive and follow @TheHillEvents for news on upcoming programs.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 3,157,459 reported global cases of COVID-19. 219,611 people have lost their lives from the virus.    The U.S. is reporting 1,023,304 cases, more than four times as many as Spain, whose 236,899 cases are the second most in the world. 203,591 cases in Italy. 169,053 in France. 162,357 in the U.K. 117,589 in Turkey. 99,399 in Russia. 73,235 in Brazil. 31,787 in India. 21,402 in Saudi Arabia. Sweden – whose unusual approach to not lock down and, instead, focus on protecting vulnerable groups and building “herd immunity” – is reporting 20,302 cases.    58,471 have died in America from COVID-19.  New York has reported 299,691 cases. New Jersey 113,856. Massachusetts 58,302. 48,102 in Illinois. California is reporting 46,483 cases. 45,928 in Pennsylvania. 10,052 in Tennessee. 8,247 in Rhode Island. 4,375 in Kentucky. 4,345 in Utah. 1,433 in Puerto Rico. 57 cases in the U.S. Virgin Islands.    5,795,728 people have been tested in the U.S. for the virus, and 116,133 of them have reported full recoveries from COVID-19.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Trump orders meat plants to stay open in pandemic. President Trump signed an executive order Tuesday evening compelling meat processors to remain open to head off shortages in the nation’s food supply chains, despite mounting reports of plant worker deaths due to COVID-19. Trump invoked the Defense Production Act to classify meat plants as essential infrastructure that must remain open. (Washington Post)    Approval for Trump's handling of coronavirus drops 10 points. President Trump’s approval rating for his handling of the coronavirus dropped 10 points from last month after an initial bump, according to a new Emerson College poll. The president’s overall approval rating has also ticked downward since last month, dropping from 46 percent to 41 percent. (The Hill)   GOP faces pressure to get tougher with Trump. Republicans in the Senate are under growing pressure to take the administration to task for its response to the coronavirus. GOP senators, with a few exceptions, have been reluctant to criticize the administration, but they are starting to re-evaluate that kid-glove treatment amid public frustration over the lack of virus testing kits and protective equipment and reports of taxpayer dollars going to questionable causes. (The Hill)  House Democrat unveils bill requiring coronavirus materials to be translated into multiple languages. Rep. Grace MengGrace MengDe Blasio, John Cho, Rep. Grace Meng unite for event to fight racism against Asian Americans NY Democrats call for mortgage forgiveness in next coronavirus relief bill  Hillicon Valley: Experts worry U.S. elections vulnerable due to COVID-19 | Report finds states need more federal election funds | Republican senators to introduce coronavirus-related privacy bill  MORE (D-N.Y.) introduced a bill Tuesday that would require all coronavirus information released by the federal government be provided in at least 19 languages. “It is unacceptable that federal agencies have not provided all these translations, but the passage of my bill would ensure that they finally do,” Meng said. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. Tammy BaldwinTammy Suzanne BaldwinDemocrats introduce bill to rein in Trump's power under Insurrection Act 21 senators urge Pentagon against military use to curb nationwide protests Warren calls for investigation into OSHA inspections during pandemic MORE (D-Wis.)  @SenatorBaldwin Today I introduced the Medical Supply Transparency and Delivery Act with  @ChrisMurphyCT, @SenSchumer  and 43 Senate Democrats to require @POTUS  to unlock the full power of the DPA to mobilize a federal response to COVID19 that increases production of testing supplies and #PPE.   Sen. Rick Scott (R-Fla.) @SenRickScott Congress shouldn’t shield states from the consequences of their own bad budgetary decisions over the past few decades. States will need to make some tough choices, which is what grown-ups do in tough economic times.   Rep. Frank Palone Jr. (D-N.J.)  @FrankPallone I’m glad @Apple and @Google are taking privacy seriously and have made important changes to how their program works. Your privacy should not be arbitrarily sacrificed in the search for ways to leverage technology to mitigate the spread of #COVID19.  ACROSS THE NATION        Poll: 3 in 4 favor continued social distancing. Nearly 3 out of 4 Americans questioned in a new poll said they are in favor of continued social distancing to help fight the coronavirus pandemic, despite multiple states starting to reopen parts of their economies. In the Politico/Morning Consult poll of registered voters, 73 percent of respondents said that they are in favor of continued social distancing, while 15 percent said that it should be ended to help the country's flailing economy, even if it contributes to the further spread of COVID-19. (The Hill)   Half of Americans say they or someone in their household has been financially impacted by the pandemic: poll. Half of Americans in a new poll say they or someone in their household has been financially impacted by the coronavirus pandemic. An NPR/PBS NewsHour/Marist poll released Wednesday shows that 50 percent of Americans, excluding those not employed or retired, say they or someone in their household has been let go or has had their hours reduced at work because of the pandemic. (The Hill) Where all 50 states stand on reopening. More than 97 percent of the U.S. population is currently under a stay-at-home or shelter-in-place order as the coronavirus pandemic continues to upend life as we know it. Nearly 60,000 people have died in America. But worries for the economy — and people's mental health — are raising the question: When will things go back to normal? And what will that normal even look like? (CNN)  WORLD VIEW   Airborne coronavirus detected in Wuhan Hospitals. Adding to growing evidence that the novel coronavirus can spread through air, scientists have identified genetic markers of the virus in airborne droplets, many with diameters smaller than one-ten-thousandth of an inch. That had been previously demonstrated in laboratory experiments, but now Chinese scientists studying real-world conditions report that they captured tiny droplets containing the genetic markers of the virus from the air in two hospitals in Wuhan, China, where the outbreak started. (New York Times)    “Life has to go on.” How Sweden has faced the virus without a lockdown. Trust is high in Sweden — in government, institutions and fellow Swedes. When the government defied conventional wisdom and refused to order a wholesale lockdown to “flatten the curve” of the coronavirus epidemic, public health officials pointed to trust as a central justification. Swedes, they said, could be trusted to stay home, follow social distancing protocols and wash their hands to slow the spread of the virus — without any mandatory orders. And, to a large extent, Sweden does seem to have been as successful in controlling the virus as most other nations. (New York Times)   Nigeria’s coronavirus cases jump by single-day record of 195 cases. Nigeria on Tuesday confirmed a total number of new 195 coronavirus cases in the country. Nigeria’s economic hubs Lagos and Kano have the highest numbers. Although Africa seems to have been largely spared from the initial wave of the virus, experts worry that the continent’s health systems will be quickly overwhelmed should the virus roar its head on Africa as it has the rest of the world. (The Guardian)   SCIENCE Gilead touts “positive data” on drug as coronavirus treatment. Gilead Sciences said Wednesday it is aware of “positive data” emerging from a clinical trial studying one of its drugs as a potential treatment for COVID-19. The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases’s (NIAID) study of Remdesivir, an experimental antiviral, has reached its primary endpoint, Gilead said, meaning the drug was found to be effective in the trial. (The Hill)    Fauci calls results “good news.”  NIAID Director Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE on Wednesday reacted to the findings, calling it “quite good news.” (The Hill)   Early studies show some promise in coronavirus immunity. Some early studies seem to suggest that the coronavirus leaves behind antibodies that have made close relatives to humans such as macaques immune, at least in the short run. Two studies of macaques that had been infected, recovered and then exposed to the virus again failed to find any monkeys who got sick a second time. “In general, we would not expect potential for immediate reinfection. That would be novel as hell,” said Nita Bharti, a biologist at the Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics at Penn State. (The Hill)  BUSINESS US GDP shrank 4.8 percent in first quarter amid biggest contraction since the financial crisis. Gross domestic product fell 4.8 percent in the first quarter, according to government numbers released Wednesday that provide the first detailed glimpse into the deep damage the coronavirus has wreaked on the U.S. economy. (CNBC)   US Olympic and Paralympic Committee announced sports recommendations for COVID-19 era. In response to a growing need among athletes and sports organizations, the U.S. Olympic & Paralympic Committee (USOPC) has announced new recommendations for safe athlete training and sports event planning around COVID-19. Dr. Jonathan Finnoff, the organization's chief medical officer, said during a virtual townhall today, “Until COVID-19 is either eradicated, a vaccine is developed, or a cure is found, there is no way of completely eliminating the risk of fatal infection. Our advice is to be careful, be systematic, and work closely with your public health officials.”   IDEAS, CAUSES, PASSION The pandemic’s lesson: Going it alone does not work. Obviously, we cannot be naive about the immediate prospects for seamless international cooperation. But the big lesson of the pandemic is that going at it alone can have universally devastating economic, health and social effects. Our national leaders — and our voters — need to recognize that the alternative to global unity of effort may be widespread and catastrophic effects on our health, our food, our physical safety and our security. (Michael Chertoff for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS TikTok, Bill Gates donating $20M to help coronavirus fight in Africa. Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates and social media platform TikTok have donated $20 million to a global health partnership that will deploy vaccines for the novel coronavirus in Africa after they are developed.  (The Hill)  ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews former Senate Majority Leader BILL FRIST  > Steve interviews NATO Deputy Secretary General MIRCEA GENONA  > Steve interviews Vanda Pharmaceuticals President and CEO MIHAEL POLYMEROPOULOS > Steve interviews Seattle Mayor JENNY DURKAN > Steve interviews Pfizer’s chief scientist MIKAEL DOLSTEN  > Steve interviews UAE Ambassador to U.S. YOUSEF AL OTAIBA  > Steve interviews Sen. CHRISTOPHER COONS (D-Del.)  > Steve interviews Edelman Public Relations CEO RICHARD EDELMAN    Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.   CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.    VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill’s Steve Clemons asks Rep. Donna ShalalaDonna Edna ShalalaThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Former NIC Director Greg Treverton rips US response; WHO warns of 'immediate second peak' if countries reopen too quickly  Treasury has not disbursed B in airline support: oversight panel We can't afford to let local news die MORE (D-Fla.) what exactly she sees wrong in the way America is trying to reopen for her to introduce her legislation, the Reopen America Act. Read some excerpts from the interview below: Rep. Donna Shalala: [What we’ve seen thus far] is erratic. It's not systematic, and it's not necessarily based on science, but rather on a lot of pressure to open up the economy and for people to get back to work. And I'm very worried we haven't done the level of testing we need to do. We don't have the supplies that we need to test even the health care workers or even the people that are cleaning the buildings in our health care institutions. We haven't tested everyone in the grocery stores or in the drugstores. We're not anywhere near where any scientist or physician would say it's time to reopen. Some of that is because the federal government has not done what it needs to do. We don't need a lot of lists of guidance from the CDC. We need the federal government to be the purchaser of all of this PPE, this equipment that we need, the testing devices. As a single buyer, they could drive down the prices. They can purchase in large quantities. They can distribute it around the country. They have the most magnificent military in the world that are used to doing these kinds of things. Second, the states need to have similar strategies in relationship to the science. We can't have governors — many of them are trying hard — we can't have governors have different strategies based on different facts opening up their states. Because what about the state next to them? This disease does not know what state it's in. This virus is going to continue to move around unless all of the states have similar data and similar strategies with the adjustments they need to make for their own states. Rural states may have a slightly different approach than urban places. I represent Miami, for example, and the beaches, and we would have a slightly different strategy. But this is about data, not about a date. And this virus needs to be squeezed. We need a hammer on it to get it down —  all the way down — before we open up.   Clemons: Miami Mayor Francis X. Suarez, when I interviewed him, said that Miami had been the first place to have a stay at home order and a curfew in place but he also said Gov. Ron DeSantisRonald Dion DeSantisDeSantis pushing to host Republican National Convention in Florida Florida bars and theaters to reopen starting Friday, DeSantis says DeSantis says he's sending 500 National Guard troops to DC MORE did not operate with the same level of early concern that the City of Miami did. We here the governor is now trying to reopen cautiously. Is Florida still at odds internally, over have how to handle this?  Shalala: I think our governor is new. He's a rookie. He's being pulled in different directions. Our unemployment insurance system has been a disaster, and he's been focused also on that. But again, we are not getting clear direction from him in which every part of the state is staying in place. This opening up of the beaches is dangerous. The opening up of golf courses, in my judgment, makes no sense. We don't have a statewide strategy as such. And so you have mayors that are tough-minded that are paying attention to the scientists and physicians — like the mayor of Miami, the mayor of Miami Beach, the mayor of Cutler Bay and Palmetto Bay, the mayor of the city I live in, Coral Gables. They are being much more restrictive, much more tough minded. And they're all admitting we don't have the testing in place that we need to have in place before we open up.   Clemons: You have run Health and Human Services, a major university as well. I’m scratching my head wondering how good people who are not political in the CDC, the FDA, and others — who are trying do the right thing — got testing kits so badly wrong. What does your gut tell you about what went wrong? Shalala: I think the White House, basically the White House and the leadership, or the lack of leadership — the erratic leadership with the president. He is literally, Steve, dangerous to our health. He moves from one side to the other. He makes one decision and then says, "well, let the states do it." This is the United States of America. We're not back to the Articles of Confederation in which the states were fighting with each other. The states are competing with each other for testing supplies. The hospitals are competing with each other. We don't have a national strategy. We have a national list of suggestions. You cannot deal with a virus this way. You've got to use the scientist physicians, the world class people at the federal level to not only give us advice but to approve state plans. We ought to fund state plans. This ought not to be left to state budgets. We ought to be funding state plans, but they have got to be based on good science — or this virus is going to continue to spread across the country and to spike across the country.   Clemons: One of the things we saw in the last couple of days was what I call a "Do as I say, not as I do" moment. When the vice president went to the Mayo Clinic and didn't put on a mask. If you were a Cabinet secretary again or you were vice president and visiting the Mayo Clinic, would you wear a mask?   Shalala: Absolutely. And in fact, most of us wore masks when we we went back to vote. We wore masks in the chamber. I wore a mask all day long. Even when I did the interviews, the stand up interviews over in the Cannon Building, I wore my mask. I mean, we are leaders, and we have to send a clear message, and the vice president should have had his mask on. When I was secretary of HHS, if there was a mask requirement, I had a mask on.    Clemons: Yesterday, I did this show on the subject of trust, with Richard Edelman, and there's been a lot of discussions about public interest and private interests and those crossing lines who are in public roles. Your stock sales have come up and you have addressed that saying it was a mistake, and I don't want to get there. But I want to ask what the public should expect in these moments from public officials like yourself, about what standard you should be setting at this time and get your insights into that. What are your views on what the public should be expecting? Shalala: Well, I think the public has found out over these months that government is important, and that standards for public officials are also important. But the importance of government — we spent years and this administration has been cutting the size of government and not filling important positions at the CDC, at the FDA, in the public health service, and it's been to our detriment at this point, and of course we have to have transparency and we have to have accountability, and I believe in both of those. But I think parents at home with their kids are finding out that their teachers are really important. I think they're beginning to see the role and the importance of the public schools in particular, because most kids in this country are in public schools and the importance of those teachers. And we're seeing in our world-class scientists the importance of the investments we've made in those scientists and the disinvestments that we've made and the heartbreak of having a CDC that had to struggle, and a public health service that has had to struggle in this pandemic. So I think faith in government is going to return and faith in the people that teach our children, provide services for the elderly and lead states and local governments as well as who leads our national government both in the Cabinet as well as in the presidency — that this makes a difference whether we live or die, that this is not just about whether we're healthy economically. This is about life and death and the quality of that leadership, the transparency, the accountability — has to do with life and death. Richard Edelman, CEO of the Edelman public relations groups, said business needs to “step into the void” left by a lack of trust in traditional sources of information. “Business has to step into the void left by lack of quality information,” Edelman told Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, in an interview Tuesday. “The media is seen as politicized. Government is seen as episodic. And so whether you're a corporation or you're a brand, you have a duty to inform your employees, who then can share that information more broadly,” Edelman added.  Edelman said that trust in businesses is contingent on the perception that their commitment to solve problems during the recession is greater than their will to make profits. He named companies such as Starbucks and Sodexo that have found ways to continue operations amid the pandemic.  “You also have an obligation to be in the business of solutions and not selling,” he said. “You should be seen as somehow helping this country get back on its feet, to keep as many people as you can employed, to include small businesses in the supply chain.”VIEW BREAKING NEWS ON CORONAVIRUS    WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > U.S. hits grim milestone of 1,000,000 cases  > Trump hosts Florida Gov. Ron DeSantisRonald Dion DeSantisDeSantis pushing to host Republican National Convention in Florida Florida bars and theaters to reopen starting Friday, DeSantis says DeSantis says he's sending 500 National Guard troops to DC MORE at White House > Senate to convene May 4, House leaders say it’s not safe yet > Schumer calls for hearing to investigate Trump’s mishandling of coronavirus relief  > Mnuchin says no bailout for states with poorly managed budgets  > 36 positive in Wisconsin after election debacle, casting doubt on in-person Nov. voting    Is Congress essential? House leaders on Tuesday reversed course on plans to bring the chamber back into session next week amid fears over whether Congress can safely operate business amid the coronavirus pandemic. House Majority Leader Steny HoyerSteny Hamilton HoyerPelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Calls for police reform sparks divisions in Congress Hoyer wins Maryland House primary MORE (D-Md.), citing discussions with the Capitol physician, announced the change in plans after initially saying Monday that the House would return May 4. This comes as Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnel (R-Ky.) said Monday that the Senate will convene in the Capitol next week. Certainly, there are pressing health concerns that Congress is rightfully heeding, but if much of the country has managed the ever-tricky transition to working remotely, why can’t our elected leaders do so? More than 56,000 people are dead in the U.S. and essential workers on the front lines of the fight against the virus are working around the clock to save lives and keep the country up and running. Without a remote voting system in place, we are still in a waiting game — and, for so many, there is no time to spare.  THE INTERVIEW Richard Edelman says America’s corporate leaders have to step in to COVID-19 void left by politicized media and episodic government; CEOs trusted more than White House       Watch the full interview here.  THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Tuesday, April 28.  Editor’s note.    While people trust family members and close friends — unless they are college students who ran off to Florida’s beaches during spring break — they don’t trust much else. Social trust is what makes communities work. We have built an overlapping, intermeshed system of norms, rules, regulations, expectations that restaurants will be clean, that drugs will be safe, that automobiles will pause at stop signs, that people on the street will not attack us, that our political leaders will tell us the truth — at least more often than not. There is a security in these sorts of social habits that now must be rewired.    Tens of millions of people who have been furloughed or laid off may not trust their employer as much. Political leaders who reopen their economies too soon, or too late, will have trust problems with their constituents. And as my interview subject today, Edelman Public Relations CEO Richard Edelman, said, if firms choose to sell and not solve the problem their customers, workers and broad society are experiencing, those consumers will “punish” them by shifting their loyalties to other firms that have put the safety and welfare of their workers and customers first.   Edelman’s advice to corporate leaders, politicians and just about any stakeholder with a platform and voice in this crisis is to 1. Show up and do your part; 2. Don’t act alone; 3. Solve — don’t sell; and 4. Communicate with emotion. People are hurting and tens of millions have been run over by this crisis. The problem solving, the empathy, the fixing of holes and gaps in our social safety net have to be real and not contrived. That’s one way to restart the seeds of trust in a stressed out time.   – Steve Clemons      Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.          This Wednesday, our new 3D journalism platform The Hill Virtually Live will host an online event — Safeguarding Seniors: Healthcare in a Health Crisis. House Energy and Commerce Committee members Reps. Fred UptonFrederick (Fred) Stephen UptonBipartisan Senate group offers new help to state, local governments Bipartisan bill aims to help smallest businesses weather the coronavirus crisis Lawmakers press HHS for answers on coronavirus drug distribution MORE (R-Mich.), Doris MatsuiDoris Okada MatsuiDozens of Democrats plan to vote remotely in a first for the House Hillicon Valley: Experts raise security concerns about online voting | Musk finds supporter in Trump | Officials warn that Chinese hackers targeting COVID-19 research groups Democrats introduce legislation to ensure internet access for college students MORE (D-Calif.) and Bill JohnsonWilliam (Bill) Leslie JohnsonThe Hill's Campaign Report: Republicans go on the hunt for new convention site Police unions coalition director: Biden 'off the deep end' in calls for reform Ex-CBO director calls for more than  trillion in coronavirus stimulus spending MORE (R-Ohio) will be joining us to talk about supporting seniors, tackling disparities and the role of innovation in the age of COVID-19. They will be followed by a panel featuring Dr. Patrice Harris of the American Medical Association, AARP’s Nancy LeaMond, Karen Freeman-Wilson of the Chicago Urban League and Alliance for Aging Research’s Sue Peschin.  REGISTER HERE and follow @TheHillEvents for additional program updates. Join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.  CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 3,083, 467  reported cases of COVID-19 in the world. The U.S. reached another grim milestone of more than 1 million cases with 1,002,498 reported as of the time of this newsletter. 213,824 people have died from the virus around the globe. Spain is reporting 232,128 cases. 201,505 in Italy. 166,036 in France. 159,137 in Germany. 93,558 in Russia. 92,584 in Iran. 68,188 in Brazil. 23,240 in Ecuador. 14,514 in Pakistan. 4,793 in South Africa.    57,266 have died in America from the coronavirus.    291,996 cases have been reported in New York. 111,188 in New Jersey. 56,462 in Massachusetts. 38,210 in Michigan. 32,848 in Florida. 20,113 in Maryland. 16,325 in Ohio. 13,879 in Colorado. 6,377 in Iowa. 6,081 in Wisconsin. 5,628,374 coronavirus cases have been conducted in the U.S. 112,065 people in America have reported full recoveries from COVID-19.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Schumer calls for hearing on Trump’s ‘abject failure at implementing’ coronavirus relief. Senate Democratic Leader Charles SchumerCharles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerGOP lawmaker calls on Senate to confirm Michael Pack as head of US media agency McConnell blocks resolution condemning Trump over treatment of protesters House Democrat demands answers from Secret Service about role breaking up White House protests MORE (N.Y.) on Tuesday blasted the Trump administration for failing to properly implement the four coronavirus relief packages passed by Congress, saying he would call on the GOP-led Senate to begin oversight hearings next week. “This administration has been an abject failure at implementing most of these laws,” Schumer said on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” on Tuesday. (The Hill)    Mnuchin says no bailout for states with badly managed budgets. Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE said states that had poorly managed budgets before the COVID-19 outbreak sent their economies reeling should not be rescued by the federal government. “This isn’t just going to be a federal bailout of the states,” Mnuchin said early Tuesday on CNBC. (Bloomberg)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Rep. Elaine LuriaElaine Goodman LuriaGun control group rolls out House endorsements  The Hill's Campaign Report: DOJ, intel to be major issues in 2020 House GOP lawmaker breaks with party to back proxy voting MORE (D-Va.)  @RepElaineLuria Temporarily eliminating copays on mail order prescription drugs for TRICARE beneficiaries will protect military families and personnel at military treatment facilities. That's why I joined @RepLBR in introducing the Help Our Heroes Access Medicine Act.   Rep. Matt GaetzMatthew (Matt) GaetzHillicon Valley: Zuckerberg on the defensive over Trump posts | Twitter labels another lawmaker's tweet | USTR opens probe into digital taxes GOP lawmaker wants probe of UPenn's Biden Center for Diplomacy and Global Engagement Twitter restricts tweet from Gaetz for glorifying violence MORE (R-Fla.)  @RepMattGaetz Americans deserve to know who's fighting for what. Democrats are fighting for illegal aliens, upgrades to the Kennedy Center, and bailouts for blue states. Republicans are trying to leverage the strength of this economy for our people, our workers, and our businesses.  ACROSS THE NATION  Governors tiptoe toward reopening across the country. Governors are tiptoeing toward allowing businesses to reopen in their states, a gamble that will have ramifications for both the coronavirus epidemic and the economy. On Monday, governors in Texas and Ohio announced phased reopening plans that will allow some businesses to resume operations over the coming weeks if they follow safety requirements. Montana, Colorado and Tennessee will allow retailers and other businesses to reopen this week in some capacity. (The Hill)    At least 40 Wisconsites test positive after election debacle. At least 40 people who voted in person or worked at polls for Wisconsin's election earlier this month have tested positive for COVID-19, according to the state health department. These developments are bound to cast more uncertainty on the prospect of in-person voting in the November election. (The Hill)  Rhode Island pushes aggressive testing, a move that could ease reopening. Extensive testing is seen as an essential tool, experts say, as states contemplate restarting public life, and search for ways to keep a handle on the virus’s path and signs of new outbreaks in the days and weeks that follow. Five percent of Rhode Island’s residents have undergone a test, compared with about 1 percent of people in states like Texas and Georgia, where reopening efforts are taking shape. (New York Times)   WORLD VIEW   Argentina bans flights until Sept. 1, in one of the world’s most intensive travel restrictions. Argentina announced this week that all commercial flights will be banned to and from the country until Sept. 1 — a restrictive measure that makes the country an outlier as others move toward reopening. The decree, released by Argentina’s National Civil Aviation Administration on Monday, means that airlines cannot sell any tickets for flights to or from the country in the next four months. (Washington Post)     Malaysia puts the breaks on Ramadan amid virus concerns. In Malaysia, the government has extended restrictions on movement until at least May 12 — midway through Ramadan. The country has closed its borders, banned events and gatherings, shut schools and houses of worship, and allowed only essential businesses to operate. Most people can travel only for necessities — exceptions require police approval — within 6 miles of their home, with one person allowed in each car. (Washington Post)   SCIENCE Race for coronavirus vaccine faces early challenges. The world is pinning its hopes on a vaccine to prevent COVID-19. Drug companies are racing to develop a vaccine at breakneck speed, but they’re quickly encountering challenges with clinical trials, production capacity and governmental approval. (The Hill)   BUSINESS Small business loans above $2 million will get full audit to make sure they’re valid, Mnuchin says. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin told CNBC on Tuesday the government will audit any company taking out more than $2 million from the Paycheck Protection Program. “I’m going to be putting out an announcement later this morning that for any loan over $2 million, the Small Business Administration will be doing a full review of that loan before there is loan forgiveness,” Mnuchin said on “Squawk Box.” (CNBC)  Some businesses won’t return relief funds despite pressure from Trump administration. A handful of publicly traded companies say they aren’t planning to return loans received from a small-business rescue program, despite pressure from the Trump administration to repay the funds. Companies in the hotel, cruise ship and medical-device sectors said they are qualified to receive the money under the Paycheck Protection Program and need the funds to stay in business. (Washington Post)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSION  Let’s stop asking, “When are we going back to the office?” For the foreseeable future, the world is going to be even more divided between those who have to go into their place of work and those who have the luxury of continuing to work from home. Those of us who have the privilege of leading organizations and teams that go into an office also have an opportunity to rebalance “office” dynamics. Let’s rise to the occasion and make use of that opportunity for the betterment of everyone. (Joe Andrew for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS          Blue Angels and Thunderbirds flyover to honor coronavirus responders. The U.S. Navy's Blue Angels and the Air Force's Thunderbirds gave a loud salute Tuesday afternoon to health care workers and others on the front lines in the fight against the coronavirus with flyovers in New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania. (NBC News)   ICYMI, STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews former Senate Majority Leader BILL FRIST  > Steve interviews NATO Deputy Secretary General MIRCEA GENONA  > Steve interviews Vanda Pharmaceuticals President and CEO MIHAEL POLYMEROPOULOS > Steve interviews Seattle Mayor JENNY DURKAN > Steve interviews Pfizer’s chief scientist MIKAEL DOLSTEN  > Steve interviews UAE Ambassador to U.S. YOUSEF AL OTAIBA  > Steve interviews Sen. CHRISTOPHER COONS (D-Del.)  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES       Family time, reimagined. Luther Berg shared a photo of one of his residents at Brookdale Northridge senior living facility in California. With nursing homes on high alert throughout the country and no visitation allowed, Kathryn Payne (photographed above) now visits with her family through the window of her room. Kathryn’s family visits every day with signs, waving, blowing kisses and talking over the phone.  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.      VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVESteve Clemons interviews Richard Edelman, president and CEO of Edelman Public Relations, about special coronavirus editions of his famous Edelman Trust Barometer on how COVID-19 has impacted the state of "trust" in America, trust in businesses, trust in government, and trust in the media. Excerpts from the interview are below: Richard Edelman: I think the most important fact for listeners is that business has to step into the void left by lack of quality information. The media is seen as politicized. Government is seen as episodic. And so whether you're a corporation or you're a brand, you have a duty to inform your employees who then can share that information more broadly. And you also have an obligation to be in the business of solutions and not selling. You should be seen as somehow helping this country get back on its feet, to keep as many people as you can employed, to include small businesses in the supply chain. And make sure that you are looking to be a member of your community, that you're giving away food, that you're giving away product and time, and that you're protecting your employees above all.   Clemons: I read your report and one of the many lines that stood out is what you mentioned, that companies and CEOs need to help solve, not sell. Who do you think stands out as helping to solve and not sell?  Edelman: Well, I think two or three good examples. Unilever pledged to keep not only its employees, but also its suppliers. For instance, Sodexo operating the company cafeteria in New Jersey — even if the place is closed, they're paying those people through June. At the same time, Unilever has also expanded its financing terms for its small vendors and for its suppliers. And so that's really making, in a certain way, a company like a bank. Also, Starbucks is now trying to reopen, but with different terms that they're somehow making sure that customers feel safe, that they do a drive-in or whatever and have a different service modality. Also, Farmers Insurance cut the rates of its auto insurance by 25 percent. So each one of these, in its own way, is a significant action. That's the point for companies. Don't just talk. Do something.   Clemons: I would have always thought that science was a trusted voice, that doctors and people with knowledge and expertise were looked at as trusted. What comes out loud and clear in your findings is that after science being pilloried for a few years, science is back, particularly over journalists and politicians. Your thoughts? Edelman: People trust those who have credentials so technical experts from the company or even more scientists, but they also trust those who are close to them. So, for instance, my employer, CEO or friends and family, or peers at the company — because trust usually used to be conveyed vertically — and then has moved horizontally — and now has moved local, something close to me. So it's today some combination of scientific fact and people who, in a certain way, I work with all the time, my peers or even more my CEO. That puts big obligations on my employer to speak to me frequently. I want updates every day on what's happening with our policies — return to work; am I going back to work with a mask? Am I going to go back to work on an A and B shift? Am I going to go in some way without a company cafeteria so that I have some mandatory social distancing. Everybody wants to know specifics. They don't just want to get facts through social media. Social media is deeply distrusted right now because there's too much fake news. Mainstream media is increasingly trusted, but sometimes seen as politicized. So Fox on the right and New York Times on the left. So, I need business as the the plug between.   Clemons: One of the things I've started doing every day is watching my colleagues on “Rising” on Hill.TV — Krystal Ball and Saagar Enjeti — and they have a lot of viewers who don’t believe that the bailout package is really helping people more than its helping big businesses. Many see the bailout as corrupt. How do you recommend that businesses swim in this situation where there is so much skepticism of them? Edelman: I think that people accept the idea that hotels or airlines or others whose businesses have been crippled by COVID, that they get some government support. What they don't accept is the idea that a retailer, a restaurant chain, others who seem to have a good business prospect of getting bailed out. The Los Angeles Lakers returned $4 million yesterday. They shouldn't have taken it in the first place. We have to be really careful just as in 2008 and 2009 on getting government bailouts and if we do, they should be merited and they should be paid back and there should be transparency as to how they're used.   Clemons: One of the other things that also jumped out in the report is the willingness of consumers, worldwide, to punish brands. Can you tell us more about that? Edelman: Three-quarters of people said that they would stop using a brand if they felt as if they were somehow exploiting the situation, pretending to end COVID by getting rid of dandruff, for instance. That’s  ludicrous. On the other hand, one-third of people said they've already changed brands because of the acts of responsibility taken by brands. So in a way, I believe in brand democracy, the idea that somehow I have more power through what I buy every day than I do voting every four years, and so I really want to have to be a belief-driven buyer, and I fundamentally want brands to stand for me during this terrible time.   Clemons: You and I have talked about your trust barometer in previous years. Does the COVID-19 crisis create an opportunity for businesses to reprove themselves and to come back in terms of trust? Edelman: I think in two industries in particular, there's a real opportunity. So financial services has really been the bottom-dweller for the last decade, ever since the financial crisis. And it started to build back with JPMorgan and Wells Fargo and others trying to rebuild communities, Detroit, etc. That's a big moment now, because banks are distributing the [Paycheck Protection Program] PPP funds. What else can they be doing to get money to small business in particular? The other is tech. For the first time since last Davos, Steve, we found the tech was no longer the most trusted industry in one-third of the countries that we survey. That's a big warning sign for tech. So either tech is a force for good here enabling e-commerce, somehow enabling us to work from home in a safe way — or it's seen as a way of helping the wealthy make a bigger difference to the disadvantaged who can't do this kind of of education at home, etc. So tech really has to play carefully in trying to provide product to those who don't normally participate.   Clemons: What advice or counsel would you give the White House through this? The White House doesn't fare very well either in terms of trusted voices. What does President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE and his team need to do to up their game as a trusted voice during this virus crisis? Edelman: I think the president's done a really good job of being available and being present and frequent. Where I think he could use a little more message discipline is not thinking aloud and making sure that he has credible sources such as Dr. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE and others around him who are carrying the science message. A president needs to be empathetic. He needs to be specific about federal aid to small business, but he needs to leave the science to those who are scientists. That's a very clear steer from our Trust Study, which said that 80 percent trust scientists and 40 percent trust politicians. They don't want this politicized. They want solutions that work and are tangible.   Clemons: Another sector I've been talking to are scientists and pharmaceutical firms. Nearly everyone says that to end this crisis, vaccines and antivirals will be created by the pharmaceutical industry. But if you look at the reactions of the American public out there, they may know that's true. But they still don't trust the pharmaceuticals on things like cost and accessibility. Do you have any insights from your research that that helps PhRMA firms navigate this. There could be a situation where they develop a drug but then are still public enemy number one. Edelman: So I think the PhRMA companies have an important — maybe once in a generation — opportunity here to be heroes. First, to give us some degree of immunity. Second, some certainty about whether we have the condition. But third, affordable, consistent product. And that we find it distributed in a fair way, not just to those who have a lot of money. And also in a way that's not too nationalistic. One of the problems of being multinational is you may make the product in Singapore, and then you're pulled by the president to bring it all to the U.S. instead of supplying it evenly across the world. So I think the real chance here is for PhRMA companies to have heroes. And it won't be the CEOs. It will be the medical directors or the scientist who comes up with the new vaccine. Have the bench person with the white coat, the woman who comes up with the great idea — make that the face of the company.   Clemons: I know that you're one of the best crises advisers in the world for people that have shocked the trust of their consumers. In this high stress moment, what are the two or three most important things for that brand of reestablishing itself as a trusted player with its consumers?  Edelman: I want to go back to the premise of solutions and not selling. I want that company to definitely be seen as a major partner of this country in solving COVID — and that the commitment is more than financial — it's actually "spiritual." And that the CEO, the board and employees all reflect this drive to achieve a solution. And we want to be on the side of the angels, on the side of our employees and keeping them working and also on the side of our communities so that we're giving away product, that we're somehow really pitching in to make this as short of a crisis as we can.WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY    > Several states begin to reopen, but conflicting messages are stoking confusion  > Birx says social distancing could last through summer  > White House reportedly weighing Azar ousting; Trump says fake news  > New Zealand declares victory in fight against coronavirus  > Tyson Foods execs: “The food supply chain is breaking”      The weekend that was. We’re all anxious to get back to normal, but when we do so and what our new normal will look like are still questions without definitive answers. As several states push forward with plans to restart their economies, the nation’s leading public health officials are still insisting that it is simply too soon. Deborah Birx said this weekend that social distancing, in some form, is likely to be a part of our lives through the summer. With warmer weather inbound, many Americans are emerging from quarantine to enjoy simple luxuries like sunbathing. Thousands defied stay-at-home orders over the weekend to visit Southern California beaches and New York’s Central Park was full of picnickers, although the NYPD is still stressing the importance of physical distancing. Months ago, when this all began, college spring breakers were widely ridiculed for ignoring the seriousness of the pandemic and going forth with their spring break plans. Are the thousands who are risking infection to catch a few rays just as “foolish” as those spring breakers — or do they deserve a break from the walls of their homes? After all, humans are intrinsically social beings and it is impossible to imagine a scenario in which we stay at home forever.  Another one bites the dust? Reports of President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE weighing the possibility of replacing Alex Azar, his secretary of Health and Human Services, flooded the airwaves this weekend. The Washington Post, along with other news outlets, reported early Sunday that White House officials are discussing possible replacements for Azar as frustrations have grown over his handling of the coronavirus crisis earlier this year. As to be expected, Trump took to Twitter to disavow the reports, calling them “Fake News.” In tweets that followed, the president ripped the media’s coverage of his administration’s handling of the pandemic. This comes as the White House first canceled, then rescheduled today’s coronavirus briefing.   THE INTERVIEW Sen. Christopher CoonsChristopher (Chris) Andrew CoonsCoronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Michelle McMurry-Heath Republicans turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks Voting rights, public health officials roll out guidelines to protect voters from COVID-19 MORE (D-Del.) says COVID-19 is foreshock of much deadlier pandemic in years ahead; we need to invest in vaccine manufacturing infrastructure now.        Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Monday, April 27.  Editor’s Note.    What will come after SARS Cov-2, the virus that creates the disease COVID-19. Sen. Christopher Coons (D-Del.) offered a grim observation that this coronavirus is just one of many out there, and that we have not yet developed a vaccine for any coronavirus at all. He said the lethality of this virus, while higher than the typical flu, is much less than what is likely in store for mankind in the years ahead. Coons said we have to prepare for a mass-killing virus that spreads as easily as the cold, but has a rate of lethality far higher than what we are experiencing today.     He noted that former Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist (R-Tenn.) and others have been worried for years about deficits in our national and global public health and scientific infrastructure, as well as in our drug manufacturing infrastructure, to prepare for this future pandemic. Coons, who has visited African nations hit by Ebola, realized there that the manufacturing and distribution challenges of vaccines have to be considered as the drugs are being developed. He shared with me the vital work of the National Institute for Innovation in Manufacturing Biopharmaceuticals (NIIMBL), a private-public partnership that is part of the broader Manufacturing USA network. This interview is well worth watching to get a deeper dive into the production and scaling challenges of drug production after a vaccine is identified.     I also asked Coons whether President Trump’s disinfectant comments provided an opportunity to give scientists a boost in the national conversation about the virus, and Coons said that good leaders know when to step away and get out of a lane better managed by others. Yep.   – Steve Clemons Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.          This Wednesday, our new 3D journalism platform The Hill Virtually Live will host an online event — Safeguarding Seniors: Healthcare in a Health Crisis. House Energy and Commerce Committee members Reps. Fred UptonFrederick (Fred) Stephen UptonBipartisan Senate group offers new help to state, local governments Bipartisan bill aims to help smallest businesses weather the coronavirus crisis Lawmakers press HHS for answers on coronavirus drug distribution MORE (R-Mich.), Doris MatsuiDoris Okada MatsuiDozens of Democrats plan to vote remotely in a first for the House Hillicon Valley: Experts raise security concerns about online voting | Musk finds supporter in Trump | Officials warn that Chinese hackers targeting COVID-19 research groups Democrats introduce legislation to ensure internet access for college students MORE (D-Calif.) and Bill JohnsonWilliam (Bill) Leslie JohnsonThe Hill's Campaign Report: Republicans go on the hunt for new convention site Police unions coalition director: Biden 'off the deep end' in calls for reform Ex-CBO director calls for more than  trillion in coronavirus stimulus spending MORE (R-Ohio) will be joining us to talk about supporting seniors, tackling disparities and the role of innovation in the age of COVID-19. They will be followed by a panel featuring Dr. Patrice Harris of the American Medical Association, AARP’s Nancy LeaMond, Karen Freeman-Wilson of the Chicago Urban League and Alliance for Aging Research’s Sue Peschin.  REGISTER HERE and follow @TheHillEvents for additional program updates. Join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.  CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE Just in from our colleague Reid Wilson (@PoliticsReid) who authored the prescient “Epidemic: Ebola and the Global Scramble to Prevent the Next Killer Outbreak”: THE U.S. IS NEARLY AT AN OFFICIAL SARS COV-2 INFECTION LEVEL OF 1 MILLION CASES at now 972,969 cases. Alaska has now gone 14 days without a double-digit increase in case numbers. They reported no new cases Friday and Saturday. Colorado had its worst day Friday, adding 993 new cases and 115 deaths. Up to 12,255 cases, 672 deaths. Delaware had its worst day Sunday, adding 458 new cases, up to 4,034. Hawaii has gone eight straight days with fewer than 10 new cases. Illinois had its worst day Friday, adding 2,723 new cases, up to 43,903 by Sunday.  Iowa had its worst day on Friday, with 520 new cases, and then again on Saturday, adding 650 new cases, up to 5,491 total. Probably tied to those meat plants. Massachusetts’s worst day ever was on Friday, adding 4,946 new cases, up to 54,938 total. Minnesota’s worst day yet was Saturday,  with 261 new cases, up to 3,602. Montana has gone a week with fewer than 10 new cases a day. They've gone four days without a death, too. Nebraska had its worst day yet on Saturday,  adding 427, now a total of 3,126 cases (I think that's a meat plant issue, too). North Carolina’s worst day yet was Saturday, with 571 new cases, for a total of 8,830. Virginia’s worst day ever was Saturday,  adding 770 cases, up to 12,970. Wisconsin’s worst day yet was Saturday, with 331 new cases, 5,911 total.  WASHINGTON WATCH  Health experts call for $46.5 billion to expand contact tracing, isolation. A group of leading health experts on Monday sent a letter to Congress calling for $46.5 billion to expand contact tracing and isolation of infected people in order to safely reopen the economy. The group of 16 health experts includes former FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb and former acting administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Andy Slavitt. (The Hill)   Angst over that Trump signature. Senate Minority Leader Charles SchumerCharles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerGOP lawmaker calls on Senate to confirm Michael Pack as head of US media agency McConnell blocks resolution condemning Trump over treatment of protesters House Democrat demands answers from Secret Service about role breaking up White House protests MORE (D-N.Y.) is reportedly planning to introduce a provision that would prevent President Trump from placing his name on any additional coronavirus stimulus checks. (The Hill)   Birx says social distancing will likely last through summer. As a number of states begin to slowly reopen, Deborah Birx is holding firm that some form of social distancing will likely remain in place through the summer. “Social distancing will be with us through the summer to really ensure that we protect one another as we move through these phases [of reopening the economy],” Birx told NBC’s “Meet the Press.” (Washington Post)    Pelosi: Minimum guaranteed income may now be ‘worthy of attention.’ Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE (D-Calif.) on Monday expressed openness to a minimum guaranteed income to help keep people hit by the coronavirus shutdowns financially afloat. Pelosi said during an interview on MSNBC that she thinks the financial aid established by the coronavirus relief package enacted into law last month should be extended in some form. (The Hill)    LAWMAKERS TWEET  House Majority Leader Steny HoyerSteny Hamilton HoyerPelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Calls for police reform sparks divisions in Congress Hoyer wins Maryland House primary MORE (D-Md.)  @LeaderHoyer I’m deeply alarmed that Prince George’s Co continues to be one of the hardest hit counties in MD. COVID-19 shines a bright light on existing racial and social disparities in our communities, which is why I sent a letter to @GovLarryHogan last week requesting additional resources.   Sen. Kevin CramerKevin John Cramer7 GOP senators slam State Dept for 'slow and inefficient policy' on passports Trump tries to soothe anxious GOP senators Trump cites 'Obamagate' in urging GOP to get 'tough' on Democrats MORE (R-N.D.)  @SenKevinCramer Grateful @CDCgov struck the right balance. When stringent regulations were issued for the Smithfield plant, my colleagues & I reached out to @SecretarySonny to ensure the Administration knows most plants do not require that same heavy hand. Clearly our concerns were heard.   Rep. Stephanie MurphyStephanie MurphyThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Former Rep. Delaney says Trump is spewing venom when he should be leading; Protests roil the nation as fears of new virus outbreaks grow  Expanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support Congress must fill the leadership void MORE (D-Fla.)  @RepStephMurphy NEWS: My office has released the results of our unemployment survey. This report shows the alarming condition of FL’s unemployment insurance system. Nearly 93% of the over 8,200 respondents said they had a “negative experience.”  ACROSS THE NATION  Tyson Foods: “The food supply chain is breaking.” In a full-page ad in The New York Times, The Washington Post and Arkansas Democrat-Gazette, Tyson Foods executives wrote that “the food supply chain is breaking,” saying farmers will not be able to sell livestock and "millions of animals — chickens, pigs and cattle — will be depopulated because of the closure of our processing facilities.” (The Hill)  Thousands visit Southern California beaches amid coronavirus outbreak. Thousands of people poured onto beaches in Orange County over the weekend as Southern California experienced its first major heat wave of the year, even as officials continue to urge visitors to avoid mass gatherings and practice social distancing due to the coronavirus outbreak. (The Hill)    Oklahoma City mayor: Not comfortable reopening “until there is a vaccine or a proven treatment.” Oklahoma City Mayor David Holt (R) on Monday said that he won’t be comfortable reopening the economy until a coronavirus vaccine or treatment is available, adding that he would have pushed the opening date allowed by Oklahoma Gov. Kevin Stitt (R) to a little later than this week. (The Hill)  WORLD VIEW  New Zealand declares victory. The New Zealand government proclaimed on Monday that the country has reached its goal of eliminating the coronavirus after reporting just four new "probable cases" of COVID-19 and one death over the weekend. "There is no widespread undetected community transmission in New Zealand," Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said. "We have won that battle. But we must remain vigilant if we are to keep it that way.” (The Hill)    Boris Johnson back to work, says it's too soon to ease lockdown. U.K. Prime Minister Boris Johnson, the highest-ranking worldwide political figure to have had a confirmed case of the virus, said Britain is at “the moment of maximum risk" and lifting restrictions before May 7, when they are slated for review, would run the risk of a second peak of the virus. (The Hill)    Italy to ease West’s longest lockdown. Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte said his nation would ease the West’s longest lockdown and gradually reopen the economy starting next week. (Washington Post)   Wuhan hospitals empty of coronavirus patients. The last COVID-19 patients were released Sunday from a hospital in Wuhan, where the novel coronavirus is believed to have originated, Chinese officials said. (The Hill)  SCIENCE Stroke phenomenon? Young and middle-aged people, barely sick with COVID-19, are dying of strokes. Doctors are sounding an alarm about patients in their 30s and 40s left debilitated or dead because of the coronavirus. Three large U.S. medical centers are preparing to publish data on the stroke phenomenon. (Washington Post)   Wise or unwise? States stockpiling hydroxychloroquine. State and local governments are stockpiling the anti-malaria drug hydroxychloroquine, according to an Associated Press report, which President Trump has touted as a “game changer” for COVID-19 patients. States and localities have obtained about 20 million doses of the drug, according to data compiled by the AP from state and federal officials. (The Hill)   Heartburn drug being studied as COVID-19 treatment. A heartburn drug is being studied as a possible treatment for COVID-19 patients in New York hospitals, officials confirmed Monday. The clinical trial regarding famotidine, the active ingredient in Pepcid, is being conducted by The Feinstein Institutes for Medical Research, the research arm of Northwell Health. (The Hill)   BUSINESS US economy could contract 30 percent in second quarter warns Trump economic adviser Kevin Hassett. The U.S. economy could contract at its worst rate since the Great Depression later this year due to the coronavirus crisis, warned Kevin Hassett, who recently rejoined the Trump administration as a senior economic adviser. (CNBC)  Nursing home industry pushes for legal immunity. The nursing home industry is pushing states to provide immunity from lawsuits to the owners and employees of the nation's 15,600 nursing homes. So far, at least six states have provided explicit immunity from coronavirus lawsuits for nursing homes, and six more have granted some form of immunity to health care providers, which legal experts say could likely be interpreted to include nursing homes. (NBC News)  ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSION  Avoiding another Great Depression through a developmentally layered reopening of the economy. Time is short. The pearls of our economy are irretrievably cracked. We must avoid another Great Depression — or global economic collapse — by recapitulating essential developmental layers quickly based on the best expert knowledge available. (Sean M. O’Connor for The Hill)    Supporting front-line women amid COVID-19. In the midst of the coronavirus pandemic, one in three jobs held by women have been deemed “essential.” In fact, 72 percent of grocery store cashiers, 89 percent of home care workers and 91 percent of nurses are women. Our women working on the front lines are risking their lives to keep the rest of us safe and healthy. The least we can do is show these brave people our gratitude in a way that actually counts: by preserving — and advancing — their basic right to a healthy and prosperous life. (Dana Singiser for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS        Weeks after Fauci joked that Brad Pitt should play him on SNL, Pitt delivered. Weeks ago, Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE said he would want “Brad Pitt, of course” to play him on Saturday Night Live. During the show’s second socially distanced episode, Fauci had his wish come true as Pitt played the man who has become one of America’s most beloved doctors. (TIME)    Mission to collect iPads for hospital patients in isolation goes national. Doctors in at least 19 states are collecting iPads and other smart devices for patients to use to video chat with their families. With stringent visitation rules barring families from seeing their sick loved ones, the group hopes to keep patients connected at a time of nearly complete isolation. (Fox News)   ICYMI, STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews former Senate Majority Leader BILL FRIST  > Steve interviews Rep. BRAD WENSTRUP (R-Ohio)  > Steve interviews NATO Deputy Secretary General MIRCEA GENONA  > Steve interviews Vanda Pharmaceuticals President and CEO MIHAEL POLYMEROPOULOS > Steve interviews Seattle Mayor JENNY DURKAN > Steve interviews Pfizer’s chief scientist MIKAEL DOLSTEN  > Steve interviews UAE Ambassador to U.S. YOUSEF AL OTAIBA  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Delaware Sen. Christopher CoonsChristopher (Chris) Andrew CoonsCoronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Michelle McMurry-Heath Republicans turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks Voting rights, public health officials roll out guidelines to protect voters from COVID-19 MORE (D). Excerpts from the interview are below: Clemons: How is Delaware doing given news that this weekend was the worst in terms of infections and deaths from COVID-19 in the state. Sen. Christopher Coons: I'm grateful for the very strong and engaged leadership of our governor, John CarneyJohn Charles CarneyHere's where your state falls on the scale of most to least reopened Coronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Sen. Chris Coons  Here's when all 50 states plan to reopen after coronavirus restrictions MORE, and our head of our division of public health, Dr. Karyl Rattay. Because we finally recently got up to date test results about the breadth of the infection of COVID-19 in Sussex County and in particular in the communities immediately around our poultry processing plants, our number, in terms of the number of infections, has jumped fairly suddenly and a number of us spent the last couple of days working to support the governor and our public health infrastructure and the hospitals in Sussex County to make sure that we've got the testing capacity and the treatment capacity needed to respond to this sudden surge in the number of cases in our southernmost county.   Clemons: You have been thinking ahead, before we have a vaccine, and have been emphasizing the need to get our manufacturing abilities in place. Can you tell us more? Coons: Well, Steve, as you may remember, I was the chair of the African Affairs Subcommittee on Foreign Relations and met with the president of Liberia several times in advance of the Ebola outbreak in West Africa in 2014-2015 and actually traveled to Liberia during Ebola. I was the only member of Congress to visit West Africa during that pandemic, and it was a result of that direct engagement, that exposure to a country that was ravaged by a pandemic where American leadership helped scale up a global response and helped strengthen the Liberian people's response to that tragic and challenging incident that got me very interested in pandemic preparedness and response. Bill and Melinda Gates have been real thought leaders, have really invested in this area, and, as you just referenced former Majority Leader and doctor, Bill Frist, former senator from Tennessee, is someone who was well ahead of his time in helping the U.S. think about and invest in pandemic response. BARDA [Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority] is a sub-agency of Health and Human Services that makes strategic investments in biologic response and disaster response capabilities. A number of years ago, they invested in four different facilities — in Texas and North Carolina and Maryland principally — that were designed to be ready facilities to rapidly scale up large numbers of doses of vaccines or therapeutics. ... One of the things I worked hard on, Steve, was so-called Manufacturing USA, which is a series of federal and private sector and academic partnership institutes around the country, and there happens to be one here in Delaware. It's called the National Institute for Innovation in the Manufacturing of Biopharmaceuticals, or its better known by the more memorable acronym NIIMBL. It's not really just the University of Delaware. It is dozens and dozens of academic research institutes and private sector partners that all told have put together more than $200 million in investment in trying to be flexible and agile in standing up rapid and high-quality responses to challenges like this current COVID-19 pandemic.   Clemons: So are you saying we should have confidence that we have a strong manufacturing infrastructure in place and can sit back and wait for all this to happen now. Or does the NIIMBL private/public network need more than it has to work and to generate vaccines and antivirals we need after they are discovered?  Coons: I have concerns that we need to invest significantly more for two reasons. One is that vaccine development is an exceptionally difficult and tricky undertaking. You have to have lots of quality control, both in the search for an effective vaccine in the human trials and then in the manufacturing of a vaccine. Second, there has never been an FDA-approved successful coronavirus vaccine. Coronavirus is an entire family of viruses. There are thousands of coronaviruses. There is obviously an annual flu vaccine, an influenza vaccine, so there is an existing backbone that is modified or developed every flu season. So how do those companies who manufacture flu vaccines do so? They work off of a known and approved backbone and then make adjustments every year because the flu mutates — it modifies. That's how it becomes newly infectious is that it changes every year, every season. This particular novel coronavirus, that is producing COVID-19 is a double challenge in that it is something that is going to require us to develop an enormous number of individual vaccine doses. And we're looking for a novel type of vaccine in that there's never been a successful coronavirus vaccine before.   Clemons: As a legislator concerned with planning for the future, do you worry that we will forget now about the pain from this coronavirus and not make needed investments in future protection? When I interviewed in the past Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE and recently talked to Sen. Frist, they both have said we need to be proactive. We need to begin thinking about vaccine development across a spectrum of possible viral risks for humans and not just be reactive to the latest attack. Your thoughts?  Coons:  I certainly hope so. Steve. One of the things that really haunted me during the 2014-2015 Ebola outbreak in West Africa was hearing that there had been a potential Ebola or Marburg virus vaccine in development in ... the NIH but that it had been shelved due to budgetary constraints and budgetary concerns, due to a lack of proactive investment in the development of a vaccine. As you know, there's been a significant Ebola outbreak in the northeastern corner of the Democratic Republic of the Congo that was grinding away last year. A key difference in last year's response to the Ebola outbreak in central Africa to the six years ago previous response is that now there are two functional vaccines that are in trials that are providing critically needed protection to public health workers who are responding to the current Ebola outbreak. What's the point in response to this novel coronavirus outbreak? Yes, Steve, I think we will hopefully finally proactively invest enough because as bad as this pandemic is, it is nowhere near as bad as what has been predicted for many years, which is that we are due for a truly lethal influenza pandemic. COVID-19 is highly transmissive, like any influenza, and it is relatively lethal, but it is not very highly lethal. So, imagine something that spreads as easily as the seasonal cold or flu, but is as lethal as Ebola. If that were to happen, we would face massive human losses globally, as happened in 1918 where tens of millions of people died. I hate to draw your attention to an even more grim scenario.   Clemons: You're saying this is a foreshock of some far worse pandemic — is what you're saying? Coons: That's correct. My hope is that this experience is bad enough that we finally mobilize globally the resources needed to ensure that we don't have to endure a pandemic like this one, but dramatically more lethal.   Clemons: What are your thoughts on how equipped President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE, or former Vice President Joe BidenJoe BidenOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Davis: 72 hours cementing the real choice for November OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump signs order removing environmental reviews for major projects | New Trump air rule will limit future pollution regulations, critics say | DNC climate group calls for larger federal investment on climate than Biden plan MORE, are to deal with this kind of unconventional national security threat? Coons: Well, Steve, remember that the 9/11 terrorist attacks on the United States were, for the vast majority of Americans, a shocking, utterly unexpected wake-up call. But for those who had been in the intelligence community, in our national security community, there were plenty of warning signs. There was a previous attempt at attacking the World Trade Center. There were attacks on the United States Embassies in Nairobi and Dar Salaam, in Kenya and Tanzania. There was the attack on the USS Cole. There were a whole series of attacks that showed that al Qaeda was becoming gradually more competent, more lethal, and more intent on killing Americans in a spectacular style. But we had a variety of challenges and problems in terms of our ability to gather the intelligence and respond in a timely way. The 9/11 Commission, after the 9/11 attacks, looked backwards at how we failed to be fully prepared for and respond to all of those clear signals. And so we gradually made massive investments in changing the structures of how intelligence is coordinated, changing the training and the doctrine that a preparation of our military forces to respond to asymmetric attacks by terrorist groups. We must do the same thing in response to this pandemic, Steve. We need a similar commission that on a bipartisan basis will look at how our pandemic response was flawed. How this administration has failed to see the moment and to grasp it and to rapidly scale up highly effective testing, contact tracing, and then to manage the distribution of badly needed supplies from personal protective equipment to ventilators to other critically needed material that would have made our testing and tracing more responsive. We will have a much longer recovery from this pandemic and many more lives lost to the pandemic than was necessary because of a disjointed and at times chaotic federal response. So my hope and expectation is that in a bipartisan way, moving forward from here, we will see a competent federal response inspired by a broad review of the ways in which the response to date has left many governors in many states struggling to find the resources and the response material that they need.   Clemons: Senator, we did have a surprising moment last week when the president suggested that perhaps we could inject disinfectants to kill the virus. Do you think that that odd moment may be in the long run helpful in getting doctors and scientists more in the right policy tracks in our federal response? Coons: Any of us in elected leadership who have served in executive posts get training in how to get out of the way. One of the things I've never forgotten about the training I got as a young county executive nearly 20 years ago — about how to handle incident response — was to be engaged and be responsive, but to also know what you don't know, and to rely on the public safety experts, the public health experts to guide tough decisions. That's what our governor has done here in the state of Delaware. He's relied on critically needed professional advice and response, and that's what our president should have done. But frankly, has not done — is to allow Dr. Fauci, Dr. [Deborah] Birx, Dr. [Robert] Redfield and others at the CDC, NIH, and in the Department of Health and Human Services federally to inform and guide response. He should be at these daily briefings. Our president should be at these daily briefings briefly to introduce the experts and to provide them with the support and coordination they need, rather than using daily briefings as a several hours-long running, feuding session with the media that is utterly unconstructive. So, my hope is that after this past week's disconcerting incident that President Trump will allow his briefings to turn more towards the sorts of briefings that are science driven, public health led and will help us move towards a more fact and science based federal response — something that all Americans need as we make very challenging decisions about how and when to reopen. VIEW BREAKING NEWS ON CORONAVIRUS    WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > U.S. hits grim milestone of 50,000 coronavirus deaths  > Trump walks back head-scratching comments, says he was being ‘sarcastic’  > FDA issues warning against hydroxychloroquine  > Republicans sharply divided over timeline for reopening  > Cuomo says World Health Organization was too little, too late > Biden predicts Trump will try to push November election          The new normal. If a picture of the Speaker of the House wearing a face covering and nitrile gloves isn’t a sobering reminder of the seriousness of this pandemic, I am not sure what is. House members on Thursday were faced head-on with the reality every American is facing: how to safely conduct business in the age of the coronavirus. Members took to the House floor to debate the $484 billion relief package they overwhelmingly passed, adhering to physical distancing guidelines and most donning masks, gloves or both. As to be expected, social media erupted with images of members wearing masks incorrectly — and Pelosi lowering her mask to wipe her nose before touching a communal podium is rightfully garnering criticism. Whatever one makes of it, it is clear that even the nation’s most powerful are struggling to adapt to the new normal. Rep. Matt GaetzMatthew (Matt) GaetzHillicon Valley: Zuckerberg on the defensive over Trump posts | Twitter labels another lawmaker's tweet | USTR opens probe into digital taxes GOP lawmaker wants probe of UPenn's Biden Center for Diplomacy and Global Engagement Twitter restricts tweet from Gaetz for glorifying violence MORE (R-Fla.) received widespread criticism for donning a gas mask on the House floor in March and, as we see daily, White House officials are not sporting masks. At the end of another week in isolation — that seems like both a day and a month at the same time — I wonder: If the most powerful institution in the world is stumbling through our new normal, what does that mean for the rest of us?    US hits grim milestone: 50,000 coronavirus deaths. More than 50,000 people in the United States have died of COVID-19, a grim milestone in a global pandemic that shows few signs of slowing even as pressure mounts to reopen parts of the U.S. economy. (The Hill)    Biden predicts Trump will try to delay November election. Former Vice President Joe Biden on Thursday at an online fundraiser predicted that President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE would try to push back November's general election because the president thinks that is the "only way he can possibly win." (The Hill)  THE INTERVIEW UAE Ambassador to the US Yousef Al Otaiba says COVID-19 crisis, like climate change, requires global collaboration; says pandemic creates opportunities with countries like Iran       Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Friday, April 23.    Editor’s Note.   50,000 people in America have now died from a vicious virus that didn’t exist six months ago. Just about about eight weeks ago, we all remember the president stating we have 15 cases in America. He said there was one really sick person, but that it looked like this was all pretty well controlled and that the cases may go to “zero.” We heard then and even for days and weeks after, “the risk to the average American of contracting coronavirus remains low.”   50,000 Americans gone who would not otherwise have died “now” except for this virus. My family is originally from Bartlesville, Okla., just north of Tulsa — population 36,000. Numbers need context to understand scale. In a country of 330 million, that number of dead seems small, but these were people from towns like Bartlesville, and Harlem, the Back Bay in Boston, New Orleans, Albuquerque, Sioux Falls, so many places. The number is big, and the carnage so painful.   The good news is that the world’s smartest scientists and researchers are racing fast to develop vaccines and antivirals. I spoke to one of them yesterday, Mikael Dolsten who is chief scientific officer at Pfizer. What they eventually produce to kill or curb COVID-19 will make the political incompetence we have seen out of Washington seem small, even though we will have a hard time forgetting that the president of the United States wondered out loud if a promising approach might be injecting people with disinfectants. People who adore President Trump and who are suffering from COVID-19 in their homes may hear him, may share his vibe of deploring expertise and science, and ingest or inject themselves with Lysol. Trump on Friday said he was being sarcastic, but this isn’t a joke.   A small nation of 10 million, the United Arab Emirates, has already tested 10 percent of its population and has committed to getting that number up to 20 percent in a short time period. The country manufactures its own tests domestically and is experimenting with innovations like smart helmets that would allow police to read the temperatures of people they encounter but do so remotely. Etihad Airways is testing every passenger before they board a plane. I interviewed the popular and high-profile UAE Ambassador to the U.S. Yousef Al Otaiba on how the UAE has managed the COVID-19 pandemic, which hit that country before the U.S. And I asked him whether it shifted his diplomatic lens in his tough neighborhood. His response was hopeful in that he said that COVID-19 did create an opportunity with Iran — but it was unclear whether Iran’s leaders see that opportunity today. The interview is interesting — and implicitly in Al Otaiba’s comments is the belief that narcissistic nationalism is not going to help us kill this virus, or the next pandemic, or solve climate change. To deal with the big challenges now and tomorrow we're going to need real transnational, global collaborations. Perhaps this is obvious, but it’s also important to say it out loud.   – Steve Clemons     Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.          On April 29, our new 3D journalism platform The Hill Virtually Live will host an online event — Safeguarding Seniors: Health care in a health crisis. House Energy and Commerce Committee members Reps. Doris MatsuiDoris Okada MatsuiDozens of Democrats plan to vote remotely in a first for the House Hillicon Valley: Experts raise security concerns about online voting | Musk finds supporter in Trump | Officials warn that Chinese hackers targeting COVID-19 research groups Democrats introduce legislation to ensure internet access for college students MORE (D-Calif.) and Bill JohnsonWilliam (Bill) Leslie JohnsonThe Hill's Campaign Report: Republicans go on the hunt for new convention site Police unions coalition director: Biden 'off the deep end' in calls for reform Ex-CBO director calls for more than  trillion in coronavirus stimulus spending MORE (R-Ohio) will be joining us to talk about supporting seniors, tackling disparities and the role of innovation in the age of COVID-19. They will be followed by a panel conversation featuring Dr. Patrice Harris of the American Medical Association, AARP’s Nancy LeaMond, Karen Freeman-Wilson of the Chicago Urban League and Alliance for Aging Research’s Sue Peschin.  REGISTER HERE and follow @TheHillEvents for additional program updates. Join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.      CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 2,761,121 confirmed cases of COVID-19 around the world and 193,671 people have died. The U.S. — with 880,112 cases — reached another grim milestone this morning and is now reporting more than 50,000 deaths from the virus. Spain and Italy are still the European epicenters with 219,764 and 192,994 cases respectively. Turkey’s cases are skyrocketing and are now at 104,912. 68,622 cases in Russia. 51,073 in Brazil. 11,183 confirmed cases in Ecuador, where global attention is now turning amid fears the outbreak is much worse than originally reported. 11,155 cases in Pakistan. 9,281 cases in the United Arab Emirates.    150,473 cases in New York City and 271,590 in New York state. 100,025 cases in New Jersey. 46,023 in Massachusetts. 39,637 in California. 38,379 in Pennsylvania. 23,100 in Connecticut. 12,753 in Washington. 11,278 in Colorado. 6,635 in Missouri. 5,772 in Arizona.    4,692,797 coronavirus tests have been conducted in the U.S. Nearly 81,000 people in America have reported full recoveries from COVID-19.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Republicans sharply divided over timeline for reopening economy. Support is building among Republicans for reopening the economy sooner rather than later, but not all GOP lawmakers are on the same page. (The Hill)   Try a little Lysol. Just an Idea. [Not!] Trump suggests using light, heat as coronavirus treatment. President Trump on Thursday suggested medical experts should study exposing the human body to heat, light and disinfectants as a treatment for the coronavirus during Thursday's White House briefing. Trump walked back his remarks on Friday, telling reporters that he was being sarcastic. (The Hill)   Trump breaks with Fauci. President Trump said Thursday he disagreed with Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE’s statement that the U.S. does not yet have the testing capacity that it needs to effectively contain the spread of the novel coronavirus as stay-at-home restrictions are relaxed. “No, I don’t agree with him on that.” (The Hill)   FDA issues warning against hydroxychloroquine. The Food and Drug Administration warned patients against taking two anti-malaria medications that have been talked up by President Trump for COVID-19, unless carefully monitored in a hospital or as part of a clinical trial. (Bloomberg)  LAWMAKERS TWEET  Senate Minority Leader Charles SchumerCharles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerGOP lawmaker calls on Senate to confirm Michael Pack as head of US media agency McConnell blocks resolution condemning Trump over treatment of protesters House Democrat demands answers from Secret Service about role breaking up White House protests MORE (D-N.Y.)  @SenSchumer With President Trump’s press conference last night, it looks like we have a quack medicine salesman on TV. Injecting disinfectant? No. He must focus on testing, testing, testing.   Rep.  Mo BrooksMorris (Mo) Jackson BrooksConservative lawmakers press Trump to suspend guest worker programs for a year The Hill's Coronavirus Report: U.S. reaches grim milestone of 50,000 deaths; UAE Ambassador Yousef Al Otaiba says COVID-19 crisis creates opportunity with Iran  Trump says he will sign executive order temporarily suspending immigration into US MORE (R-Ala.)  @RepMoBrooks Yesterday, despite #COVID19 risks, #Congressmen voted in #Capitol on #Coronavirus bills. In less than 48 hours, I drove 1,400 miles to/from #Washington, another risk. Shouldn’t governors end shutdown orders so all Americans have the same freedom Congress does to do their jobs?   Rep. Pramila JayapalPramila JayapalPelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC Expanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support House punts on FISA, votes to begin negotiations with Senate MORE (D-Wash.)  @RepJayapal After my tele-meeting w/panel of 5 fab small biz owners and > 75 others last night, I’m more convinced than ever that PPP program (tho based on good ideas) is structurally flawed, unable to deliver necessary relief. We need bold #PaycheckGuaranteeAct.  ACROSS THE NATION  Most Floridians don’t want their state to reopen yet, despite push from governor. More than two-thirds of Floridians don’t want to loosen social distancing rules come April 30 despite Republican Gov. Ron DeSantisRonald Dion DeSantisDeSantis pushing to host Republican National Convention in Florida Florida bars and theaters to reopen starting Friday, DeSantis says DeSantis says he's sending 500 National Guard troops to DC MORE’s push to do so, a Quinnipiac University poll released Wednesday found. Seventy-two percent of respondents said that they are opposed to reopening the state once the governor’s stay-at-home order expires at the end of the month. (The Hill)    New Mexico governor extends stay-at-home order: “We’re not ready to ease up.” New Mexico Gov. Michelle Lujan GrishamMichelle Lynn Lujan GrishamGeorge Floyd's death ramps up the pressure on Biden for a black VP Biden should name a 'team of colleagues' Top Democratic pollster advised Biden campaign to pick Warren as VP MORE (D) extended the state’s stay-at-home order Wednesday to until “at least” May 15. Grisham posted on Twitter that New Mexico’s public health emergency orders will continue until mid-May, saying, “We’re not ready to ease up.” (The Hill)    Navajo Nation joins lawsuit against US for “fair share” of coronavirus funding. The Navajo Nation is joining 10 other tribes in a lawsuit against the Treasury secretary in an effort to secure their “fair share” of federal COVID-19 funding, the tribe announced in a statement this week. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW  Ecuador’s death toll among the worst in the world. A New York Times analysis finds the death toll in Ecuador during the outbreak was 15 times higher than the official number of COVID-19 deaths reported by the government. The figures suggest that the South American country is suffering one of the worst outbreaks in the world — and highlight the damage the virus can do in developing countries. (New York Times)   President Trump tweeted Friday that he spoke with the president of Ecuador and pledged to send much needed ventilators to the country:            UAE ramps up coronavirus testing rate to 1 in 10 people. The United Arab Emirates has increased the coronavirus testing rate to about 1 in 10 people. The Gulf country, which has opened government drive-thru test centers across the country, is focused on making testing widely available to all those who need it, a government spokesperson said. (Bloomberg)   * Click here to watch Steve’s interview with UAE Ambassador to the U.S. Yousef Al Otaiba.   Religious institutions grapple how to worship in age of COVID-19. The world’s major religions are grappling with how to commemorate some of their holiest days in a new way because of the coronavirus pandemic, restricting movement and banning large gatherings. For Passover, Easter and now Ramadan, times when the faithful gather in prayer, leaders are rethinking how to carry out their religious services. (New York Times)   SCIENCE It’s war. To get vaccine, proposal gains ground to infect study group of young people. An idea that might seem outlandish at first is gaining some ground as a way to speed development of a coronavirus vaccine: intentionally infecting people with the virus as part of a trial. The idea, known as a “challenge trial,” would deliberately infect a few hundred young, healthy volunteers, who were first given either the potential vaccine or a placebo. Those picked would be well informed about the risks. (The Hill)  BUSINESS Lysol maker issues warning against injecting disinfectant after Trump comments. Lysol manufacturer Reckitt Benckiser on Friday issued a warning that “under no circumstance” should its products be administered into the human body or be used as a treatment for coronavirus, a day after President Trump discussed whether disinfectants could be used to treat the disease. (The Hill)   Beer sales start to dry up as public venues keep doors closed. With most Americans still under stay-at-home orders, and liquor stores deemed essential businesses, demand is brisk for six-packs and cases. That revenue stream, however, has failed to make up for the large-volume purchases that are part of the business model for big and small brewers. (The Hill)  ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSION  How do we go back to work? One hospital’s procedures show the way. In sum, let’s be thoughtful, safe and careful, using science and humanity to manage the process. Let’s not make the perfect be the enemy of the good. (Mark C. Poznansky and Jacqueline A. Hart for The Hill)  Get virus aid out now — worry about fraud later. To do their jobs quickly, agencies can and should make exceptions to business as usual. But in doing so, they will make mistakes — and, we hope, correct them, too. No one likes these mistakes. Congress, like everyone else outside the executive branch, feels like a fan watching their team when it’s behind: They want to call a different play, or replace the quarterback or the coach. But they can’t. (Joshua Gotbaum for The Hill)  GENEROUS SPIRITS  They lived in a factory for 28 days to make millions of pounds of raw protective equipment to help fight coronavirus. For nearly a month, 43 employees of Braskem America lived in a Pennsylvania factory, working around the clock to produce tens of millions of pounds of raw materials that will end up in face masks and surgical gowns worn on the front lines of the pandemic. (Washington Post)    Eminem sends Detroit hospital workers “Mom's Spaghetti.” This week Detroit health care workers received tubs of "Mom's Spaghetti," infamously referenced in Eminem’s hit song "Lose Yourself." Local catering company Union Joints carried out the initiative, which was funded by Eminem and the Marshall Mathers Foundation. (CNN)   ICYMI, STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. DEBBIE DINGELL (D-Mich.)  > Steve interviews former Senate Majority Leader BILL FRIST  > Steve interviews Rep. BRAD WENSTRUP (R-Ohio)  > Steve interviews NATO Deputy Secretary General MIRCEA GENONA  > Steve interviews Vanda Pharmaceuticals President and CEO MIHAEL POLYMEROPOULOS > Steve interviews Seattle Mayor JENNY DURKAN > Steve interviews Pfizer’s chief scientist MIKAEL DOLSTEN    Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.     VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons discusses how diplomacy has changed as a result of the novel coronavirus pandemic with United Arab Emirates Ambassador to the U.S. Yousef Al Otaiba and asks the Ambassador how he gets himself “virtually in the room” where things happen as a diplomat.  Some excerpts from the interview below:  Clemons: How do get yourself virtually in the room where things happen as a diplomat? YOUSEF AL OTAIBA: First, let me start by wishing you well and making sure that you and your family are healthy and you stay safe. I hope everybody gets through this safely. We are going through something that no one's ever experienced before so it's forcing us to think in different ways. It's forcing us to adapt. And if the question is about diplomacy — just like everyone else — we're trying to figure out how to do diplomacy online, through phone calls, through letters. Diplomacy, unfortunately, will have to keep going. The crises in the area, extremism, terrorism, all the challenges that we've always faced aren't going to stop because of corona. So, we have to adapt and figure out how to do it. Like what we're doing here, if this were normal times, we'd be sitting in a studio in person having this conversation. Instead, we're having it online. We're going to learn how to do things differently as long as this environment persists. So just like we're all learning how to distance, teach our kids online, just like we're learning how to shop online. I think we're going be doing a lot more diplomacy and meetings and gatherings virtually until people feel safe getting on planes and traveling to see each other again.    Clemons: I used to run into you on Etihad Airways a lot because I was going to Abu Dhabi a lot as well. We used to all talk about Hillary ClintonHillary Diane Rodham ClintonMark Cuban says he's decided not to run for president Trump official criticizes ex-Clinton spokesman over defunding police tweet Poll: Biden leads Trump, Cunningham neck and neck with Tillis in North Carolina MORE when she was secretary of State and the number of miles that she would fly each year. It was sort of a measuring stick for how active someone was in their job. Are we going to measure diplomatic prowess and effort differently in the future? AL OTAIBA: It's going to be awkward because this is new. I mean, we're both old enough to remember that before email, we had to write letters, we had to write faxes. But then email came up and when we adapted. In this environment, nobody knows how long it will last, but we're going to continue to get things done. We're facing challenges in the region that were challenges before COVID-19. You know, the crisis in Yemen, situation in Libya, Syria, the economies that were struggling before are now struggling even more because of the economic impact of COVID and lower oil prices. So, we're going to find ways to get things done. I think we're just going have to figure it out as we go along.    Clemons: The other day I had former British Foreign Minister David Miliband, who is now head of the International Rescue Committee, on. We were talking about Yemen as well as other war-torn places and the impact of COVID-19. The UAE has pulled out of Yemen, but how has your lens changed with Iran, with Yemen, with others in the region given this crisis?  AL OTAIBA: So, there's an opportunity. I think there are some countries who are going to look at the region and at the crisis that they're facing and see an opportunity to try to fix the problem, try to resolve the issue. And there are some crises that are going to allow people to manipulate the situation, or hijack the situation and take advantage of it. You know, I don't think the pandemic is going to force people or countries to change who they are. But whether you see an opportunity to resolve issues and move forward or to create more problems, that ultimately depends on who you are in your true nature.    Clemons: Do you think there's an opportunity that's real with Iran?  AL OTAIBA: I don't know. I think the jury still out, and I think it's still too early to tell. I don't know if corona changes the dynamics and the mindsets of the decisionmakers there. I think we'll still see.   The question I am trying to understand is whether it's corona or climate change or any of these big global challenges that we both know are not capable of being resolved by any one or two or three countries, these are going to require the entire world coming together with a collective response — whether it's this pandemic or the next pandemic or climate change and environment. Does this situation create the ability or the opportunity for us to work together as an international community? Are we going to be better prepared to pool our resources, our research and development, for example, and work together? Are we going to be able to work across borders better on resolving climate change? And this is kind of the big issue I'm trying to get my head around. It's still early, don't know which way we turn, whether we turn right or we turn left. But I really think this gives you the opportunity to think about what kind of world we want to live in.   Clemons: One of the things I've been looking at is how the UAE, which is 10 million in population responded to the COVID crisis, and now you've got about 1 million of those 10 million who have been tested. As we said, you've had about 8,000 cases and 52 deaths. But the level of testing that you deployed per head in your country is somewhat staggering. And I've read other things that you're already developing like smart helmets that the police can detect people's temperatures from afar. How have you been able to achieve so much for a relatively small country in such a short period of time?  AL OTAIBA: We're lucky for a couple of reasons that have nothing to do with, you know, decisionmaking. We are a small enough country that we can make decisions quickly and move quickly. So, our decisionmaking process, whether it's on the security side or on the economic side, or in this case a combination of both — the economic and the health care. They get together, they decide, based on facts. What is the best way to go? Do we go this way? Do we go that way? On the testing, we were just very lucky in that we happened to have a system in place where we manufacture our own tests. So we are, as you correctly pointed out, we have tested up to 10 percent of our population as of today. Our target is to get up to 20 percent. That's 2 million people out of the 10 million people. That is not easy. It's really not easy. It requires a whole of government approach. I saw pictures of a briefing that was given to our leadership, and if you looked at the way the room was set up, there are people from the Health Care Ministry from transportation from security, basically the entire government all working together to achieve a common goal. Now that helps when you have the right people in the right positions. It also helps when you design a system that works pragmatically, efficiently, and works together as a team. That is something that we have focused on for a very, very long time in the UAE. But at the end of the day, because we're only 10 million people, it is manageable.    Clemons: I know a lot of governors and mayors that might like to buy some of your tests if you have any surplus. That said, one of the things we saw in Singapore which was an early success story was a recent spike up in cases. In part, this may have come from not having tested groups of their guest workers. Are you differentiating between UAE citizens and your many expat and guest workers as you manage COVID-19 infections and testing?  AL OTAIBA: The rules apply to everyone. I was in a position about a week ago where a member of my family was flying back and they had to quarantine, just like everyone else coming in. The answer I got was that there are no exceptions. This is a health care policy. This is a risk to anyone. The virus does not distinguish between an Emirati or non-Emirati. Everyone in this is completely, completely equal. I mean, this is the first time I've ever seen, there is no immunity. Doesn't matter if you're from Africa, Asia, Europe or the United States. It doesn't matter if you live in the north or the south. It doesn't matter if you are religious or nonreligious. Your ethnicity or religion is irrelevant here. So, I think our folks understand this, and the rules apply to everyone. One of the things we've managed to do early on is flights were closed very early on; schools were closed very early on; public gathering places like malls and beaches and so on were closed very early on. But we're doing our best to make sure we create an environment where transmission is minimal. Once we get the numbers down to certain trajectories and curves, I think we'll start thinking about what parts of the economy to turn on. But as everyone here is struggling — governors and the administration — finding the right intersection between health care and human risk with turning back on the economy and getting people back to work — it's a very challenging question, and you really need to do everything you can to get that decision right. So, we are struggling with that, just like everyone else.   Clemons: Any lessons learned yet because I was intrigued to learn, for instance, that Etihad Airways is testing its passengers for COVID-19 in real time when they arrive for flights. I don't know what we're doing with United Airlines, American and Delta, but that was a fascinating thing to hear. I was reading that malls are beginning to find pathways to reopen in Dubai and Abu Dhabi, and I'm wondering what some of the best practices are if you know them that are being applied bringing your own economy back.  AL OTAIBA: I think whether it's an airplane or a mall or school, the most important thing you want to do is you want to make people feel safe. So, I read an article yesterday that now Emirates and Etihad are flying only repatriation flights. So if they're trying to bring back Emiratis from country X or country Y, or we're taking expats from the UAE back to their home countries, everyone — before they get on that plane — is now getting a test, and the results of the test comes out before they board the plane. Even when commercial flights start again, I suspect that this will be now part of the new procedure. I think if I am flying back to the UAE, I will get tested before I go on a plane. This will make sure I cannot get on that plane unless I test negative. I think that's going to be the new normal. I suspect you might see something similar in malls where people get their temperature taken. And so, I think we're trying to figure out what that formula looks like from A to B.   Clemons: I want to ask you about something you and I have talked about many times, which is about Arab youth and what Arab youth want in their future. We know that studies have shown Arab youth want better schools; they want science, want jobs. They want religion dictating less what they do and what their choices are. How do you think this crisis is affecting Arab youth and their view of their future?  AL OTAIBA: I'm going to go back to my previous answer is that they have to feel safe. They have to feel whether they are living in the UAE or Egypt or Jordan — they have to feel that their government and their leadership is doing everything they can to protect them, to communicate to them, to make sure that their lives are better tomorrow than it was yesterday. And I know that in the UAE, that's the case because the numbers in the polls that we've both read tell that. But I think if you have confidence in your government before this and your government is doing a good job, you are going to be even more confident in your government after corona. But if you had doubts prior to this, your doubts are probably also going to increase. So, I think this is a stress test of government. How they react and how they respond. The ultimate goal is obviously to deal with and handle the health care policy and side effects of the corona pandemic. But also, your people have to feel that your government is doing the best job that they can to protect them. Ultimately, that's really the core issue between any government and any society.President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE on Thursday suggested medical experts should study exposing the human body to heat and light as a treatment for the coronavirus during Thursday's White House briefing by the president's task force on the virus. Trump's remarks followed a presentation from William Bryan, undersecretary for science and technology at the Department of Homeland Security.  Bryan presented the results of a study that showed the virus deteriorates more quickly when subjected to higher temperatures and humidity — a finding that quickly drew skepticism from other experts on social media and cable television given outbreaks in a number of places with warm climates, such as Singapore and Brazil. Bryan presented data that found how long the virus can live on solid surfaces or in the air was cut significantly under high temperatures, higher humidity and when exposed to sunlight. He said his office was also studying how certain disinfectants might kill the virus more effectively than others, referencing isopropyl alcohol and bleach. Trump latched onto the findings, inquiring multiple times about harnessing the light and heat as part of a potential cure. "So, supposing we hit the body with a tremendous — whether it's ultraviolet or just very powerful light — and I think you said that hasn't been checked but you're going to test it," Trump said. "And then I said, supposing you brought the light inside of the body, which you can do either through the skin or in some other way. And I think you said you’re going to test that too. Sounds interesting." Trump also asked if there was a way to use disinfectants on the body "by injection inside or almost a cleaning."  Pretty interesting suggestion from the president of the United States here. pic.twitter.com/o2UmDRVpW5  Bryan later cautioned that the agency's findings did not mean that sunlight will kill the virus, nor should going outdoors supersede social distancing guidelines put in place by state and federal leaders. "It would be irresponsible for us to say that we feel the summer is just going to totally kill the virus … that is not the case," he said. But he occasionally sent mixed messages, telling one reporter he would personally opt to hold a family gathering outside rather than inside during the summer and explaining that sunlight could have an effect at getting rid of the virus on playground equipment or other surfaces. Asked if it was dangerous to give the impression Americans would be safe from the virus going outside, Trump doubled down on his suggestion to use the heat and light as a cure. "Maybe you can, maybe you can’t ... I’m not a doctor. But I’m, like, a person that has a good you-know-what," Trump said, pointing to his head. He then turned to Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus response coordinator, asking if she had ever heard of using "the heat and the light" to combat the coronavirus. "Not as a treatment," Birx said. "I mean, certainly ... when you have a fever it helps your body respond. But I’ve not seen heat or light." "I think it’s a great thing to look at," Trump said. The U.S. has more than 873,000 confirmed cases of coronavirus, according to data from Johns Hopkins University, including in a number of warm weather and humid climates, further raising questions about the sunlight's impact on the disease. New Orleans was one of the country's first hot spots, while Florida and Georgia have seen increasing cases. Countries located near the tropics have also dealt with infections.  VIEW BREAKING NEWS ON CORONAVIRUS    WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > House expected to pass $484 billion relief package and measure establishing new committee on virus oversight  > In reversal, Trump now says he “disagrees strongly” with Georgia governor  > President says CDC director misquoted, CDC director says not so  > House members, wearing masks, debate and vote on aid bill today  > Another 4.4 million Americans joined jobless rolls last week    Trump vs. scientists. President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE began his news conference Wednesday evening by asking Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Robert Redfield to explain how he was “misquoted” in coverage of a Washington Post interview in which he said that the second wave of COVID-19 will be “more difficult.” Redfield said he was accurately quoted and tried to explain the nuanced differences between “worse” and “more difficult.” This is not the first time the White House has pushed back on the nation’s top scientists. Rick Bright, the doctor who led the federal agency involved in developing a vaccine for COVID-19 said Wednesday that he was removed from his post after pushing for more vetting of hydroxychloroquine, an anti-malaria drug Trump and his allies have repeatedly pushed, despite a lack of evidence it treats the coronavirus. Nancy Messonnier, the director of the CDC’s National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, was nearly fired for publicly warning in February of a mass-scale pandemic hitting the U.S., according to The Wall Street Journal. She has since taken a far less public role in the government’s response to the virus.            So, who do we believe? As the country anxiously awaits a return to normalcy, the contrasting messages from the White House and the nation’s leading public health experts are at best, disconcerting. Should we put our trust in the Faucis and Birxs of the world, or should we trust our elected leaders who, with no experience in public health, are pushing to reopen the economy in lieu of COVID-19 concerns? After all, Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp (R) was perplexed to learn – long after it was initially reported – that the virus could be spread by asymptomatic carriers. He is now pushing for his state to reopen Friday. The decision of whose advice we heed could mean life or death for many.  THE INTERVIEWMikael Dolsten hopeful non-traditional collaborations and FDA dialogue will cut in half vaccine and antiviral development timeline       Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Thursday, April 23.  Editor’s note.    I have been doing a daily commute between Chestertown, Md,. and Washington, D.C., to produce my daily Coronavirus Report interviews. Traffic, as one might expect, is negligible but there are still many making a 5 a.m. trek to jobs and obligations that are necessary to keep the nation’s capital functioning at some basic level. What impresses me both about the scene in D.C. and Chestertown, a small rural Colonial-era town, is how everyone I pass on the street or see from the car is practicing social distancing and standing in lines more than 6 feet apart outside the 17th Street coffee shop Three Fifty. When I walk on the street, people say hello, nod their heads forward in greeting, masks on. In Chestertown, where there are a number of restaurants that allow curbside or at-door pickup, people are wearing masks, and everyone seems to be their most generous self. This is not the D.C. I have known. Those small-town affectations of saying hello to those one doesn’t know have always been part of Chestertown. But for the district, it’s new — and I hope that that is one of the upticks in character that survives this COVID-19 debacle.   In my recent interviews with mayors and lawmakers, including Rep. Debbie DingellDeborah (Debbie) Ann Dingell18 states fight conservative think tank effort to freeze fuel efficiency standards Pelosi: George Floyd death is 'a crime' OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Coal company sues EPA over power plant pollution regulation | Automakers fight effort to freeze fuel efficiency standards | EPA watchdog may probe agency's response to California water issues MORE (D-Mich.), Rep. Brad WenstrupBrad Robert WenstrupThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Sen. Coons says US needs to invest in vaccine manufacturing now; uncertainty looms over states reopening  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: U.S. reaches grim milestone of 50,000 deaths; UAE Ambassador Yousef Al Otaiba says COVID-19 crisis creates opportunity with Iran  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Pfizer's Mikael Dolsten says vaccine development timeline being cut in half; House poised to pass 4 billion relief package MORE (R-Ohio), Miami Mayor Francis Suarez and Seattle Mayor Jenny Durkan, I was struck how they each highlighted the importance of all of us being good to one another. They highlighted acts of kindness like restaurants in some areas of Seattle finding ways to feed those who have very little, donating blood plasma to very ill COVID-19 patients, helping depressed people and intervening in domestic violence situations. There are now more than 26 million newly unemployed people and even more than that if you count partially employed. This is a staggering number of people whose lives have been upended. We need to be aware of this hardship that so many in our community are experiencing and not lose track of them as economic stimulus packages and reopening society are debated.   Today my interview is with Mikael Dolsten, Pfizer’s president of worldwide research, development and medical and chief scientist. He is one of 20 scientists and pharmaceutical representatives who met President Trump in early March to discuss what needs to be done to have a vaccine, or multiple vaccines and anti-virals, in a breathtaking period of time and at a global scale. The seriousness Dolsten brings to this challenge is obvious in our conversation. But what he shared about how firms are sharing data and findings with each other in ways they have not done in this modern era makes one hopeful that the traditional multiyear calendar of discovering drugs, testing them scientifically and bringing them responsibly to market is being collapsed into a much shorter timeline. I asked Dolsten how the price of these drugs and their accessibility is going to be managed — and he said this is a historic, once a century pandemic and that we are going to have to get these therapies to everyone in need and who is ill. There’s a lot of criticism of pharmaceutical firms, but at a time like this, it’s also clear how absolutely essential these reservoirs of talent and engines of scientific research are. It’s a very interesting discussion, and I hope you watch.   — Steve Clemons     Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, Editor-at-Large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.         On April 29, our new 3D journalism platform The Hill Virtually Live will host an online event — Safeguarding Seniors: Health care in a Health Crisis. House Energy and Commerce Committee members Reps. Doris MatsuiDoris Okada MatsuiDozens of Democrats plan to vote remotely in a first for the House Hillicon Valley: Experts raise security concerns about online voting | Musk finds supporter in Trump | Officials warn that Chinese hackers targeting COVID-19 research groups Democrats introduce legislation to ensure internet access for college students MORE (D-Calif.) and Bill JohnsonWilliam (Bill) Leslie JohnsonThe Hill's Campaign Report: Republicans go on the hunt for new convention site Police unions coalition director: Biden 'off the deep end' in calls for reform Ex-CBO director calls for more than  trillion in coronavirus stimulus spending MORE (R-Ohio) will be joining us to talk about supporting seniors, tackling disparities and the role of innovation in the age of COVID-19. They will be followed by a panel conversation featuring Dr. Patrice Harris of the American Medical Association, AARP’s Nancy LeaMond, Karen Freeman-Wilson of the Chicago Urban League and Alliance for Aging Research’s Sue Peschin.  REGISTER HERE and follow @TheHillEvents for additional program updates. Join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 2,665,122 global confirmed cases of coronavirus. 186,131 have lost their lives to COVID-19. There are 845,959 cases reported in the U.S. and 46,972 people in America have died from the virus. 213,024 cases in Spain. 189,973 in Italy. 151,195 in Germany. 139,243 in the U.K. 62,773 cases have been reported in Russia, but most agree that, like China, this number should be far higher. 46,701 cases in Brazil, the hardest hit Latin American country. 42,797 in Belgium. 14,592 in Israel. 10,825 in Pakistan.    263,754 cases have been reported in New York and 15,074 deaths have been reported in New York City, now the global epicenter of the crisis. 95,914 cases in New Jersey. 42,944 in Massachusetts, a state that is seeing its numbers continue to climb dramatically. 36,212 in Pennsylvania. 5,154 in Mississippi. 3,926 cases in Iowa. 3,445 in Utah. 335 cases in Alaska. 54 cases in the U.S. Virgin Islands.    4,493,106 coronavirus tests have been conducted in the U.S. 77,436 patients in America have reported a full recovery from COVID-19.   WASHINGTON WATCH      Wearing masks, House members debate and vote on $484 billion relief package. Members of the House donned face masks Thursday as they took to the floor to debate a $484 billion coronavirus relief package that is expected to pass later in the day. In what appeared to be a first, the House chaplain, reading clerk and other staff members also wore masks while they were on the House floor. (Washington Post)    Cuomo slams McConnell: States declaring bankruptcy is ‘one of the really dumb ideas of all time.’ New York Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) slammed Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE (R-Ky.) on Thursday for saying he supports allowing states to declare bankruptcy amid the coronavirus pandemic. “This is one of the really dumb ideas of all time,” Cuomo said during his daily press briefing. “Not to fund state and local governments is incredibly short-sighted,” he added.  (The Hill)   The president reverses on Georgia. President Trump said Wednesday that he disagrees “strongly” with Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp's (R) decision to allow bowling alleys, hair salons and other businesses to reopen Friday. The comments at Wednesday’s coronavirus task force briefing come on the heels of reports that Trump called Kemp on Tuesday night to express his support and praise for the governor’s decision to reopen. (CNN)  Trump signs executive order suspending immigration to U.S. for 60 days. President Trump on Wednesday announced he had signed an executive order that temporarily suspends the issuance of new green cards, a limit on immigration he says will protect American jobs amid the coronavirus pandemic. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthyKevin Owen McCarthyThe Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges The Hill's Morning Report - Protesters' defiance met with calls to listen Top GOP lawmakers invite Blue Dogs to meet with China Task Force MORE (R-Calif.)  @GOPLeader 4.4 million. That’s how many Americans lost their jobs in the last week—the exact time span that Democrats let the Paycheck Protection Program run out of money. It didn’t have to be this way. These are Pelosi Layoffs. Rep. Lori TrahanLori A. TrahanDemocrats on House Armed Services panel 'dismayed and gravely concerned' with Esper The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Pfizer's Mikael Dolsten says vaccine development timeline being cut in half; House poised to pass 4 billion relief package MA lawmakers press HHS secretary on status of state's protective equipment MORE (D-Mass.) @RepLoriTrahan This is shameful. Children and families should NEVER have to worry about getting the food they need to survive. This shouldn't be a partisan issue. #HandsOffSnap   Rep. Greg SteubeWilliam (Greg) Gregory SteubeHouse lawmakers introduce bill for local chambers of commerce to receive PPP funding Pelosi seeks to wrangle caucus behind next COVID-19 bill The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Pfizer's Mikael Dolsten says vaccine development timeline being cut in half; House poised to pass 4 billion relief package MORE (R-Fla.)  @RepGregSteube On my way back to DC this morning to vote on legislation to empower Florida’s families, small businesses and farmers. Though the airport is empty, the TSA and airline employees are still working hard to keep everyone safe. Thank you to them and all those on the front lines.  ACROSS THE NATION  Las Vegas Mayor under fire for pushing casino reopening. When Carolyn Goodman began her week, the independent mayor of Las Vegas probably did not anticipate that in a matter of days she would become one of the most talked about public officials in the nation — and for all the wrong reasons. During a head-scratching CNN interview, Goodman doubled down on her plan to open the city’s casinos with no knowledge of safety protocols that would be put in place. (Washington Post)   Georgia state Democrats urge Kemp not to reopen businesses yet. Dozens of Democratic lawmakers in Georgia on Thursday urged Gov. Brian Kemp (R) to reconsider plans to begin gradually lifting coronavirus-related restrictions in the state, asking him to wait until testing capacity has improved throughout the state. (The Hill)    Majority of coronavirus patients on ventilators in N.Y. died. More than 85 percent of those placed on ventilators in New York's largest hospital system due to coronavirus symptoms later died from the disease, a study has found. Among those who had to be placed on ventilators,12 percent of the overall population of COVID-19 patients, the death rate jumped to 88 percent, from roughly 20 percent overall. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW China pledges additional $30 million funding for WHO. China has committed $30 million to the World Health Organization (WHO) one week after President Trump halted U.S. funding to the United Nations agency. In announcing the donation Thursday, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang defended the WHO and said the agency under the leadership of Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus has been “actively fulfilling its duties and upholding an objective, scientific and impartial stance.” (Washington Post)    As many as half of European coronavirus deaths came from nursing homes. As many as half of the people who died in Europe from COVID-19 may have lived in nursing homes or long-term assisted living facilities, the top World Health Organization (WHO) official on the continent said Thursday. The Associated Press reported that Hans Kluge, WHO's Europe director, told reporters in a statement that a "deeply concerning" pattern was emerging in homes for the elderly as officials gain a handle over the full extent of the virus's spread. (The Hill)   U.K’s Zoom Parliament launches with few glitches but shows virtual democracy may work for a while. Britain's extraordinary first "Parliament via Zoom" proceeded Wednesday in rather ordinary fashion, with the usual barbed questions and artful evasion by politicians, plus the addition of awkward views of oversize chins and bookshelves staged as backdrops. Everything was the same, and everything was a little odd. (Washington Post)   SCIENCE Infectious disease expert says we won't have a vaccine by next winter. Gregory Poland, who studies the immunogenetics of vaccine response in adults and children at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., and an expert with the Infectious Diseases Society of America says that “we will not have a vaccine by next winter” and warned that “the four seasonal coronaviruses do not seem to induce long-term immunity.” (MarketWatch)   BUSINESS 4.4 million more Americans joined jobless rolls last week. More than 4.4 million Americans filed their first claims for unemployment insurance last week as the U.S. economy bleeds jobs under a lockdown imposed to slow the coronavirus pandemic, the Labor Department reported Thursday morning. (The Hill)  Treasury issues new guidance for small-business loans to make it harder for public companies to get funds.The Small Business Administration issued new guidance on Thursday that makes it “unlikely” that big, publicly traded companies can access the next round of funding for the U.S. government’s small-business relief program. The update comes after a public furor that large companies tapped the Paycheck Protection Program, for hundreds of millions of dollars in loans while thousands of small businesses have yet to receive funding. (CNBC)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSION  Could the coronavirus create a new civic spirit in America? While the coronavirus does unutterable harm to Americans, it also presents us with a great opportunity to think and act once again more as citizens rather than as consumers, techno-internet citizens or hyphenated Americans, as many of us have become during the past few decades. (Fred Zilian for The Hill)  GENEROUS SPIRITS  Mike Bloomberg commits $10M to International Rescue Committee. Bloomberg Philanthropies today announced a $10 million contribution to support the International Rescue Committee’s efforts to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on vulnerable populations across the globe, and for additional work that will be needed to protect these peoples.  To watch Steve’s interview with IRC President and CEO David Miliband, click here.   ICYMI, STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. DEBBIE DINGELL (D-Mich.)  > Steve interviews former Senate Majority Leader BILL FRIST  > Steve interviews Rep. BRAD WENSTRUP (R-Ohio)  > Steve interviews NATO Deputy Secretary General MIRCEA GENONA  > Steve interviews Vanda Pharmaceuticals President and CEO MIHAEL POLYMEROPOULOS > Steve interviews Seattle Mayor JENNY DURKAN Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.     YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.   CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Pfizer's chief scientist Mikael Dolsten.  Excerpts from the interview below: On what he thinks the pharmaceutical world can produce to fight COVID-19.    Clemons: Normally, there is a calendar challenge in developing and releasing new drugs and therapies, but I've read that you're optimistic that we're changing that and speeding up this drug development process in historic ways.  DOLSTEN: Yes, I think given that we have such a new challenge — it's been an opportunity to explore new, more transparent ways to work together. And I think it's inspired the dialogues we have with the regulatory agency to be more facilitating, while at the same time, they want to ensure that the process incorporates the best advise for safe and effective vaccines or medicines. But I think it's moving to a level where we jointly look at the needs of the patient, and as the clock is ticking, trying to make months to weeks, weeks to days, and days to hours. And between companies, we're looking at ways to create a transparent pairing of experiences to learn quickly together, and that has been very stimulating — this reset of the system.   Clemons: I know that you have a partnership that you've announced with BioNTech on a potential vaccine. I know you've been working on antivirals as well and across different parts of the COVID-19 attack spectrum. Can you give us some idea of the various initiatives that Pfizer has in place now? DOLSTEN: Yeah, at the onset off this pandemic, our CEO Albert Bourla defined a five-point plan to stimulate the way we work to get in the ecosystem and how Pfizer can contribute and bring forward its capability, experiences and resources. And one part included for us to leverage the two years of experience we had with a German biotech company BioNTech in bringing forward a new technology that's more rapid and agile and particularly suitable to address viruses that either emerge fast ... and also may change unexpectedly. And this is the technology that we then expanded our original flu partnership into a COVID-19 partnership to advance rapidly. And I'm pleased to say that we announced [yesterday] morning in a press release that our partnership got approved in Germany. We are starting clinical trials with a novel mRNA vaccine technology against COVID-19 and we expect them to start shortly and even imminently in Germany. And at the same time we are finding the requirements to start similar studies in the U.S. and they would be very much going hand in hand.   Clemons: In the article that you wrote in Forbes, you you shared a historical analogy about penicillin being pushed by the British government and the U.S. government as something that had to be developed and scaled during World War II. I didn’t now about this previously. What is similar about that experience to today? DOLSTEN: While a crisis like this is are extreme and unfortunate and sad for all those that suffer, I think sometimes they can stimulate and catalyze, that we find new ways of overcoming obstacles because of the devastating threat we're facing. And if you look at the many tens of thousands of casualties, and even much larger passing a million of infected people. I think it forced us to think outside the box on how we can come together and make sure that we learn quickly and find new ways to bring vaccines and security. And I wanted to actually mention a statement by CDC Director [Robert] Redfield yesterday that while we feel that we have had a tremendous hard time the last few months, we need to take that learning and prepare for — who knows — an even bigger challenge as the flu season this fall will break in maybe September or October. And what if the [coronavirus] comes back, which is highly likely because it will not be expelled by that time because there is no vaccine. I think exactly the same kind of plan was emerging in our preparations here that we want to move swiftly against [COVID-19] now. But we can't wait to have credible and documented with faith in efficacy vaccine no later than October, when we may be hit by multiple viruses, and that enabled us to go backward, to say if we are to have a vaccine in millions of doses to protect people in the greatest need by October, what needs to happen every week until then? And that's the type of dialogue we have had with U.S. and German regulators. And I think this moon shot allows us to find new ways together. I'm optimistic that even though nobody thought it would be possible, that everyone said it will take 12-18 months at least — we now have a plan that's about half that time. And I think pending, you know, positive outcome in clinical studies, pending productive regulatory dialogue, there is a plan that could with a mix of extremely hard work — and no harm to have some luck — could enable you to have a solution that would expel the virus from the public society and bring back the confidence for those in greatest need that they may be protected. And that's really what we're working with.   Clemons: Mikael, the world is watching how this ecosystem of science and pharmaceutical firms responds to this crisis. As a vaccine and antivirals emerge, what are you views on accessibility and pricing for those who need these drugs? DOLSTEN: I think accessibility for patients in need globally is very important for us. It's always important for us, but of course, with a pandemic, it puts this at the head. So, while we think there is a way forward to spend at risk before we have clinical data, manufacturing and assembling resources to be able to have millions of doses in October — and that is just to help those that are most vulnerable to the virus. The front linepeople of society and those that suffer from other diseases that make them fragile. So we think about bringing our resources together. And I think it was a sign of this partnership that we're working with a cutting edge biotech on the technology, but Pfizer’s experience going all the way back to penicillin, which you mentioned, and over many many decades to master this manufacturing network across the globe and without a partner to be able to think about hundreds of millions and even billions of doses. And I welcome the ecosystem to have more than one vaccine because we face this global pandemic. But it's really our vision here to step it up from millions to tens of millions, to hundreds of millions and even billions as we gather the experience and the momentum in this effort. That's the only way to bring back something that looked at least somewhat like we used to call a normal day. Although I think this pandemic, the biggest in a century for us, will change the world. Hopefully some aspect of what was normal when it comes to social networking, when it comes to be able to go in a grocery, when it comes to being able for patients to go to an emergency room, when it comes to what our intensive care unit looks like — that feeling of somewhat back to normal can only be brought back by the vaccine.   Clemons: This week we saw the NIH issue a report that a hydroxychloroquine study had no demonstrable positive impact on patients. We also have tensions over how to reopen the economy and protect public health. What are the illusions of progress we need to be careful of? DOLSTEN: I think to really change this threat to public health, it's only vaccines and therapeutics that can really do that. But as we think about this threat and how we spend our life between that moment and now, it's always important to retain hope that we will be able to change this current very difficult time, that science will win. That's important to keep that hope. But to navigate cautiously. And I think the balance between not having a collapsing business and unemployment versus ensuring that we don't lose tens of thousands of lives — it is a delicate task. I just encourage that there is broad participation of all the necessary voices to make those difficult decisions. And when I was at the White House, I was really encouraged that we were some 20 different experts around the table, and that's my own advice to people — to continue inclusiveness in views and make sure that all aspects of societal concerns, sciences, and the business aspect of keeping society going is weighted equally in the final decision. And I do think it's important to think about today and move cautiously. I think rapid change from working at home to suddenly seeing people at restaurants and shops in kind of a historical way — that would not be a good way. But there may be a midpoint, where one can keep social distancing, where you can keep careful opening up of certain sectors and certain regions while monitoring through testing — and being willing to say we're moving cautiously and constantly incorporating scientific, medical and other social sciences into navigating through these crisis while the solution of a vaccine is the only way to get to a world where we can come back more to normal life. Security is what the physicians and patients need at the hospital. So while this was not a perfect one guiding principle, I think it reflects that cautious move and constantly taking feedback from the environment — and progress in science. Our contribution here is to accelerate the science and continue to give promise that in October we’ll start to have one of several vaccines that could be part of the changing society. And I hope that at the same time or even earlier, the therapeutics will help those with the greatest need. So, Steve. I hope that gave you a bit of a sense of the urgency and that there is progress.VIEW BREAKING NEWS ON CORONAVIRUS    WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > Senate passes $484 billion relief bill, House expected to pass package Thursday  > Trump to shut down immigration, deport infected migrants via executive order  > CDC director says second wave of COVID-19, combined with flu, could be far worse  > It’s Earth Day’s 50th anniversary    Groundhog day? Somehow, in the midst of the worst global pandemic in a century, President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE has shifted attention back to his bedrock issue of immigration. The president is seizing on the pandemic to engineer an immigration ban he’s sought for years, framing it as a step to protect domestic jobs and public health with the U.S. economy continuing to tank. The move is red meat for his base and Democrats are quickly pushing back, accusing the president of shifting his focus to immigration in an effort to distract from his administration’s botched response to the coronavirus. Trump tweeted this morning that he will sign his executive order today to “prohibit immigration into our Country.” And just like that — as Americans continue to die and mass-scale testing remains a grim prospect — the White House is turning to banning immigration.  CDC director warns of second, even more deadly, wave of coronavirus. In an interview with The Washington Post, Robert Redfield, the director of the Centers for Disease and Prevention (CDC), warned that a second wave of the coronavirus will be far more dire because it is likely to coincide with the start of flu season. “There’s a possibility that the assault of the virus on our nation next winter will actually be even more difficult than the one we just went through,” Redfield said.   THE INTERVIEW Seattle Mayor Jenny Durkan tells Steve Clemons She Does Not Believe There is Any City or State in America That Has Adequate Testing and Contact Tracing to Safely Reopen Their Economy      WATCH THE FULL INTERVIEW HERE.  THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Wednesday, April 22. Happy Earth Day!  Editor's note.     So many stories are flowing in these times — there are heroes, and we see them every day, and there are villains. What a remarkable turn when we now know that some U.S. states have resorted to smuggling their personal protective equipment, particularly N95 masks and ventilators, so that they aren’t seized by federal authorities. When the federal government has been a Keystone Cops operation of messaging on everything from “this is a Democratic hoax” to “China did this” to “we’ve done more than enough testing,” to add federal seizures to the mix feels to many like rubbing hot sauce in an already aggravated wound.  Other heroes are the scientists that we don’t get to know as well as Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE and Deborah Birx but who will be vital to the story — those who figure out how to antagonize, deter, disrupt, dislodge and kill the coronavirus. I’ve talked to research scientists at large and small pharmaceutical enterprises, and at universities like Johns Hopkins, and government scientists. The rough consensus is that, because there is no apparent silver bullet in hand to take out this novel coronavirus, we have to try everything. Some drugs, including antivirals and vaccines developed for other viruses, will be in the mix. But the glaring lesson of the week is that despite White House trade adviser Peter Navarro’s doctorate in the social sciences, his read of “anecdotal information” does not come close to what sound and true scientific method produces. And in this case, a National Institutes of Health panel found that there is zero therapeutic benefit to the application of hydroxychloroquine when mixed with azithromycin, which the president, Navarro, Rudy GiulianiRudy GiulianiPiers Morgan, Rudy Giuliani in furious debate over Trump: 'You sound completely barking mad' Rudy Giuliani calls on Cuomo to remove Bill de Blasio Sunday shows preview: States begin to reopen even as some areas in US see case counts increase MORE and others had been promoting. And today, the price of oil surged after President Trump tweeted that the U.S. Navy should “shoot down and destroy” any Iranian gunboats harassing ships in or around the Straits of Hormuz. That’s at least one way to get the price of oil higher. Today, I interviewed one of the nation’s heroes, Seattle Mayor Jenny Durkan who stood strong through the wave of COVID-19 that rocked her city and region. She has thoughts on how we build trust with our citizens and workers and get back to being a healthy society.   — Steve Clemons   _______________________________________________________________________________________   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, Editor-at-Large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.         On April 29, our new 3D journalism platform The Hill Virtually Live will host an online event — Safeguarding Seniors: Healthcare in a Health Crisis. We’ll be looking at how Medicare is stepping up to support seniors, what it will take to protect underserved communities and the role of telemedicine. Watch this space as we announce registration details and program speakers.  REGISTER HERE and follow @TheHillEvents for program updates.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 2,603,147 reported cases of COVID-19 across the globe. 830,789 cases in the U.S., now accounting for 45,638 of the world’s 180,784 deaths. With 25,085 deaths in Italy. 21,717 in Spain. 20,829 dead in France. Canada’s numbers are rising and our neighbors to the north are nearing 40,000 confirmed coronavirus cases. 20,471 in India. 17,837 in Peru. 12,772 in Saudi Arabia. Chile, which is now issuing “immunity passports” to those who have successfully recovered from the virus, has reported 11,296 cases. 10,141 in Singapore. 8,238 in the United Arab Emirates.    A staggering 258,589 cases are confirmed in New York. 92,862 in New Jersey. 36,082 in Pennsylvania. 10,460 in Colorado. 12,444 in Indiana. South Carolina, which will begin slowly reopening businesses along with other southern states, has 4,608 cases.    4,171,896 COVID-19 tests have been conducted in the U.S. And more than 75,000 people in America have reported full recoveries from the virus. A question on the top of everyone’s mind is whether or not those 75,000 people are now immune to the virus? Or does reinfection pose a significant threat?   WASHINGTON WATCH      Trump shuts down immigration by executive order today. “I will be signing my Executive Order prohibiting immigration into our Country today,” President Trump tweeted this morning. “In the meantime, even without this order, our Southern Border, aided substantially by the 170 miles of new Border Wall & 27,000 Mexican soldiers, is very tight - including for human trafficking!” he added. (The Hill)   Give war a chance? Oil jumps after Trump orders Navy to ‘shoot down and destroy’ Iranian gunboats. After two dark days for crude oil prices are rallying again Wednesday morning after President Trump triggered a small short-covering rally by tweeting that he has ordered the U.S. Navy to "shoot down and destroy" Iranian gunboats if they harass U.S. ships. Once again, Trump’s tweet managed to lift oil prices hinting at an escalation of conflict with Iran. (OilPrice.com) Battle heats up for fourth coronavirus relief bill. The Senate’s passage of a $484 billion coronavirus relief bill on Tuesday is setting the stage for negotiations on an even bigger package that could rival the $2.2 trillion CARES Act passed by Congress last month. Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE (D-Calif.) and Senate Minority Leader Charles SchumerCharles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerGOP lawmaker calls on Senate to confirm Michael Pack as head of US media agency McConnell blocks resolution condemning Trump over treatment of protesters House Democrat demands answers from Secret Service about role breaking up White House protests MORE (D-N.Y.) are calling for “a big, strong and active” coronavirus relief package, but Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE (R-Ky.) is pressing pause, warning about the cascading U.S. debt. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. Martha McSallyMartha Elizabeth McSallyFox News polls: Trump trails Biden in Ohio, Arizona and Wisconsin Kelly holds double-digit lead over McSally in Arizona: poll The Hill's Campaign Report: Minneapolis protests rock the nation MORE (R-Ariz.) @SenMcSallyAZ Thanks to Harvard for my master’s degree. But @tedcruz and @Greta are right: give it ALL back. Use your $40 billion endowment to help struggling students.   Rep. Alma AdamsAlma Shealey AdamsDemocrats press OSHA official on issuing an Emergency Temporary Standard COVID-19 could exacerbate eating disorders rates in children — here's how to combat it  Hillicon Valley: Experts raise security concerns about online voting | Musk finds supporter in Trump | Officials warn that Chinese hackers targeting COVID-19 research groups MORE (D-N.C.) @RepAdams Man-made climate change is an existential threat that puts our lives at risk, and those of all future generations. This #EarthDay, we should recommit to addressing the climate crisis with all deliberate speed.   Rep. Tom EmmerThomas (Tom) Earl EmmerHouse Republicans voice optimism on winning back the House following special election victories GOP pulls support from California House candidate over 'unacceptable' social media posts Trump campaign launches new fundraising program with House Republicans MORE (R-Minn.) @RepTomEmmer Incredible to see Tina Peterson, a FedEx truck driver from @BlaineMN speaking at the @WhiteHouse. Truck drivers have been some of the silent heroes throughout this pandemic. I am grateful to them for keeping the nation supplied and the American economy moving.  ACROSS THE NATION  Study shows 74 percent of Americans have been mostly or completely isolating. Adults who follow social distancing guidelines generate at least 90 percent fewer contacts per day than those who do not, according to new Gallup data.   Atlanta mayor pleads with residents to reject governor’s reopening of Georgia. Saying “Look at the Science,” Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms (D) is urging city residents to stay home even as Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp (R) plans to reopen the state at the end of the week. (The Hill)   Florida coordinating reopening with five southern states. Florida is a part of the coalition of southern states (including Georgia) that is coordinating to reopen their economies. This new coalition has formed as the states see increasing coronavirus cases and lack the testing capacity some public health experts say is needed to safely reopen. Gov. Ron DeSantisRonald Dion DeSantisDeSantis pushing to host Republican National Convention in Florida Florida bars and theaters to reopen starting Friday, DeSantis says DeSantis says he's sending 500 National Guard troops to DC MORE (R) said Wednesday morning that the cohort of states “shared a lot of ideas” and think they will “be on the same page on some stuff.” (The Hill)  Dentists want coronavirus testing kits before reopening. The American Dental Association wants the Department of Health and Human Services to supply testing kits to dentists so they can swab patients once the economy reopens. (The Hill)  WORLD VIEW  China shrugs off Missouri lawsuit, calling it ‘very absurd.’ China is firing back against a lawsuit Missouri brought earlier this week over Beijing's handling of the novel coronavirus outbreak, which was first detected in Wuhan, China, last year and has killed more than 45,000 people across the United States. (The Hill)     Russian medical workers say COVID-19 is ravaging their ranks, but hospital chiefs are silent. Russia’s hierarchy of fear — from the president down to head doctors in hospitals — appears to be stepping up its intimidation against anyone speaking out about shortages and infections in health care ranks as the COVID-19 pandemic expands across the country. (Washington Post)     Eight children test positive for coronavirus in Tokyo care facility. Eight infants and toddlers at a care center in Tokyo have tested positive for the coronavirus, officials said Wednesday, raising concerns about a wider outbreak at care facilities in the country for neglected or abused children. (New York Times)   SCIENCE FDA commissioner: At-home coronavirus test as accurate as one done in doctor's office. Stephen Hahn, the commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, on Wednesday said the agency’s newly authorized at-home coronavirus test is “very easy and safe to perform.” LabCorp, which operates one of the world’s largest clinical laboratory providers, will be making and receiving the tests. (The Hill) Germany set to begin its first clinical vaccine trials. A German biotechnology company said Wednesday that a coronavirus vaccine candidate it had developed with American pharmaceutical company Pfizer had been approved for clinical testing in Germany, raising hopes that a working coronavirus vaccine could become available soon. (New York Times)   BUSINESS Tyson Foods closes Iowa pork plant indefinitely after coronavirus outbreak. Tyson Foods is suspending operations at its pork processing plant in Waterloo, Iowa, because too many workers have been absent due to the coronavirus pandemic. All 2,800 workers of the plant will be asked to come in for coronavirus testing, which will determine the timing of its reopening. (The Hill) Lack of national testing apparatus spurs 3D printing of nasal swabs. A group of hospitals and companies are turning to 3D printers to ramp up production. Researchers at University of South Florida Health, a Tampa-based medical school, and Northwell Health, New York’s largest health care provider, teamed up to develop a 3D-printed swab they can make at hospitals. (CNBC)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSION  COVID-19 lessons for the 50th anniversary of Earth Day. Let’s mark the 50th anniversary of Earth Day with a commitment to bring the learning from the difficult COVID-19 experience to the climate change battle. While the threat may not seem as immediate or as stark, the debate over what must be done to avoid reaching a crisis point may seem eerily familiar. (Daniel Esty for The Hill)  GENEROUS SPIRITS        In Melbourne, Australia, street artists created a mural to honor the health care workers on the front lines of the country’s fight against COVID-19.  Brad Paisley crashes virtual happy hours with fans. The country music singer has been popping up on various Zoom hangouts to raise a glass to front-line workers during the coronavirus pandemic. (Fox News)   ICYMI, STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Miami Mayor and coronavirus survivor FRANCIS X. SUAREZ  > Steve interviews Rep. DEBBIE DINGELL (D-Mich.)  > Steve interviews APHA Executive Director DR. GEORGES BENJAMIN  > Steve interviews former Senate Majority Leader BILL FRIST  > Steve interviews Pennsylvania acting Secretary of Banking and Securities RICHARD VAGUE  > Steve interviews Rep. BRAD WENSTRUP (R-Ohio)  > Steve interviews NATO Deputy Secretary General MIRCEA GENONA  > Steve interviews Vanda Pharmaceuticals President and CEO MIHAEL POLYMEROPOULOS   Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES     Statement Masks? Suzanne Garwood shared a photo of her go-to face covering: a bandana featuring headshots of female political leaders. With the use of face coverings mandated in large swaths of the country, folks are finding new ways to protect themselves when in public – and maybe even add a political statement along the way.    SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.    VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Seattle Mayor Jenny Durkan. Yesterday, the mayor issued an economic forecast for Seattle with two economic scenarios, one for rapid recovery and another for slow recovery. Both scenarios highlight significant job loss and high unemployment. Some excerpts from the interview are below: Clemons: What are the big factors in whether you've got a fast return or a slow return?  Clemons: You and I talked about where was the 50-plus community and how they were being engaged —and also about the large homeless community. How are these two communities figuring into your COVID-19 realities now? Durkan: At the very beginning of this, we knew where we are going to have to focus our resources are on both those most vulnerable health-wise and those most vulnerable economically. And looking at our aging population, and our homeless population, we very concertedly worked with local county officials to make sure we could stand up a range of new shelter space so that people in existing shelters could have more distance between them, as recommended by our health officials. We also worked with the county and stood up a number of quarantine and isolation facilities. So people who may not be able to recuperate at home because they had no home would have somewhere to go to. And right now, I think we're seeing across America that ground zero for the ongoing fight against this virus is in our senior population. Seattle in Washington State, like everywhere else, is seeing significant virus spread in our senior centers. It is one of the greatest challenges. Clemons: What more do you need to make that work better than it is?Durkan: Again, it goes back to two things. One is adequate testing capabilities. We still don't have it. We started a program last week to try to get in strike teams to our senior centers. And the test kits were recalled because some of them were contaminated. They were kits that one of our medical centers had obtained overseas. And it just goes to show you ... it's like a scavenger hunt. You have cities and states and medical facilities literally hunting the world for basic supplies like testing swabs and masks for our health workers. We can't have that and win this fight. If we don't have a sustained ability to have a supply of the basic things we need to fight this virus, we won't be successful. And so we need to quit pitting city against city, state against state and have a cohesive plan for America.Clemons: You share this sort of this law of the jungle out there right now. Maryland's Gov. Larry Hogan recently acquired 500,000 test kits from South Korea and the president wasn't thrilled about that. We've been reading stories today and yesterday over federal seizures of equipment that have been going to hospitals and cities and places around the country that have been seized without transparency as to where they're going. How bad is that scene?Durkan: It's terrible. I mean, I think that, you know, when you have literally cities trying to find source stuff in China and Korea and Italy — I can recall one event where we had masks come into a port in California that the state thought they were going to be able to get, and then they ended up in a bidding war with others. It goes back to everyone staying at home right now that has watched any amount of TV. How many pharmaceutical ads do you see? They're on all the time. Those companies have some of the most innovative manufacturing capability in the world. It has to be turned to developing first the diagnostic testing capability. Second testing for antibodies and then third long-term — that if we can get a vaccine that we can do it at a very significant level. And every American has a right to that. And that won't happen if we just let market forces do it. We have to be able to make sure that happens so that we can successfully get out of this and reopen the most innovative economy there is.Clemons: How do you go about reopening the economy? We see in Georgia right now different signals between the governor who wants to reopen and the mayor of Atlanta is telling her people to follow the science and not to open. How do we manage this?Durkan: First, I think that Mayor [Keisha Lance] Bottoms, like Mayor [Stephen] Benjamin in South Carolina, are really doing a public service by raising the right questions. And this all works better if officials work together to find a path forward. I can't say enough about Gov. Inslee and the leadership he's given in Washington state, but we've had mayors and county executives throughout the state of different parties working things out and figuring out a path forward. Number one is you can't make this a political issue. It is a public health issue, and the virus is going to produce and replicate and transmit according to the laws of science. And you have to start with that as your premise. And second, we know people are weary of being inside. We also know this has had devastating impacts on so many Americans. So many people in Seattle — workers, small businesses — and we need to be able to reopen our society to bring people back together and our economy. But if we don't do it in a smart and measured way and see what is happening as we do it, we literally will not only be back where we were in February, we'll be in a worse place. I liken this to everyone's been in a shopping mall where you can take the elevator up to the top floor, and then you have to take the escalator down and you have to usually circulate halfway through the floor. Well, we shut this economy down by taking the elevator up, even though we did it gradually, in a dial. Now we're going to have to take the escalator down, level by level and see how do we bring people together? Clemons: You've been a leader for the LGBTQ community but in the spirit of Miami Mayor Francis X. Suarez donating blood plasma, gay men have been told they can't donate their plasma. And I just want to ask your thoughts on that on then expound on what else can everyone do out to play a constructive role in this crisis?Durkan: Well, Steve, I think it's ironic about the blood donations. We're seeing such an intersection and replay in many ways of the AIDS crisis of the late 80s and early 90s. We had a virus that was spreading. No one knew the cause. There was no vaccination for it, and no cure for it. And Dr. [Anthony] Fauci was leading the charge to find one. And here we are decades later in a very similar battle. And so I think what we should have learned before that I hope we learn now is we really have to, A, base it on science, and B, we cannot vilify anyone or do what was done early on in this to try to label this, for example, a Chinese virus. We saw a lot of acts of discrimination and harassment in our community against the Chinese American community. You know this, we're all in this together, and every community everywhere is going to have to dig deep. And I will tell you, I have been so inspired by the way that Seattle has responded to this. Just this week, I had a conference call with some of the owners of small businesses in Seattle, most of them from communities of color whose businesses had to close down because of our orders. But they found a way to keep their kitchens open to feed their community. And those are the kinds of inspirational acts of selflessness and courage that we're seeing day after day. And I really want to highlight those people — from our front-line health care workers and first responders, to the people who are feeding their communities, finding creative ways to check on people, make masks. I've seen much more of that than I've seen of the negative. And that's what gives me hope and inspiration.The Hill’s Steve Clemons talks with Mihael Polymeropoulos, president and CEO of Vanda Pharmaceuticals, to discuss the company’s phase three trial to address Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome, which many COVID-19 patients are dying from and how the biopharmaceutical industry is moving the needle in the search for a treatment and vaccine to treat coronavirus. Excerpts from the interview are below:   On the state of his company’s fight against acute respiratory distress syndrome Vanda Pharmaceuticals CEO Mihael Polymeropoulos: As you said there's a lot going on — a lot of people working very hard— to figure out solutions in health to respond to this catastrophic pandemic crisis. As you mentioned, COVID-19 is a very scary infection, primarily because we know that some people end up with acute respiratory failure, and they die from the consequences of that infection. So, what we're doing is, we're trying to understand whether we can block this neuro-inflammatory process that ends up in the collapse of the lung. Tradipitant is a neurokinin 1 receptor antagonist, a molecule that interacts with this neuro-inflammatory pathway when it is initiated through Substance P. So the idea here is that administering an antagonist in the pathway, tradipitant, will block the inflammatory process and hopefully early enough so that it does not result in the mechanical ventilation support of the patients and the high mortality rates that we have been seeing.   Clemons: What is, what have you been seeing? I know that these are early trials and I don't know the rules on what you can disclose, but is it promising? Polymeropoulos: I don't think we can say anything yet. This trial began just last week at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York. A few patients have already been randomized — and again this is a double blind study that is placebo controlled, meaning that on top of all the standard of care, half the patients are taking tradipitant and half are taking a placebo. And this is in order to ensure that we have a good experiment. The good news is that hopefully we can enroll the study quickly, and in the next two months and soon thereafter, we'll have the results. And again, we must try as a pharmaceutical industry a lot of solutions — some of them will work, others won’t — but we need to do good experiments and be able to either confirm or exclude a therapeutic.     Clemons: How hard has it been to move your researchers from your various research lines you had going to now focus on COVID-19 therapies and drugs?  Polymeropoulos: How come Vanda, a company that did not have a presence in antivirals, is actually in it now in a big and comprehensive way. That comes out of the conviction that as a pharmaceutical company not only do we need to develop drugs that can be helpful to people and hopefully be commercially successful, but we have a sense at Vanda of social responsibility. And that is, we are a pharmaceutical company after all. And while all of us are locked up in our homes, and we hope that somebody is going to treat us, somebody is going to find a cure. For employees of a pharmaceutical company, it is imperative that they jump in and try to do all they can. And that's exactly what we did at Vanda over the last month. We developed a comprehensive plan going after COVID-19 and we're looking at ways to interfere with the virus, the virus entry, the virus development and assembly inside the cell. And as we have been discussing in the last few minutes, with tradipitant and the ODYSSEY study to address the acute respiratory distress syndrome. The rest of the company is running as well. What you're seeing here is rising to the occasion. Of course, a couple of other studies in atopic dermatitis and gastroparesis are going to move a little slower. Hopefully, we'll catch up. But we thought as a pharmaceutical company, there's no option but actually to jump into COVID-19.   Clemons: Is the research ecosystem on COVID-19 chaotic or ordered in the right way? Polymeropoulos: It's hard for me to know what is chaotic and what is not. But I will say that we've seen the FDA be very cooperative and trying to accommodate the projects and respond quickly. I’ll give an example. Beyond the projects we're doing now, we're pursuing additional projects as well, and we've seen a fantastic response in timing and willingness to collaborate. But I think there's an overarching need that we need to be very careful with. All of us hear about vaccines. We hear about the antivirals. We hear about the IL-6 inhibitors and the studies that are being done. We, as a scientific community of the industry, know very well that it's going to take a lot of different things to conquer the virus and conquer this disease. And we need to try them all. Past experience with difficult infections like HIV/AIDS have taught us that it takes a lot of strategies, that you need to try them all and they will evolve over time. So, Vanda’s approach of looking at many points in the evolution of the disease, we think, is the right thing to do. And we hope that the government can actually help us by encouraging this approach. The solution is not going to be just a wonderful vaccine 12 to 18 months from now. Hopefully that happens, and we never think about COVID-19 again. But the world is not perfect, and we're going to need antivirals. We're going to need them to be comprehensive and we're going to need the ways to help the people who are dying today. People are not dying just because the virus got into their cells. They die because of respiratory failure.    Clemons: I know you've been pushing to get more African Americans, Hispanics and Asians into clinical trials. Is that happening? Is that happening not only on your front, but other fronts? Is that a blind spot in this process? Polymeropoulos: I think underneath that is that we know different people are going to respond differently. We still have no idea why some people end up in the hospital and end up on the respirator; some of them die and others are asymptomatic. What causes that? It is the same virus after all. We believe that there is a reason to look at how people respond. Not because of the disease burden and socioeconomic status, but because of the wonderful differences in our genetic makeup that makes us a diverse people. But this is exactly where the research project CALYPSO comes in. It is a project to uncover the genetic reasons of different responses to this infection — people are more likely or less likely to be infected or more likely to experience this severe disease or not. There is a significant role for the government here. We hear a lot about the elderly with underlying conditions. We need to be careful generalizing. It is not just the elderly with underlying conditions. It is that this virus affects people in ways that we don't understand, and people respond in ways that we don't understand. What makes that response different? It is very important that we do not over generalize that it is just the elderly and it is just underlying conditions. It's going to be a lot more and it's going to take a lot of work to figure it out.The Hill's Steve Clemons talks to NATO Deputy Secretary General Mircea Geoană about the broad national security picture today in the coronavirus era. Excerpts from the interview below:  On whether NATO concocted the novel coronavirus:     Clemons: NATO is a membership organization, and many of your members have had a tough time with COVID-19, including the U.S., Italy and Spain. How are you navigating this? Geoană: It’s normal, psychologically and politically, for nations to try in the first stage of such a massive shock to turn a bit inwards and look after your citizens. In fact, that's what governments are supposed to be doing, to defend the citizens they are supposed to defend and represent. So, the first stage was a little bit more inward looking. But as we moved a little bit more from this initial stage, we have seen here in NATO a remarkable sense of solidarity reemerging. We've seen help to Italy coming from the U.S. Today, as we speak, a new contingent of Slovak medical doctors, civilian and I think also military, are going to the rescue of our Italian friends and allies. Medical doctors and nurses from Albania, from Romania, are going to Italy and to Spain. We've seen, as you mentioned in the numbers, a significant increase of inter-allied support. Of course, we don't have as NATO our own assets, per se. It's still the government's, but because we are so good in logistics, in strategic airlift, in command and control, allies prefer sometimes to use NATO because our efficiency is well proven in different crises. We are also very good in what we call in generic terms, resilience. We have basic requirements, baseline requirements for many of the components of our economic and social fabric in our nations that NATO is very good in doing this — in infrastructure, in energy security, in civilian-civil military cooperation, in emergency situations. As we speak inside NATO, we are already beginning an upgrade of our resilience package, making sure that we also move to the first stage, which is not only a gradual economic reopening of activities and a gradual return to normal life, but also a process of lessons learned because this is a pandemic. This is a major shock that has impact on us and serious governments and serious organizations like the one in the political West and also inside the world community — they're drawing lessons on what we should do next to be better prepared and respond together.   Clemons: I've been watching with admiration stories about the Czech airlift of a million masks to North Macedonia, NATO air lifting supplies like ventilators and masks to places like Spain, the coordination and the response centers, the hospital tents, all of the kinds of things that that you've been putting forward. In contrast, the U.S. has had tremendous logistics and supplies difficulties. Is the United States playing a constructively positive role in NATO’s logistics picture because it doesn't feel that we're doing that well for ourselves here in the United States? Geoană: This is a moment of pride for us. We see in all ally nations and also in many countries around the world, in these very difficult moments, our military personnel coming to the forefront of our common obligation to defeat and fight this damn virus. We see tens of thousands of military personnel from all 30 NATO allies helping in putting themselves in harm's way alongside civilian medical personnel, making sure that this infection — that even sometimes helping the local police or the national police or gendarmerie in some cases in Europe. They're really stepping up their game. We're very proud of our military, of course, of the ones who continue to be in our missions and operations all over Europe and also in the theaters I just mentioned, but also in our nations. My country Romania. I'm coming from Romania. I was ambassador to Washington. You mentioned my days in Washington. I still remember with great, great fondness and love that period of time. For my nation, the United States has given additional flying hours for the NATO strategic airlift, the C-7 big transport airplanes, professional military airplanes that belong to NATO. But nations basically control the number of flight hours that can be used for those planes. The U.S. came to the rescue of Romania. Defense Secretary [Mark] Esper, in our defense ministerial meeting, by secure communication lines just last week mentioned the fact that this is happening. We're not in the business of telling nations what to do domestically — and even less so to get into domestic politics, especially in an election year in one country or another. But what I'm saying, NATO is not the first responder. We're not supposed to be doing that, But the moment there is a need for our logistics, for our command and control, for our military personnel to step up our game and be there when our citizens need us most, I think this test is about to be passed in very good conditions by our organization. Of course, there are lots of things that are not under control. There are economic, social, other components of this crisis. But when it comes to national resilience, to lead by example, including the U.S. I have a regular weekly conference call of coordination with the U.S. under the U.S. initiative with many allies — and also with the European Union. We coordinate and I don't see here a lack of American leadership. We just see an immensely complicated problem that has to be addressed in conditions of duress, of stress. And, of course, sometimes with politics coming to the forefront. But that's the charm of democracies. I would not like to live in a dictatorship, I lived for half of my life in communist Romania. Thank you, no. Never again. So I prefer sometimes a democratic, tough conversation instead of having a top down heavy arm of the state telling me what to do.   Clemons: You and I have talked in the past about which global powers are behaving and which global powers are misbehaving. And I'm interested in your view from Brussels and NATO headquarters. What is Russia doing right now? Are their nations trying to exploit this moment and how is NATO responding? Geoană: Listen, great power competition and competition in general is the name of the game since the beginning of human society being organized, and it will continue as long as you live on this planet — or probably on different planets. But what it is very important to know is that such difficult circumstances should not be used and abused to really advance your narrow, selfish interest in moments of such difficulty. Of course, as I mentioned, there is a natural tendency to look inwards and to look after your own citizens and your national interests. But I personally believe, and we do believe that this volume, this combination of disinformation, fake news, conspiracy theories combined with some form of soft power propaganda — what can we call mask diplomacy. Or the Belt and Silk Road Initiative. Again, we cannot tell nations not to really, you know, play cards and play ball in such situations. But I think this is very detrimental to engage in such operations. And there is a deliberate, continuous and now upgraded effort, especially by Russia, also sometimes by China, to really use this difficult moment to seed discord, mistrust and to weaken our political democratic system in the political West. This is something that we have to fight back. This is something that we are fighting back. VIEW BREAKING NEWS ON CORONAVIRUS    WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > Senate passage of relief bill expected today  > Trump to sign executive order halting immigration to U.S.  > Georgia set to reopen Friday; Atlanta mayor ‘perplexed’ by move > WHO warns against easing lockdown restrictions in all countries  > Stocks down again as oil continues meltdown    Infection vs. Immigration? President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE said Monday evening via Twitter that he will sign an executive order to temporarily suspend immigration to the United States amid the coronavirus pandemic, an extraordinary move that prompted immediate questions about its timing, scope and legality. While the specifics of the move remain unclear, more details are expected to come at today’s White House coronavirus task force briefing. The move has already set off a firestorm of criticism – with Rep. Joaquin CastroJoaquin CastroOusted watchdog says he told top State aides about Pompeo probe CHC says George Floyd death shows 'tiny fraction' of what people of color confront in their daily lives Julián Castro launches PAC to support progressive candidates MORE (D-Texas), the chairman of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus, calling the move “authoritarian-like.”    Atlanta mayor ‘perplexed’ by governor’s move. Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms (D) — whose name has been floated as a potential vice presidential pick for Joe BidenJoe BidenOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Davis: 72 hours cementing the real choice for November OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump signs order removing environmental reviews for major projects | New Trump air rule will limit future pollution regulations, critics say | DNC climate group calls for larger federal investment on climate than Biden plan MORE — said in response to Kemp’s announcement that she is “perplexed that we have opened up in this way.” Bottoms added that the move doesn’t appear to be “based on anything that is logical.” (The Hill)  Other U.S. states and some European countries are also beginning to ease lockdown restrictions and reopen some firms. But, the World Health Organization is warning that cases could sharply increase if measures are rolled back too quickly. “We want to re-emphasize that easing restrictions is not the end of the epidemic in any country,” WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said Monday. (The Hill)   THE INTERVIEWS Steve Clemons talks Coronavirus Russia disinformation with NATO Deputy Secretary General Mircea Geoană — and then Race for COVID Drugs with Vanda Pharmaceuticals President and CEO Mihael H. Polymeropoulos    Watch Steve’s interviews with NATO Deputy Secretary General Mircea Geoană here AND Vanda Pharmaceuticals CEO Mihael Polymeropoulous here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Tuesday, April 21. Editor’s Note.    When then-Navy Secretary Richard Spencer was trying to protect the Navy’s judicial process in the case of trying, demoting and retiring Eddie Gallagher — and taking from him his Navy SEAL trident -— President Trump tweeted that his rank should be restored. Spencer told a number of journalists, including this one, that while he respected the chain of command and the authority of the president, he was “waiting for an official order from the president” and that he didn’t “view a tweet as an official order.” Spencer later called me and said, “Steve, I guess I was wrong. Apparently a tweet is an official order.” So it’s not surprising that Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan (R), reading the president’s tweets and hearing the tenor of his remarks at the daily White House coronavirus briefing, would believe that Trump’s tweets meant governors would be mostly on their own in securing the tests they would need to reopen their economies. That makes sense because the CDC botched the early roll-out of tests with contamination problems in production. It also makes sense because Trump’s former FDA chief Scott Gottlieb has said that the earliest the nation will have the level of tests it needs will be September.     Hogan subsequently went out on his own and purchased 500,000 tests from South Korea. But in this case, it turns out that the president’s tweets were not official policy. Criticizing Hogan at Monday’s briefing, Trump said, “I don’t think he needed to go to South Korea. I think he needed to get a little knowledge — would have been helpful.” Hogan said this week, “the administration made it clear over and over again they want the states to take the lead, and we have to go out and do it ourselves, and so that's exactly what we did.”   Two things here. First, the president is at odds with many governors, mayors, CEOs and workers — as spelled out in my interview last week with Rep. Debbie DingellDeborah (Debbie) Ann Dingell18 states fight conservative think tank effort to freeze fuel efficiency standards Pelosi: George Floyd death is 'a crime' OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Coal company sues EPA over power plant pollution regulation | Automakers fight effort to freeze fuel efficiency standards | EPA watchdog may probe agency's response to California water issues MORE (D-Mich.) — in his view that we are doing enough testing in the U.S. Nearly everyone, including most of his health advisers, is saying we need a broader, deeper and bigger testing platform. In contrast, the president said, “Not everybody believes we should do so much testing,” Trump told reporters. “You don’t need so much. We’re talking about maximum, maximum.”    Secondly, governors around the country, not just Democrats but also Republican Mike DeWine of Ohio and Hogan, are reporting that the national labs in their states lack the resources and supplies to manage testing. That’s a fact at the moment.    The president tweeted that governors were going to have to be responsible for testing — and Hogan took those tweets seriously and got tests for his businesses, schools and residents. New York Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) said Tuesday that his family pressed him on why he didn’t think of Hogan’s idea while also making the case the federal government could have been more helpful in this area.   The bottom line: Hogan did the right thing.   AND ONE OTHER THING. Today is a security and science doubleheader in my interviews with notable leaders in the fight against COVID-19. I’m talking to NATO Deputy Secretary General Mircea Geoană about the broad national security picture today in the coronavirus era. NATO is America’s most important security alliance and this pandemic is clearly a significant threat to not only America’s national security but to our closest allies. I’m also talking to Mihael Polymeropoulos, the CEO of Vanda Pharmaceuticals, the only mid-cap biopharmaceutical firm that has a phase three trial underway addressing Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS), which many COVID patients are dying from.   — Steve Clemons   ____________________________________________________________________   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.    On April 29, our new 3D journalism platform The Hill Virtually Live will host an online event - Safeguarding Seniors: Healthcare in a Health Crisis. We’ll be looking at how Medicare is stepping up to support seniors, what it will take to protect underserved communities and the role of telemedicine. Watch this space as we announce registration details and program speakers. Follow @TheHillEvents for updates.   On April 29, our new 3D journalism platform The Hill Virtually Live will host an online event - Safeguarding Seniors: Healthcare in a Health Crisis. We’ll be looking at how Medicare is stepping up to support seniors, what it will take to protect underserved communities and the role of telemedicine. Watch this space as we announce registration details and program speakers. Follow @TheHillEvents for updates.  CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are now more than 2.5 million global confirmed cases of the coronavirus. The U.S. is home to 788,920 cases and 42,458 people in America have died. Some of the hardest hit European nations are beginning to slowly — and cautiously — reopen their economies as experts believe they have emerged on the other side of the virus’s peak. 204,178 cases in Spain. 181,228 in Italy. 156,495 in France. 147,593 in Germany. 125,856 in England. The question on everyone’s mind is whether or not these numbers are poised to slow down or spike dramatically as Europeans get back to work. Only time will tell.    There are 253,400 confirmed cases in New York. Comparatively, Hubei province in China — where the virus originated — has only reported 68,128 cases. The Chinese numbers have to be taken with a grain of salt, but the enormity of the U.S. caseload and death toll are particularly staggering when compared with COVID-19’s point of origin.    New coronavirus clusters are continuing to crop up throughout the U.S. 88,806 reported cases in New Jersey. Nearly 40,000 in Massachusetts and just above 34,000 in Pennsylvania. 20,087 cases in Texas. 19,398 in Georgia — which is set to reopen parts of its economy later this week. 14,193 cases in Maryland. 12,486 in Washington.    4,026,572 tests have been conducted in the U.S. That’s not nearly enough to warrant a return to normalcy any time soon.   WASHINGTON WATCH        Senate expected to pass relief bill today. Senate Minority Leader Charles SchumerCharles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerGOP lawmaker calls on Senate to confirm Michael Pack as head of US media agency McConnell blocks resolution condemning Trump over treatment of protesters House Democrat demands answers from Secret Service about role breaking up White House protests MORE (D-N.Y.) on Tuesday said he believed Democrats, Republicans and the White House had a deal to provide $350 billion to a coronavirus relief small-business lending program as well as $75 billion for hospitals and $25 billion to expand testing. He added that the Senate could vote on the deal this afternoon. The House will likely clear the measure Thursday. (The Hill)    White House readies push to slash regulations as major part of its coronavirus economic recovery plan. Senior White House and Trump administration officials are planning to launch a sweeping effort in the coming days to repeal or suspend federal regulations affecting businesses, with the expected executive action seen by advisers as a way to boost an economy facing its worst shock in generations, two people familiar with the internal planning told The Washington Post.  Barr: Some governors’ action ‘infringes on a fundamental right’ during coronavirus. Attorney General William BarrWilliam  Pelham BarrFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report Davis: 72 hours cementing the real choice for November Black Lives Matter, protesters sue Trump admin over aggressive crowd clearing MORE said Tuesday that some state governors’ efforts to fight the coronavirus “infringes on a fundamental right” of American residents. Barr said in an interview on “The Hugh Hewitt Show” that governments in the U.S. need to “do a better job” of ensuring coronavirus restrictions are “properly targeted” and do not unnecessarily infringe on constitutional rights. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. Joni ErnstJoni Kay ErnstGOP lawmakers say Steve King's loss could help them in November The Hill's Campaign Report: Biden on the cusp of formally grasping the Democratic nomination  The Hill's Morning Report - Protesters' defiance met with calls to listen MORE (R-Iowa)  @SenJoniErnst When we get through this, it will be because of the nurses, doctors, and health care workers on the front lines of #COVID19. It’s time we give these heroes a tax holiday.   Rep. Linda Sánchez (D-Calif.)  @RepLindaSanchez The U.S. has more #COVIDー19 cases than any other country. Instead of working with Congress to help families get back to work or with states to ramp up testing, Trump is halting all legal immigration. Failing to meet this challenge is much more dangerous than any immigrant.   Sen. Bill CassidyWilliam (Bill) Morgan CassidyGOP senators dodge on treatment of White House protesters The Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - US virus deaths exceed 100,000; Pelosi pulls FISA bill Stakes high for Collins in coronavirus relief standoff MORE (R-La.)  @SenBillCassidy We need to start applying science toward our testing. If we know there is a neighborhood at high risk of infection, we need to proactively screen in that area. That’s how we continue to #FlattenTheCurve, decrease transmission and allow more freedom in the economy.  ACROSS THE NATION  Hundreds of thousands in L.A. County may have been infected, study finds. Hundreds of thousands of Los Angeles County residents may have been infected with the coronavirus by early April, far outpacing the number of officially confirmed cases, according to a report released Monday. (Los Angeles Times)    Despite outbreaks, Iowa governor refuses to shut down states’ meat plants. Gov. Kim Reynolds (R) is refusing to shut down Iowa’s meatpacking plants despite growing concerns over workers’ safety as more coronavirus clusters begin to pop up throughout the plants. Reynolds acknowledged that the plants “will continue to see clusters of positive cases” but insists that “keeping that food supply chain moving” is her top priority. (AP/KCRG)    Wisconsin health officials link seven coronavirus cases to in-person voting. Health officials in Wisconsin are reporting that seven people are thought to have contracted COVID-19 while taking part in the state’s controversial April 7 primary election. Six of the positive cases are voters and the other is a poll worker. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW   Europe thinks it is past the peak of the first wave of the virus. In Italy, Spain, France, Germany and Britain, public health officials — their faces often drained by exhaustion — are now expressing cautious optimism that the first wave of Europe’s devastating pandemic is ending. From Ireland to Greece, officials are seeing hopeful signs that coronavirus infections are peaking and have begun to plateau or recede, pointing to a daily reduction in the number of new hospitalizations. (Washington Post)           Coronavirus clusters at Mexico’s hospitals raise alarm, protests. A series of outbreaks at hospitals have rattled Mexicans and raised questions about the Social Security Institute, the country’s biggest public health network. Nurses and doctors have held protests around the country. The governor of Baja California, Jaime Bonilla, lashed out at federal authorities for the lack of protective gear in his border state, saying doctors were “dropping like flies.” (Washington Post)   SCIENCE FDA authorizes first coronavirus test collected at home. The Food and Drug Administration on Tuesday announced that it is authorizing the first coronavirus test that allows patients to collect samples at home themselves. (The Hill)  BUSINESS Stocks extend dropoff as oil markets remain negative. Stock markets opened to significant drops on Tuesday, extending their Monday fall, as oil markets remained in disarray and in some cases had negative prices. (The Hill)  Delta CFO rescinds retirement as coronavirus roils air travel. Delta Air Lines Chief Financial Officer Paul Jacobson has rescinded his retirement and now plans to stay with the carrier as it struggles through the devastating impact of the coronavirus on air travel.  (CNBC)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSION  Reopening America’s skies: How to fly safely in the COVID-19 era. To reopen America, the federal government should focus on what it can control. Targeted health screening procedures at our nation’s airports, informed by the evolving nature of this virus, will build needed trust and confidence. (Meryl Justin Chertoff for The Hill)    How human-centered tech can beat COVID-19 through contact tracing. Ultimately, the best technological interventions to fight COVID-19 will be the ones designed in collaboration with contact tracers to enable them to do their best work and integrated into the planning processes of these programs. (Margaret Bourdeaux, Mary L. Gray and Barbara Grosz for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS  Virginia-based bridal shop is giving away 75 wedding dresses to health care workers. As many wedding plans have shifted due to the global coronavirus crisis, one bridal shop is doing something to help ease the minds of brides-to-be working on the front lines. On Instagram, Ava Clara Couture Bridal announced a wedding gown giveaway event for hospital nurses located in the Hampton Roads area of Virginia. (Good Morning America)   ICYMI, STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Miami Mayor and coronavirus survivor FRANCIS X. SUAREZ  > Steve interviews Rep. DEBBIE DINGELL (D-Mich.)  > Steve interviews APHA Executive Director DR. GEORGES BENJAMIN  > Steve interviews former Senate Majority Leader BILL FRIST  > Steve interviews Pennsylvania acting Secretary of Banking and Securities RICHARD VAGUE  > Steve interviews Rep. BRAD WENSTRUP (R-Ohio)  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEVIEW BREAKING NEWS ON CORONAVIRUS    WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > Congress inches closer to deal on small-business aid  > Governors under fire to reopen as testing capacity remains slim > White House extends travel restrictions to Canada, Mexico   > Ex-FDA chief says U.S. won’t have mass-scale testing until September > Impact of crisis on economy collapses oil futures into negative prices for first time in history         The weekend that was. From Colorado to Maryland, state capitals across the country were flooded with demonstrators this past weekend who are protesting their respective states’ lockdown measures. Many fear these gatherings could be counterintuitive and that congregating in protest will spread the virus and force stay-at-home measures to be extended. After all, there is a clear oxymoron among protesters carrying signs warning that the coronavirus is a “hoax” as they take to the streets in masks to protect against a virus they argue is not deadly enough to warrant economic ruin. As President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE takes to Twitter in apparent support of the protests, governors across the country are under new political pressure. The nation’s governors — and the president — now find themselves grappling with a choice that pits two calamities against one another: the death of the economy or the death of Americans.    Senate sets up Tuesday session to try to pass coronavirus relief deal. The Senate will try to pass a forthcoming agreement on coronavirus aid as soon as Tuesday if negotiators are able to reach a deal. The Tuesday meeting will give the chamber another chance to pass a deal on an "interim" coronavirus relief bill, and keep the House on track with House Majority Leader Steny HoyerSteny Hamilton HoyerPelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Calls for police reform sparks divisions in Congress Hoyer wins Maryland House primary MORE's timeline of voting as soon as Wednesday. (The Hill)  Ex-FDA Chief says U.S. not likely to have mass testing until September. Former FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb told NBC News’s “Today” that he thinks some lesser-impacted states are ready to start reopening, but when asked about the status of U.S. testing capability said, “We won’t have the testing we want until September, I think, in the kind of broad coverage.” (NBC News)  THE INTERVIEW Wenstrup blasts China and World Health Organization for deceit; says America needs to rethink its supply chains       Watch the full interview here.    THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Monday, April 20  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Monday, April 20.  Editor's Note.    The footprint of COVID-19 in the United States is staggering compared with any other nation. There are now more than 760,000 confirmed cases, more than 40,000 dead, and 7,800 in critical condition in America today. We hear from numerous experts that the curve is flattening. But this level of infection raises the legitimate question of how workers will trust the health standards of their workplaces, their colleagues, and those of shops they frequent while encountering people they don’t know on buses and subways.    I should begin by noting that as a journalist, it’s highly unusual for me to pretend to be someone I am not. But, we find ourselves in times that are just that: unusual and confusing. So, in an effort to bring you, our readers, a glimpse into the difficulty of finding a COVID-19 test – I made a few calls this morning to try to track one down.    I tried in Washington, D.C., which is still under strong shutdown measures ordered by Mayor Muriel Bowser, but I told several doctor’s offices that I was an essential worker and needed to get tested to be allowed into my workplace. I got nowhere as I reported I’m showing no symptoms and had had no contact with anyone I believed had COVID-19, but I said “everyone knows the dangers of this are from asymptomatic people — not infected people.” It didn’t help.    I did the same calling Detroit. I pretended that I wanted to open my small business. Nothing. I just got off the phone from a testing center in Cleveland. I called Tallahassee, Fla., to see how I could get guidance, as a small-business owner, on following the president’s lead and trying to get tests to reopen my business. I got no help and heard a lot of frustration on the other end of the line. My last call was to Minneapolis where the person I spoke to said they would try hard to get me access to tests for my employees, but I could tell this person was trying to make me feel good about the process and probably couldn’t deliver.   There may be places out there better organized and prepared to give guidance to the firms the president wants to reopen. But I couldn’t find them. I tried hard. While many are probably right that we need orders of magnitude more tests, almost omnipresent in our lives, daily or weekly tests to establish high-trust contacts and high-trust environments, the other missing parts of this equation are not swabs and reagents but simple messaging guidance to those out there in communities across America who are going to be looked to for guidance as millions of businesses try to come back online in a responsible way. That guidance is missing. What I did feel was overwhelming the system was frustration and chaos.   – Steve Clemons Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.    On April 29, our new 3D journalism platform The Hill Virtually Live will host an online event – Safeguarding Seniors: Healthcare in a Health Crisis. We’ll be looking at how Medicare is stepping up to support seniors, what it will take to protect underserved communities and the role of telemedicine. Watch this space as we announce registration details and program speakers. Follow @TheHillEvents for updates.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE The U.S. has surpassed 760,000 COVID-19 cases and the virus has killed more than 40,000 in the country. While many urban centers are now reporting that they feel they’re on the back end of the curve, meaning that the number of new infections is slowing and thus the future death rate will come down as well, that doesn’t appear to be the case for many Midwest states and rural areas where numbers are now surging. Even Wyoming, which had among the lowest number of cases in the nation, is now posting official infections at 426 (including confirmed and probable cases), up 113 in a day.  West Virginia is at 890 confirmed cases and 20 deaths. Texas at 19,411 cases and 500 deaths. Pennsylvania at 32,991 cases and 1,276 deaths. Kansas has 1,949 cases. Iowa is now at 2,902 cases. Indiana at 11,211. Idaho at 1,672. Colorado has 9,730 cases. New York continues to lead with the huge incidence numbers of 248,431 confirmed cases and 18,298 deaths. And next door New Jersey is at 85,301 cases and 4,362 dead. Massachusetts is now at 38,077 cases and 1,706 dead.  Given these numbers and the pain and stress behind the spread of this disease, it is surprising to hear some leaders such as Brazil’s President Jair Bolsonaro say that COVID-19 is not serious enough to disrupt the functioning of their economy.  Brazil’s cases are surging and are now at 39,548. As we think about developing resilience and hopefully “herd immunity” to this disease, it’s also important to remember that COVID-19 started with one “patient zero” in Wuhan, China. And many others have been their own version of “patient zero” in cities, towns and villages across the world. If nations fail to stop the spread and contain the disease, they remain dangerous to the rest of the world until vaccines and treatments are developed. Cameroon has 1,017 confirmed cases. Belgium is at 39,983 cases. Austria at 14,795. Bahrain at 1,895. Ecuador at 10,128. Kuwait at 1,995. Malaysia at 5,425. Pakistan at 8,418. Israel at 13,654.    WASHINGTON WATCH  House prepares to vote on coronavirus aid package as soon as Wednesday. The House is preparing to vote as soon as Wednesday on a new coronavirus aid package as the White House and congressional negotiators near an agreement. "Members are further advised that at this time, a recorded vote on the interim legislation is likely in the House this week. Members will be given sufficient notice about the exact timing of any votes and when they will need to return to Washington, DC," House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer (D-Md.) wrote in a notice to members. (The Hill)    Ocasio-Cortez comes out against interim coronavirus relief bill. Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-CortezAlexandria Ocasio-CortezEngel says he refuses to seek NYT endorsement over Cotton op-ed The Hill's Campaign Report: Republicans go on the hunt for new convention site Trump calls New York Times 'fake newspaper' after headline change MORE (D-N.Y.) said Monday that she opposes an interim coronavirus relief package as it has been publicly reported. "It is insulting to think we can pass such a small amount of money in the context of not knowing when Congress is even going to reconvene and pass such a small amount of money, pat ourselves on the back and then leave town again," she added. (The Hill)    White House announces extended travel restrictions with Mexico, Canada. The United States, Canada and Mexico will extend restrictions barring nonessential travel across their respective shared borders for another 30 days amid the coronavirus pandemic, the Trump administration announced Monday. (The Hill)  Fauci says protests are “hurting”; economic recovery is “not going to happen” until the virus is under control. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE said Monday morning, “The message is that clearly this is something that is hurting, from the standpoint of economics and the standpoint of things that have nothing to do with the virus,” Fauci told “Good Morning America.”    LAWMAKERS TWEET  Rep. Elise StefanikElise Marie StefanikBipartisan House bill seeks to improve pandemic preparedness The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mastercard CEO Ajay Banga says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now; Teva's Brendan O'Grady says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like Strategic Oil Reserve House GOP to launch China probes beyond COVID-19 MORE (R-N.Y.) @RepStefanik Thank you to the McGuire brothers from Sackets Harbor for their hard work in 3-D printing ear savers for healthcare workers to wear with their masks!   Rep. Virginia FoxxVirginia Ann FoxxThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO CEO Greenwood says US failed for years to heed warnings of coming pandemic; Trump: Fauci won't testify to 'a bunch of Trump haters'  Hillicon Valley: Amazon VP resigns in protest | Republicans eye university ties to China | Support rises for vote by mail Republicans seek information on Chinese ties to US universities MORE (R-N.C.) @virginiafoxx From the volunteer pilots shuttling patients to hospitals to those sewing and producing masks, those assisting Meals on Wheels to health professionals volunteering at local clinics, thank you for all that you do! We will win this fight together. #NationalVolunteerRecognitionDay   Sen. Christopher CoonsChristopher (Chris) Andrew CoonsCoronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Michelle McMurry-Heath Republicans turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks Voting rights, public health officials roll out guidelines to protect voters from COVID-19 MORE (D-Del.)  @ChrisCoons Among the many stories of Delawareans helping one another, I want to highlight the team at @NERDiTNOW in Newport. Their team has provided IT support to local nonprofits and students as they transition to work or study remotely due to #COVID19. Thank you for all your work!  ACROSS THE NATION    Mile-high clash! Health care workers block protesters challenging stay-at-home order in Denver. Health care workers blocked protesters challenging stay-at-home orders in Denver on Sunday, according to video and photos shared on social media. Workers in scrubs and masks were seen standing with arms crossed in the street, blocking the protesters in a powerful counterdemonstration. (The Hill)    Facebook reveals county-level COVID-19 symptom map. The social media behemoth with more than 2 billion global users partnered with the Carnegie Mellon University Delphi Research Center to conduct a survey that has collected responses from more than 1 million people in the past two weeks. The map is intended to help policymakers and researchers predict outbreaks and will be updated daily. (Washington Post)  WORLD VIEW  Nations credited with fast response to coronavirus moving to gradually reopen businesses. Germany and South Korea — both role models in handling the outbreak in their respective regions — are slowly reversing some of the restrictions put in place weeks ago. (Washington Post)     Singapore seemed to have the virus under control, until cases doubled. Singapore did almost everything right. After recording its first coronavirus case on Jan. 23, the prosperous city-state meticulously traced the close contacts of every infected patient, while keeping a sense of normalcy on its streets. (New York Times)     Saudi Arabia donates $500 million to WHO. The World Health Organization thanked Saudi Arabia's King Salman for donating $500 million to support the international efforts in preventing the coronavirus’s spread. (Arab News)    Chile to issue coronavirus “immunity cards” to those who recover. Chile is set to become the first country to issue “immunity cards” to those who have recovered from the coronavirus, allowing holders to return to work, despite questions about whether those who have recovered are in fact immune, how long any immunity might last, and the accuracy of antibody tests. (New York Times)   SCIENCE FDA allows Novartis to test hydroxychloroquine against COVID-19. The Food and Drug Administration and Novartis have reached an agreement to allow the Swiss pharmaceutical company to proceed with a clinical trial of hydroxychloroquine for COVID-19 patients. Phase III of the clinical trial is set to begin in the new few weeks. (The Hill)  Available antibody tests lack scrutiny and are unreliable. The Food and Drug Administration has allowed about 90 companies, many based in China, to sell tests without undergoing the usual government vetting. The early reviews have not been favorable. (NY Times)  BUSINESS U.S. oil prices settle in negative territory for first time in epic rout. West Texas Intermediate futures for May delivery, which expire Tuesday, plunged more than 100% to -$37.63 a barrel. That means sellers have to pay someone to take the oil off their hands. Brent crude oil prices fell 9% to $25.58 per barrel. (Investor’s Business Daily)    Casino exec calls for Las Vegas Strip to reopen by the end of May. The CEO of Wynn Resorts is calling for the Las Vegas Strip to slowly begin reopening in May with restrictions in place. Matt Maddox released a 23-page plan along with an op-ed published in The Nevada Independent urging officials to consider reopening certain Las Vegas businesses now closed amid the coronavirus pandemic. (The Hill)  Shake Shack giving funds back. Shake Shack executives announced in a statement on LinkedIn that they will be returning the $10 million loan received through the Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program. Founder Danny Meyer and CEO Randy Garutti wrote that the program “came with no user manual and was extremely confusing.” (The Hill)  ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSION  Government should be limited – even during a pandemic. In this metaphorical war against the novel coronavirus — as with literal wars against America’s military enemies — we have been willing to sacrifice aspects of our individual liberty for the collective goal of defeating the immediate threat. Yet all restrictions on liberty, even ones motivated by a desire to save lives, can be taken too far. (Charlie Grow and Michael Dimino for The Hill)    Coronavirus presents challenges to international order and global trust. We need to look at the world as it is, recognizing that the United States is a vital part of the international order, not separate or alone. If we abdicate American leadership, abandon our alliances, and betray the trust and admiration many once held for our country, what replaces it will almost certainly be worse, not just for our country, but the world as a whole. (Mike RogersMichael (Mike) Dennis RogersBottom line Officials warn Chinese hackers targeting groups developing coronavirus treatments Hillicon Valley: Amazon VP resigns in protest | Republicans eye university ties to China | Support rises for vote by mail MORE and Glenn Nye for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS  “One World: Together at Home.” The world’s biggest stars took over the major networks Saturday evening for a Global Citizen event celebrating essential workers and supporting the World Health Organization. The virtual concert sought to strike a balance between the vast magnitude of the pandemic and glimmers of hope. It couldn’t make any promises. (New York Times)  ICYMI, STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Miami Mayor and coronavirus survivor FRANCIS X. SUAREZ  > Steve interviews Rep. DEBBIE DINGELL (D-Mich.)  > Steve interviews APHA Executive Director DR. GEORGES BENJAMIN  > Steve interviews former Senate Majority Leader BILL FRIST  > Steve interviews Pennsylvania acting Secretary of Banking and Securities RICHARD VAGUE  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES     Hope on the horizon. Ken Garrison from Virginia shared his view of the weekend sunset from a drive along the state’s Blue Ridge Parkway. With Americans holed up at home, even a quick road trip and a picturesque sunset can be a glimmer of hope for better days that lie ahead.   SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And send us your stories of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.    VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Rep. Brad WenstrupBrad Robert WenstrupThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Sen. Coons says US needs to invest in vaccine manufacturing now; uncertainty looms over states reopening  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: U.S. reaches grim milestone of 50,000 deaths; UAE Ambassador Yousef Al Otaiba says COVID-19 crisis creates opportunity with Iran  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Pfizer's Mikael Dolsten says vaccine development timeline being cut in half; House poised to pass 4 billion relief package MORE (R-Ohio)VIEW BREAKING NEWS ON CORONAVIRUS    WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > White House unveils plan for phased reopening > Trump shifts testing accountability to state, local governments  > Experimental drug shows promise, but not all experts are as hopeful > China raises Wuhan death toll following international criticism  > DMV cases double in one week President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE has unveiled ‘Guidelines for Opening Up America Again.’ The White House’s plan for getting the economy back up and running is a three-phased approach “based on the advice of public health experts.” Trump emphasized in Thursday’s coronavirus task force briefing that the federal government will be involved to support states, but ultimately, the nation’s governors are going to “call their own shots.”    Read the full plan here.         About that peak? U.S. coronavirus deaths hit record one-day total. Thursday marked a new record for coronavirus deaths in the U.S., with 4,591 people dying from the virus in just 24 hours. New cases reported remained largely the same as the death toll soared. (The Hill)   THE INTERVIEW Pennsylvania’s acting Secretary of Banking Richard Vague says another $2 trillion package needed – massive unmet demand to keep small business alive       Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Friday, April 17.  Editor’s Note.    One of the big questions lurking in our future is whether the apparent vibrancy of the American economy with low unemployment and a high stock market before the coronavirus struck was real or jacked up. President Trump had achieved major tax-cutting legislation earlier in his term, but critics slammed the move because it was pumping too much into the financial system at a time when the economy was strong and that it would reduce the government’s reserves to shore up the economy in truly dark times. Before COVID-19, U.S. debt was surging far beyond levels predicted by the Congressional Budget Office and the Office of Management and Budget. Now we are in truly dark times, and anticipated debt levels are larger than the entire economy — that’s a historic moment and a bad one. There are now more than 22 million unemployed workers and millions more who are partially employed. GDP growth has crashed and as corporate earnings reports for public firms have now begun to be revealed, with more in the coming weeks, we are seeing economic carnage.   America can bounce back, at least somewhat, when demand takes off after some states relax stay-at-home orders and establish safe pathways back to work and economic vitality. But we have to ask whether we ate too much of our national seed corn in good economic times and didn’t do the kinds of things that would have helped protect both the economy and society in troubled times. The debt overhang of this stimulus today will be with America for generations to come. There is no choice now, but there was a choice when America was not under duress and wrecked its fiscal solvency anyway. My interview subject today, Pennsylvania’s acting secretary of banking and a real expert on America’s past economic crises, Richard Vague, says that the federal government has ample room to take on the debt needed to keep the economy going through this crisis. The challenge, he said, is whether it can get its act together to really get the money flowing at a level needed now. He said there is massive unmet need to keep small businesses alive — and Congress doesn’t return to work until May. That’s something to think about.   – Steve Clemons   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, Editor-at-Large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.    On April 29, our new 3D journalism platform The Hill Virtually Live will host an online event – Safeguarding Seniors: Healthcare in a Health Crisis. We’ll be looking at how Medicare is stepping up to support seniors, what it will take to protect underserved communities and the role of telemedicine. REGISTER HERE and follow @TheHillEvents for program updates.    CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are now 2,196,109 confirmed cases of coronavirus around the world. 149,024 people have died from the virus. 672,293 cases are confirmed in the U.S. – by far the most in the world – and 33,898 people in America have died from COVID-19. Spain continues to have the next most cases with 184,948 cases. Italy has 168,941. 138,456 in Germany. 109,769 in the United Kingdom. China, after upping their original number of confirmed cases and deaths, is now reporting 83,760 cases.    New York remains the global epicenter of the pandemic with its 223,699 confirmed cases. A New York City nursing home is struggling to contain a newly reported outbreak, with 29 of its residents dead from the virus. New Jersey has reported 75,317 cases. Massachusetts has surpassed Michigan and its 32,181 cases are third highest in the country. 28,157 cases in California. 25,733 in Illinois.    Without a strategic leap in the level of testing, reopening the economy remains a tenuous process that could lead to a resurgence of cases nationwide. Only 3.4 million people – slightly north of one percent of Americans – have been tested.    More than half a million people around the world have reported full recovery from COVID-19.  WASHINGTON WATCH  Trump guidelines for reopening economy let governors make final decision. The 18-page guidelines released by the White House for beginning to reopen the economy recommend that states see a downward trajectory in the number of confirmed coronavirus cases as well as flu-like symptoms before they move to lift stay-at-home orders and other restrictions. The document explicitly states that the outlined steps are implementable statewide at the “discretion” of individual governors. (The Hill)    Protesters gain Trump’s support? President Trump took to Twitter on Friday and appeared to back protesters, in three states with Democratic governors, who are gathering in opposition of extended stay-at-home orders.   Senate misses deadline, but talks on loans push forward. Senate negotiators haven’t given up on reaching a deal to add funds to a small-business lending program set up to help firms weather the coronavirus crisis, despite an impasse Thursday that coincided with the program running out of money. Signs remain that the two sides could still come together to act on desperately needed relief for Americans. (The Hill)  LAWMAKERS TWEET  Rep. Val DemingsValdez (Val) Venita DemingsThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Val Demings calls for a new DOJ Office of Police Standards; Trump, GOP to pull convention from NC MORE (D-Fla.) @RepValDemings Hackers have repeatedly hijacked the computer systems of communities around the country. In the midst of this crisis, such attacks could be devastating. We wrote to congressional leadership asking for vital cybersecurity funding to safeguard our civic and emergency systems. Sen. Marsha BlackburnMarsha BlackburnGOP senators dodge on treatment of White House protesters Five things to know about Trump's legal power under the Insurrection Act Bipartisan senators call for investigation of TikTok's child privacy policies MORE (R-Tenn.)  @MarshaBlackburn Even if your spring sports were cancelled, remember: Life is a bigger game than any sport. So, today, wholeheartedly get in the game.       Coronavirus cases double in DMV in just one week. The number of coronavirus cases in Washington, D.C., Maryland and Virginia has doubled to 20,000 cases in a week, according to information reported by their health departments Thursday evening. The death toll in the two states and D.C. has reached 750 and has continued to increase each day with D.C. Mayor Muriel Bowser (D) predicting the region will reach its peak sometime in May. (The Hill)    Virginia hospital system bars workers from bringing their own medical equipment. Inova, a medical system that operates hospitals in Northern Virginia, is banning employees treating coronavirus patients from wearing their own personal protective equipment despite shortages in the hospital. Employees who work at Inova Fairfax Hospital said the policy isn’t enforced unilaterally and can cost them their job if they aren't compliant. (The Hill)    Beaches, parks to reopen in Jacksonville, Fla., in “pathway back to normal life.” The mayor of Jacksonville, Fla., said the city's beaches and parks will reopen at 5 p.m. Friday, but with restrictions as the coronavirus outbreak continues across the state and country. The beaches and parks will be open for essential activities only and social distancing guidelines must be followed. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW  Coronavirus crushes China’s economy, Wuhan death toll revised higher. China’s gross domestic product shrank by the biggest margin in history as the pandemic delivered a devastating blow to the world’s second-largest economy. The Chinese government has also raised the death toll for Wuhan by 50 percent in the face of widespread international criticism of previous data. (Washington Post)    Poorer nations face bigger risk in easing virus restrictions. As some wealthier Western nations begin easing coronavirus restrictions, many developing countries, particularly in the Middle East and Africa, want to do it too, but they cannot afford the luxury of any missteps. Easing lockdowns could increase infections and quickly overwhelm hospitals with limited beds and breathing machines. Keeping restrictions in place risks social upheaval and more economic losses. (Associated Press)  Cabinet shakeup in Brazil over coronavirus differences. Eager to reopen Latin America’s largest economy, Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro has fired Luiz Henrique Mandetta as minister of health, after the two officials sparred publicly over the need for social distancing to fight the region’s largest COVID-19 outbreak. (Washington Post)   SCIENCE Early results show promise for experimental COVID-19 drug. An experimental antiviral drug being used as part of a study to treat coronavirus patients in Chicago has shown to rapidly dissipate patients' fevers and respiratory symptoms, allowing most to be discharged in under a week. The promising drug Remdesivir is being studied around the country and experts say there is still much information to gather. (The Hill)  Gottlieb: It’s not a slam dunk. Scott Gottlieb, Trump’s former FDA Commissioner, isn’t overly enthused by Remdesivir testing results that led to a gain on Wall Street. Gottlieb is warning that the drug is “not a slam dunk by any means” and he doesn’t “think it’s a cure for the virus.” (Washington Post)   BUSINESS Stocks soar amid growing hope for virus treatment, plans to reopen country. Stock markets jumped Friday morning following reports of a potentially effective treatment for the coronavirus. The Dow Jones Industrial Average was up 550 points, or 2.3 percent, while the S&P 500 rose 52 points, or 1.8 percent. (CNBC)    NY Fed president paints dire picture of economic recovery. New York Federal Reserve President John Williams on Friday said that the economy will likely not be back to full strength until at least December. Williams predicted that the construction sector may be able to bounce back more quickly but added in a CNBC interview, “I don’t see the economy getting back to full strength by the end of the year.”  Millions still waiting for IRS relief checks. The IRS has started to issue coronavirus rebates to tens of millions of people, but faces challenges in getting the payments to everyone. Millions of people who haven't previously given the IRS their bank information, or who may not typically file tax returns, are still waiting for relief funds. (The Hill)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSION  COVID-19 calls for Marshall Plan for health. The twin crises of the last century — the Great Depression and World War II — nudged us as a country to invest in our collective well-being. The New Deal, and its political successor, the Great Society, were ambitious efforts to place compassion and care for the many at the heart of federal decision making. We need a Marshall Plan for health, a commitment to rebuilding our world with the aim of improving on what came before. (Sandro Galea for The Hill)    COVID-19: The leadership failure. The cavalier attitude of the U.S. president, who downplayed the pandemic threat early on, the bureaucratic public health failure from Beijing to Washington, and the rather slow response of the World Health Organization, which finally declared COVID-19 a pandemic on March 11, have combined to cause a global medical and economic catastrophe of historic proportions. (Ariel Cohen for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS        Life saving deliveries! Chicago hospitals tending to COVID-19 patients are receiving shipments of ventilators that will help them save more lives. UPS, General Motors and Ventec Life Systems are collaborating to deliver these much needed supplies. Chicago’s Franciscan and Weiss Memorial hospitals are getting 10 ventilators per shipment. Tomorrow, 34 ventilators will be delivered to Gary, Ind., for distribution where they are most needed. Footwear company donating shoes to health care workers. Data from a new study published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention suggests that COVID-19 may travel on shoes and that the footwear of medical staff in particular could be carriers. Kizik, a Utah-based innovative footwear company, announced Friday it will immediately donate 1,000 pairs of hands-free shoes to health care workers in support of the fight against COVID-19. (Kizik)   ICYMI, STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews former AIDS czar MARK DYBUL > Steve interviews former GSK Global Vaccines President LUC DEBRUYNE > Steve interviews former Baltimore Health Commissioner LEANA WEN > Steve interviews former Trump homeland security adviser TOM BOSSERT > Steve interviews International Rescue Committee CEO DAVID MILIBAND > Steve interviews Miami Mayor and coronavirus survivor FRANCIS X. SUAREZ  > Steve interviews Rep. DEBBIE DINGELL (D-Mich.)  > Steve interviews APHA Executive Director DR. GEORGES BENJAMIN  > Steve interviews former Senate Majority Leader BILL FRIST    Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.   CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.    VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews acting Secretary of Banking and Securities for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Richard Vague. Vague has also written several widely acclaimed books on the nature and drivers of economic crises including “A Brief History of Doom” and “The Next Economic Disaster: Why It’s Coming and How to Avoid It.”  Excepts from the interview below: On how Pennsylvania is currently weathering the crisis on the economic front    Clemons: On our other Hill.TV show, Rising, our hosts had an interview with an editor from the American Prospect magazine. This editor was very critical of the way the governance set up for the small business loan program because the banks have very few restrictions on pumping money out and taking lots of fees as they do so. Are you worried that the incentives are misaligned in that effort on funding small businesses in this crisis? VAGUE: I don't see it that way at all. I think the bankers are — the interest rate on these loans are very low. There is a processing fee. These banks are working 16 to 20 hours a day to try to get these things done. The system has all sorts of operating difficulties with it. I think that the incentives, if anything —  either they're appropriate or they're not quite sufficient. But the objective, as you recall, would be to get money in the hands of small businesses, and we're doing that. We just need to do a lot more of that.    Clemons: The Pennsylvania state Senate the other day voted to overturn the governor's stay-at-home orders. ... What is the state of play in Pennsylvania right now on reopening the economy versus ongoing public health concerns?  VAGUE: Health is the priority. And Gov. [Tom] Wolf has been tremendously courageous in the face of all sorts of pressure in making sure health is our priority. And we see reasons for concern. Singapore is something we've all seen over the last few days. They were very successful early on. They reopened too quickly, and cases are skyrocketing in Singapore. We don't want that to happen. But what I can tell you is an enormous amount of planning is going on at the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania planning level on how to reopen and keep folks safe from a health standpoint. So I think you're gonna see a lot of great precautions built into the system as we reopen that allow us to begin to operate again, if you will, and remain safe. I think we're gonna see that hopefully sooner rather than later.   Clemons: You wrote an oped for The Hill not too long ago. And in that op ed, you talked about the resource level that was going to be needed and what we needed to do to get money in the hands of real people where they are now and on a repeated basis until we were through this. ... There seems to be a huge gap between what you said we needed and that stimulus package. Where are you now on the state of further stimulus? VAGUE: I think the amount that we still need is at least a couple of trillion more. Maybe more than that. And the most effective way to do that is going to be to increase and extend the checks that get directly in the hands of consumers and to increase and extend the funding support such as the SBA payroll protection plan. Those are the things needed. What I can also tell you is that states and municipalities are going to need a lot of support very quickly to be able to continue to provide the services that are so critical across the state — from a health care and education and payroll standpoint. So we need all that. And frankly, getting it for a month or two or three from now is going to compound the damage. We need it this week. We need it next week.    Clemons: I'm interested in the questions of what our social contract is going to look like in the future with with working families and people out there. And whether it's been automation and technology, whether it's been offshoring and trade, there's been sort of a steady drumbeat against [the economic standing of] workers for a long time in the United States, and sometimes when you have moments like this, as you've written about during the Great Depression, where all sorts of institutions are created and essentially a new social contract put together by Roosevelt or later by Lyndon Johnson. Are you thinking of what we do about rewiring America’s social contract? VAGUE: People are consumed with just the day to day of getting back up and running. The number of details that are going to be involved in getting the current economy restarted are going to be many and perhaps even a little overwhelming, so I'm not sure there's the opportunity. But I tell you, folks’ mindsets are going to be different as we exit this crisis. One of the things I've advocated for some time is — the United States ought to be teaching and training workers that are already 30 and 40 and 50 years old. New skills, better skills. And we ought to be training not 10,000 people a year, but a million people a year or 2 million people a year. Now that's something that we were proposing last year and the year before as a way to address the exact thing that you're talking about now. I don't think that's that expensive. Spending $10 billion a year, $20 billion year or something like that felt daunting a year ago. Today, I think, our feelings about costs have been rescaled, and we understand something like that is in fact, very affordable.    Clemons: You are one of the great experts on both private sector debt and government debt. Government debt is surging today to very high levels. Give us the Richard Vague take on whether this government debt being taken on is something about which we should be concerned. VAGUE: Today as regards government, federal government debt specifically, make no mistake, we have ample capacity to do what we need to do. Government debt to GDP was about 106 percent on Dec. 31, 2019. In Japan, it's 238 percent. That gives you a sense of how far we could continue to go and still have additional capacity. I think even with all that's in the pipeline, the federal government debt to GDP will be about 130 percent, perhaps. That is not a level that is a problematic level. We still have ample capacity. There's any number of theorists who've shown that the spending at the government level creates identical assets or wealth in the private sector and that's actually, the way the accounting for that works. The other thing that I would be sure and mention is — people worry about inflation as a result of this. All of our research has shown that the opposite is what we ought to be concerned about. Rising debt levels over the last 40 years had invariably resulted in lower interest rates, not higher interest rates. I think that will continue to be the case. I think the pressure on interest rates will be for them to go lower. I think there will be deflation, and that's what we need to be concerned about. The Hill's Steve Clemons interviewed former Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist (R-Tenn.) who outlined in 2005 his fears that we would be facing a major deadly "pandemic of pandemics" and that we needed to take action. Some excerpts from the interview below:  On why he was motivated then and why little of consequence happened    Clemons: I want to read just a short clip from your piece. It says: “For what the world now faces it has not seen even in the most harrowing episodes of the Middle Ages or the great wars of the last century. And not only are we as unprepared for rampant epidemics then, we have not taken sufficient note of the fact that though individually each might be devastating, they are susceptible of either purposeful or accidental combination, in which case they could be devastating almost beyond imagination.” ... You saw a biothreat either evolving naturally or being created by governments in the bioweapons area, and you said we needed a Manhattan Project to respond either to willful acts of bioterrorism or accidents. Do you still believe that? FRIST: Yes, I am even more so today, and today we have the technology to do it. We have the know-how to do it. Back then, being the only physician in the United States Senate, there just weren't a lot of people listening. That same talk that you read from, I gave over 20 different times across the country. Now we have a teachable moment, we know what to do. We're seeing it play out before us. We can make that investment now. In that paper, I also made the call that it would come from Asia very specifically, and it was very obvious because of the congestion there. The relationship from animal to animal, and animal to human — and that leap will be made and will be made in the future, unless we act aggressively now. We need to put out the fire that's underway. But at the same time, we can't lose sight of the fact that we need to invest now for that next pandemic which will come — I'll say it again — will come again in the future, regardless of what happens with the current pandemic underway.    Clemons: I have interviewed Dr. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE about a dozen times in the last many years, and he is often basically trumpeted the same alarm you are that this is coming, that we're going to have problems. He’s been worried about respiratory viruses for a long time and says that we need to move out of just reacting and get a research effort together that would create a platform virus that would take these things on in advance. Are you two aligned on that front? What's stopping this common sense idea from moving forward? FRIST: Well, politically, and it's not just the partisan environment, it is a lack of long-term thinking and therefore, for our political figures to understand, to take action, to respond, we need to have a mass understanding advocacy from the American people who now everybody is feeling it today. The pain, the suffering, especially our most vulnerable. So now is the time to do it. It takes a coordinated plan to do it. ... We need to continue our partnerships with people like the World Health Organization. Because viruses don't have visas, and pandemics don't know borders at all.    Clemons: Senator, I want to ask your view on the tug of war that seems to be breaking out between those that want to give this virus more of a chance to be beaten down, knocked out of our society and controlled, contained, tracked, get testing in place versus those who want to open up the economy and open up the aperture of what they're willing to tolerate by way of further infections and deaths. What is your view of this tug of war? FRIST: Well, the challenge that we have today is the biology of the virus. And whatever happens with our economy by definition is going to follow what we do with the virus, and the virus has a mind of its own. We have two tracks. The public health track says shut everything down. That's going to save the most lives. The economic track says, well, we have to have a dose of reality here. This virus is really deadly to maybe only 2 or 3 percent, we don’t know what it is of the population. The other 98 percent need to be able to live a semi-normal life, going back to work in order to put food on the table, to escape the travesty of poverty, which also has a huge economic cost. The policymakers have to operate in both of those. Some states are more on the public health side. Some more on the economic side. The more science we have, the more testing — and this nation has failed in terms of testing from the top to the bottom — but the more testing we have and that we create, it allows you to get the information to more smartly open the government, to open the businesses, to get people back to work, and get people back to school. So I think we don't have enough data yet, but it's coming in fast every day. I think we need an open data platform today that we can feed the best of testing, of science, of surveillance, of symptoms in to — and then gradually begin to open things beginning in about a couple of weeks. In those areas that audit risk for a surge. And with that titrate how much opening up? Closing down? Opening up? And closing down — starting with target populations. For example, most hospitals in the country today are totally empty, or 90 percent or 80 percent empty. I can see very soon beginning to open those hospitals, bringing our health personnel back to work, maybe starting with a younger cohort than an older cohort. But I think that could begin in about two to three weeks in certain parts of the country, not at the federal level, but in certain parts of the country.    Clemons: I know you've advocated a "national response portal," and data is so important to make that work. Testing is so important. In short form, you know how this government works. Why is getting the testing frame right so difficult? Do you have any solutions that you know of that we should be considering to get testing fixed?  FRIST: I think, No. 1, the leadership of this country should stop telling the American people that we have enough tests today. They've been telling them that for three weeks. That slows everybody down across the board — the scientists, the laboratories. So we need number one to say we still need more testing. No. 2, I think we are making real progress today, but I think tax credits and tax incentives can still be given to those people who are bringing testing on board today, to accelerate it. No. 3. I think that a code can be given, an ICD type code, ICD type 10, is just a code where you can get reimbursement for both the testing but also the surveillance and participating in what’s called contact testing. So those are three things that we can do, that we should do. But we need to put that on the table as we go forward. VIEW BREAKING NEWS ON CORONAVIRUS    WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > Sources believe coronavirus outbreak originated in Wuhan lab > Senate adjourns without deal on small business loan program  > Governors under pressure to lift lockdowns amid protests, pushback  > White House set to release guidelines on relaxing social distancing as Paycheck Protection Program runs out of money > Without adequate testing, reopening the economy remains dangerous > 22 million Americans now jobless  > COVID-19 doesn’t just attack the lungs   Sources believe coronavirus outbreak originated in Wuhan lab as part of China's efforts to compete with U.S. There is increasing confidence that the COVID-19 outbreak likely originated in a Wuhan laboratory, though not as a bioweapon. China was attempting to demonstrate that its efforts to identify and combat viruses are equal to or greater than the capabilities of the United States, multiple sources who have been briefed on the details of early actions by China's government and seen relevant materials tell Fox News.         Residents, lawmakers rebuke lockdown orders. In Michigan, hundreds of protesters staged a drive-by protest urging Gov. Gretchen Whitmer (D) to lift her stay-at-home mandate, one of the strictest in the country. In Pennsylvania, the GOP-controlled state Senate passed a measure to override Gov. Tom Wolf’s (D) lockdown on most of the state’s business. Texas and Washington are among a bloc of other states planning demonstrations. The $349 billion lending program for small businesses has run out of funds. The Small Business Administration has run out of money for its Paycheck Protection Program, White House officials said Thursday, leaving millions of businesses unable to apply for emergency loans while Congress struggles to reach a deal to replenish the funds. (New York Times)   THE INTERVIEW Frist Says National Leaders Must Stop Dismissing Science and that We Need a Manhattan Project to Stop Virus Pandemics       Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Thursday, April 16.  Editors Note.    In 2005, Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist (R-Tenn.), a heart and lung transplant surgeon, gave a speech at the National Press Club outlining the existential threat that viruses spread from animals to humans represented to mankind. He said then that an effort about 20 times the scale of the Manhattan Project would be needed to create more permanent, less incident-reactive protection for people around the world. To read the speech today gives one chills because it feels as if it could have been written a few months ago anticipating all that has happened — including his prediction that whether by accident or design, the bioweapons industry which lurks in many countries could launch a deadly virus the likes of which mankind hasn’t seen. Read Frist’s speech, or watch it here, recently republished at The American Mind by the Claremont Institute. In my interview with Frist today, he also says the leadership in this country, and I assume he means President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE, needs to stop bragging about the testing that’s been done. He says it sends “the wrong signals.” He continued that we need to have a sea change in our capability and approach to testing before the economy can be brought safely back online. He also made a strong statement that we should absolutely be funding the World Health Organization. This is 15 minutes of interview worth your time.    — Steve Clemons   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, Editor-at-Large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.  On April 29, our new 3D journalism platform The Hill Virtually Live will host an online event – Supporting Seniors: Healthcare in a Health Crisis. We’ll be looking at how Medicare is stepping up to support seniors, what it will take to protect underserved communities and the role of telemedicine. REGISTER HERE and follow @TheHillEvents for program updates.  CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are now 2,090,110 confirmed cases of COVID-19 around the globe. U.S. cases are continuing to soar and stand at 640,291. 140,773 are dead and more than 31,000 people in America have died from the coronavirus.    New York’s 214,832 cases continue to be triple that of the next closest state, New Jersey, with 71,030 cases. 29,918 confirmed cases in Massachusetts. 28,059 in Michigan. 27,098 in California. 16,305 in Texas. 10,032 in Maryland.   Another important number to watching: total tested. The consensus seems to be that the U.S. will need to dramatically ramp up its testing capabilities before reopening the country. As of the time of this newsletter, 3.2 million in America have been tested — a mere 1 percent of the population. Amazon CEO Jeff BezosJeffrey (Jeff) Preston BezosGeorge Floyd protests show corporations must support racial and economic equality On The Money: Initial jobless claims drop to 1.9 million | IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks | Nearly half of Americans have lost income over coronavirus Hillicon Valley: Facebook begins labeling posts from state-controlled media | Chinese and Iranian hackers target Biden, Trump campaigns | Twitter CEO gives M to Kaepernick group MORE is among many private sector leaders calling for mass testing to get the economy back up and running.    52,772 people in America have reported full recoveries from the virus.  WASHINGTON WATCH  Reopening economy emerges as new political battleground. The question of how quickly to reopen the economy has emerged as the latest political battleground dividing the two parties. Behind the scenes, Republicans are warning that a prolonged economic shutdown would do more harm to the nation’s long-term viability than COVID-19. (The Hill)            Testing falls woefully short as Trump seeks an end to stay-at-home orders. As President Trump pushes to reopen the economy, most of the country is not conducting nearly enough testing to track the path and penetration of the coronavirus in a way that would allow Americans to safely return to work. (New York Times)    White House taps members of Congress to advise on reopening. President Trump is asking a bipartisan group of lawmakers to join a panel tasked with determining how to reopen the U.S. economy. This new task force comes on the heels of the high-powered private sector advisory council the administration convened earlier this week. (The Hill)  Trump convenes sports commissioners in hopes of filling stadiums. President Trump spoke with the heads of major sports leagues to gauge the feasibility of holding sporting events in the coming months. Although the White House is eager for a return to normalcy, public health experts warn it could be quite some time before mass gatherings are safe to attend.  (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET     Rep. Pramila JayapalPramila JayapalPelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC Expanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support House punts on FISA, votes to begin negotiations with Senate MORE (D-Wash.)  @RepJayapal 5.2 million people filed for unemployment this week — bringing the total up to 22 million in the last month. Mass unemployment is a policy choice. We need my Paycheck Guarantee Act to ensure all workers get their paycheck during this crisis.   ACROSS THE NATION  Will other states follow California’s lead? California will create a $125 million assistance fund for illegal immigrants who have lost work due to the coronavirus pandemic but can’t access traditional unemployment insurance, Gov. Gavin NewsomGavin NewsomChief Justice Roberts wisely defers to California governor in church challenge  Senior citizens deserve better than to be left in isolation Supreme Court denies California church's challenge to state restrictions MORE (D) said Wednesday. The program, the first of its kind, will consist of $75 million from the state and another $50 million that Newsom said philanthropic partners have committed to raise. (Wall Street Journal)    New York taps McKinsey to develop a “Trump-proof” economic reopening plan. New York Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) has hired high-powered consultants to develop a science-based plan for the safe economic reopening of the region. Cuomo seeks a plan that can thwart expected pressure from the White House to move more rapidly to open the economy. (CNBC)    How the coronavirus unleashed economic havoc on Michigan. Roughly a quarter of Michigan’s eligible workforce is now trying to obtain unemployment aid, a staggering example of the economic carnage wrought by the coronavirus in a state that’s no stranger to financial struggle. Michigan officials are bracing for yet another economic crisis, this time perhaps on the magnitude of the Great Depression. (Washington Post)    Idaho’s Republican governor extends stay-at-home order despite GOP criticism. Idaho Gov. Brad Little (R) has extended stay-at-home orders within the state through April 30, despite increased protests popping up around the country against the continuing measures, saying, "I've got to do what I've got to do for the people of Idaho.” (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW The WHO acted faster and with more foresight than many national governments. With limited, constantly shifting information to go on, the WHO showed an early, consistent determination to treat the new contagion like the threat it would become, and to persuade others to do the same. (New York Times)    European Commission apologizes to Italy. The president of the European Commission offered an apology to Italy on Thursday, saying the country did not receive adequate help at the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic. The commission’s president, Ursula von der Leyen, said, “It is right that Europe as a whole offered a heartfelt apology [to Italy].” (NBC News)       How Vietnam avoided catastrophe. In Vietnam, which shares a border with China, fewer than 300 COVID-19 cases have been reported and no one has died. Experts say experience dealing with prior pandemics, early implementation of aggressive social distancing policies, strong action from political leaders and the muscle of a one-party authoritarian state have helped Vietnam. (NPR)     Japan extends state of emergency to whole country. Japan will extend its current coronavirus state of emergency, in place in seven regions including Tokyo and Osaka, to cover the rest of the country, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe said Thursday. (NBC News)   SCIENCE Coronavirus is ravaging more than just our lungs. Doctors are finding that the virus may also be causing heart inflammation, acute kidney disease, neurological malfunction, blood clots, intestinal damage and liver problems. That development has complicated the treatment of the most severe cases of COVID-19 and makes the course of recovery less certain, they said. (Washington Post) Pollution down 50 percent in some European countries. The Coronavirus lockdowns have played a role in causing pollution levels to drop significantly across Europe over the past month, the European Space Agency said. (CNN)  BUSINESS Unemployment numbers continue to soar. Another 5.2 million people filed initial unemployment claims for the week ending April 11, according to the Department of Labor. Over the past four weeks, 22 million Americans have filed for unemployment, the sharpest and most severe rise in joblessness in the nation’s history. (The Hill)  Stocks torn between unemployment spike, Trump’s economic restart. U.S. equity markets are seesawing Thursday, with investors torn between a sizeable jump in first-time unemployment claims and President Trump's efforts to reopen at least part of the U.S. economy. (Fox News)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSION  Coronavirus is spreading fast in small-town America. As COVID-19 began to ravage densely populated metro areas, some hoped the distance inherent to rural communities would act as a shield against the same fate. Now that the pandemic has reached nearly every county and most rural places across the nation, we see how wrong that hope was. (David Lipsetz for The Hill)  Who takes control if there is no presidential election this year? There is an obvious gap in our Constitution, because the Framers didn’t contemplate a no election possibility. This prospect undoubtedly is frightening enough to Republicans to assure that they will do everything in their power not to cancel the 2020 election. (Alan DershowitzAlan Morton DershowitzMoussaoui says he now renounces terrorism, bin Laden The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Frist says Manhattan Project-like initiative necessary to fight virus; WH to release plan for easing lockdowns The Hill's Campaign Report: Biden faces tough task of uniting Democrats MORE for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS  Florida teacher goes above and beyond. First grade teacher Katie Ricca made a socially distant trip to one of her students after she seemed down during a Zoom session. Sitting 6 feet apart, Ricca read books to the student and tried to bring her “a normal little bit of life.” (Fox News)  Every dog adopted in Florida shelter. More people have been fostering and adopting pets from animal shelters during the coronavirus pandemic  — a small silver lining as the world battles the outbreak. And in one Florida shelter, every single dog has found a home in what staff are calling an “amazing milestone.” (The Hill)   ICYMI, STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews former AIDS czar MARK DYBUL > Steve interviews former GSK Global Vaccines President LUC DEBRUYNE > Steve interviews former Baltimore Health Commissioner LEANA WEN > Steve interviews former Trump homeland security adviser TOM BOSSERT > Steve interviews International Rescue Committee CEO DAVID MILIBAND > Steve interviews Miami Mayor and coronavirus survivor FRANCIS X. SUAREZ  > Steve interviews Rep. DEBBIE DINGELL (D-Mich.)  > Steve interviews APHA Executive Director DR. GEORGES BENJAMIN  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.   CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews American Public Health Association Executive Director Georges Benjamin.  Excerpts from the interview are below: About evenly spreading the benefits are of America’s public heath infrastructure. Clemons: Can you describe for our audience what are the things that go into a public health infrastructure?Benjamin: Happy to do so. So we have people that follow data so they look at hospital data and see that you know, there's so many sick people that are happening in a community that you weren't expecting. Then they go into that community and try to figure out why that is. Then once they know, they come up with measures to prevent it. So let's say you had a bunch of kids who had asthma — around the community that wasn’t expected. They would go in and try to figure out why those kids had asthma and they would talk to their teachers. They would look at their houses. They would go to the day care. Say, for example, you had a bunch of kids that showed up in an emergency department with asthma attacks. And they did their investigation, and all of a sudden they discovered that the bus tailpipe was broken. Broken tail pipe, noxious fumes. More asthma. And of course, the solution isn't a medical solution. The solution is to fix the tailpipe. So they do those kinds of things, making sure you wear your seat belt because they're too many car crashes and people getting hurt in car crashes. Too many people getting sick from a restaurant on a particular day. They go into the restaurant and do an inspection and then make the restaurant, you know, fix up whatever was causing that infection. These are the kinds of things that public health people do every day, and quite often we don't even know they're doing it. What should we do about not having a disease tracking system in place? Benjamin: We need to rapidly begin training people. More people. We know there's an estimate that came out a couple of weeks ago About 100,000 more people are needed to help us do this kind of tracking. Then, but more importantly, we actually need a test that's timely and works. Without a test that is timely and works, you don't have anybody to track. You don't know what to track. You're simply tracking people that have been in the hospital and guessing about who they've contacted. What has been happening with the White House since February? What has your organization been pushing for?Benjamin: We recognize that the first two tools that we have is good public education about what the risks are and for us to physically distance from one another. And the second thing, of course, is for us to get the testing out. And we've been actively pushing the government to get the test out and to get a better risk communication method out to people so that we can physically distance. The second thing we've encouraging, of course, is the research to do a vaccine. And funding for the research to do a vaccine as well as to come up with some good antiviral agents, some pills that people can take that you can treat the virus with. As you know, both of those efforts are underway. But they’re going to take some time. What do you see in the data coming in looking like much of the United States has gotten over the so-called peak. Benjamin: Well, first of all, I want to point out that it's a mixed picture. Yes, we're seeing a lot of and hearing a lot from those big urban settings that we're seeing on TV every day and are able to actively communicate what's happening. ... We're not hearing about all the problems that we're having in rural America but haven’t heard yet, and we’re not certainly hearing from all communities. So the challenge we have is that each community is at various different states in the development of the disease. The second thing I think is important is that while we are winning, we’re winning because we're staying away from one another. And now, of course, we're having a big debate about when do we return our communities back to kind of normal. And our biggest concern is that we may try to do that too soon and too fast. Can we really see returning to work without a reliable testing program?Benjamin: Without the test, any other data we get gives us a false sense of security. We have to have a test to understand who's been infected. And if I get sick tomorrow, whether or not I am infected from the disease. We certainly have got some tests out there, but we absolutely don't have enough of them for the honest assuredity that was can give the public that it's safe to return back to normal. Clemons: Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE said he had been approached by members of the Congressional Black Caucus about the very high level of impact, and mortality and infection rates among black Americans, and he said that they were going try to go to where people were, that they were going to try to direct resources to solve this.Benjamin: Well, the first thing we need to do is make sure that communities of color, like all communities, get the right information and unfortunately, there’s a lot of misinformation that people are getting right now. So we need to make sure that we get the right information to people about how you get the disease and how to protect yourself. The second thing that we absolutely have to do is recognize that many people of color are in those public facing jobs. Bus drivers, security guards, working in grocery stores. Certainly not only communities of color, but all those people in those occupations which are higher risk. We need to make sure they understand how to protect themselves. And those of us who then leave our homes to go shopping and do other things with those essential workers need to make sure that we're doing what we can to protect them from us.  Clemons: What are some of the examples of misinformation out there? Benjamin: Well, the first one was several weeks ago that African Americans were immune from the disease, which of course, is not true. A misunderstanding about what happens when we said, well, you know, if you're older and you have a bunch of chronic diseases, you're much more likely to get sicker and die. People heard that as boy, if I'm young and don't have those diseases, I'm also not going to get sick — which, of course, is also not true. And I think we've heard all kinds of crazy myths about diets and drinking hot water. And because people say, Well, the virus doesn't live in the heat. Of course, that's not true as well. And so people doing home remedies that they think might might help them and save their lives. You know, drinking more vitamin C, doing these kind of thing. Vitamin C is great for you. It's great for your health, but it's not going to impact the course of this disease.  On President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE's defunding of the the World Health Organization Benjamin: We strongly support the World Health Organization. The World Health Organization is doing the best they can with the resources that they have. ... Nobody does these kind of emergencies perfectly. But I got to tell you, we also screwed things up very early on, and so we should not do that to the World Health Organization. By the way, the World Health Organization is there to help many, many nations that can't help themselves without their help. If we pull funding from then now, we think it will be a crime against humanity because so many people in those communities will die without our help and without our funding. As we look forward, what do you think we need to do to make sure we are better prepared in the future?Benjamin: We should pretend that we are back in January when this first thing happened. And we should do now what we should've done back in January. We need to make sure that we have an adequate testing system and a great test to test who have the disease and who had the disease before. We ought to have an organized effort to make sure that all of our front-line health care workers get all of the protection gear that they need. We need to make sure that we actively communicate to the public what we know, and what we don't know so we can build trust in this response. And then we need to begin right now preparing for the rest of this year. Because even if this disease is markedly reduced in the next few weeks, we've got to worry about it coming back next fall or winter. VIEW BREAKING NEWS ON CORONAVIRUS    WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > Global COVID-19 cases surpass 2 million  > Trump suspends WHO funding pending review > Cuomo says New York moving to ‘new normal’  > Dems move toward deal with Mnuchin, White House  > Treasury orders Trump's name on stimulus checks, delaying process  > China wasted six key days, allowing virus to exponentially spread    D.C. extends public health emergency, school closures until May 15. Mayor Muriel Bowser (D) announced that in extending her order, other coronavirus restrictions in the city, including nonessential business closures, a stay-at-home order and a ban on gatherings of 10 or more people are also extended. (Washington Post)  N.Y. moves to a ‘new normal.’ as Gov. Cuomo outlines gradual reopening of businesses. New York Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) said Wednesday that his state is moving to a “new normal” as he outlined a gradual reopening of businesses, saying the crisis won’t be over until a vaccine is made available. “Where we’re going, it’s not a reopening in that we’re going to reopen what was. We’re going to a different place,” Cuomo told reporters. (CNBC)   THE INTERVIEW APHA Executive Director Georges Benjamin: Halting WHO funds could be crime against humanity as many would die       Clemons: President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE has gone after the World Health Organization and is, pending review, cutting off funding. Your reaction?   Benjamin: “We strongly support the World Health Organization. The World Health Organization is doing the best it can with the resources that they have. You know, nobody does these kinds of emergencies perfectly. But I got to tell you, we also screwed things up very early on, and so we should not do that to the World Health Organization. By the way, the World Health Organization is there to help many, many nations that can't help themselves without their help. If we pull funding from the WHO now, we think it will be a crime against humanity because so many people in those communities will die without our help and without our funding.”   Watch the full interview here.  THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Wednesday, April 15.  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Wednesday, April 15.    Editor’s Note.   Officially, the global count on those diagnosed as positive for the coronavirus has surpassed 2 million. We have to always add that qualifier of “officially” because everyone knows the number is much larger. America, with 5 percent of the world’s population, hosts about 30 percent of the world’s official cases. A testing framework for those who are ill remains elusive. Stories still stream in of people being turned away from treatment centers unless they are showing highly developed and obvious symptoms of COVID-19 when the fact is that COVID-19 spreads mostly silently from asymptomatic carriers of the disease. The president started his administration with a number of economic advisory panels that were mostly disbanded after the racial collisions in Charlottesville, Va., and the discomfort many CEOs felt in the administration’s embrace “of both sides.” Those panels are back now — including leaders from industry and labor and some conservative thought leaders — who will be tasked with helping to advise on a comeback. The thought occurs to me whether we will have a different sort of embrace of both sides — those who know the science and put human life and public health first and those who want to restart the economy as the primary objective and tolerate a certain degree of death. We will soon see.     –  Steve Clemons   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.    On April 29, our new 3D journalism platform The Hill Virtually Live will host an online event - Protecting Seniors: Healthcare in a Health Crisis. We’ll be looking at how Medicare is stepping up to support seniors, what it will take to protect underserved communities and the role of telemedicine. Watch this space as we announce registration details and program speakers. Follow @TheHillEvents for updates.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE Global coronavirus cases have now surpassed 2 million. At the time of this newsletter, 129,045 lives have been lost to the virus. Nearly 8,000 people have died from COVID-19 in New York City alone and more than 26,000 Americans have died from the coronavirus.    Second to New York, New Jersey has 68,824 cases. Massachusetts 28,163. California 25,779. Pennsylvania 25,591. Florida 21,628. Most experts agree that a lack of testing in the U.S. means these numbers should be higher, possibly double or even triple the officially recorded numbers of “confirmed cases.” Although New York may be heading toward a slowdown in cases, the death rate is expected to peak in other metropolitan areas in the weeks to come.    Around the world, 502,389 people have reported full recoveries from COVID-19.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Trump to halt WHO funding amid review. President Trump on Tuesday said his administration will halt funding to the World Health Organization (WHO) pending a review of the global body for what he described as its mismanagement of the coronavirus outbreak. (The Hill)      Democrats try to force McConnell’s hand on coronavirus aid. Congressional Democratic leaders are trying to box out Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE (R-Ky.) by negotiating a deal with Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE and President Trump to provide $251 billion in new funding for small businesses. Senate Minority Leader Charles SchumerCharles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerGOP lawmaker calls on Senate to confirm Michael Pack as head of US media agency McConnell blocks resolution condemning Trump over treatment of protesters House Democrat demands answers from Secret Service about role breaking up White House protests MORE (D-N.Y.) and Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE (D-Calif.) calculate that Trump will be eager for a deal when funding for the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), a popular small-business lending program, is projected to expire Thursday. (The Hill)    Hoyer: House eyeing possible Friday vote on next coronavirus bill. House Democrats are hoping to vote Friday on the next round of coronavirus relief, Majority Leader Steny HoyerSteny Hamilton HoyerPelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Calls for police reform sparks divisions in Congress Hoyer wins Maryland House primary MORE (D-Md.) said Wednesday, but disagreements over the process could push it to next week. (The Hill)    Lawmakers introduce resolution rebuking Trump’s claims of power over governors. Reps. Tom MalinowskiThomas (Tom) MalinowskiGun control group rolls out House endorsements  Human Rights Campaign rolls out congressional endorsements on Equality Act anniversary  House passes massive T coronavirus relief package MORE (D-N.J.), Dean PhillipsDean PhillipsHouse passes bill to grant flexibility for small business aid program Bipartisan senators introduce bill to make changes to the Paycheck Protection Program The Memo: Activists press Biden on VP choice MORE (D-Minn.) and Justin AmashJustin AmashMark Cuban says he's decided not to run for president Amash readying legislation allowing victims to sue officers The Hill's Morning Report - Trump mobilizes military against 'angry mob,' holds controversial photo op MORE (I-Mich.) introduced a one-sentence resolution Tuesday pushing back on President Trump’s claims that he has total authority over when states can begin to ease the restrictions they put in place in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Amash is considering a third-party bid for the presidency. (The Hill)    Trump's signature to be on stimulus checks. Federal stimulus checks for millions of Americans will be reportedly delayed by several days because President Trump wanted his signature to be on them. Treasury Department officials say this will not cause any delays. (Washington Post)   CDC director on WHO: We continue to have a “productive public health relationship.” Robert Redfield, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), on Wednesday said the World Health Organization continues to have a “productive public health relationship” with the CDC after President Trump announced he was halting funds for the global organization pending a review. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. Chris Van HollenChristopher (Chris) Van HollenDemocrats introduce bill to rein in Trump's power under Insurrection Act Democratic senators kneel during moment of silence for George Floyd Hillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues MORE (D-Md.) @ChrisVanHollen Millions of Americans in desperate financial straits will have to wait longer to get their individual payment checks because Donald Trump wants to add his name to them. No other American President has done this. His COVID-19 strategy: Trump First. Rep. Fred UptonFrederick (Fred) Stephen UptonBipartisan Senate group offers new help to state, local governments Bipartisan bill aims to help smallest businesses weather the coronavirus crisis Lawmakers press HHS for answers on coronavirus drug distribution MORE (R-Mich.)  @RepFredUpton We all need to come together during this time. I’m reminded of a quote by Henry Ford: “Coming together is a beginning; keeping together is progress; working together is success.” We’re all looking for the lighthouse & the safe harbor from this pandemic.#InItTogether #MI0   Rep. Judy ChuJudy May ChuMinority caucuses call for quick action on police reform House Democrats press Treasury on debit cards used for coronavirus relief payments Democrats blast CDC report on minorities and COVID-19 MORE (D-Calif.)  @RepJudyChu The US helped create the WHO to keep people healthy, especially during a global pandemic like this. Many countries depend on the WHO right now to fight coronavirus. But now, more people will needlessly die because Donald Trump needs somebody to blame for his own delayed actions.  ACROSS THE NATION  Nation’s capital expecting COVID-19 peak in May. D.C. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) said hospitalizations in the nation’s capital could peak in late May, a month earlier than previously projected, if area residents continue to stay at home and avoid large groups. (Washington Post)          Michigan governor fires back at Trump, says states won’t be “open via Twitter.” Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer (D), a possible vice presidential candidate, knocked President Trump on Tuesday after he claimed on Twitter the day before that he had the authority to “open up the states” once the coronavirus outbreak begins to wane. Whitmer said that “the government's not going to be open via Twitter.” (The Hill)    Illinois governor said he's “given up on any federal promises.” Illinois Gov. J.B. Pritzker (D) said he has "given up" on promises for coronavirus aid from the federal government amid an escalating feud between himself and President Trump. "I hope something will get delivered from the federal government, but I don't expect it anymore,” Pritzker said on CNN. (The Hill) Arizona Gov. Ducey says state is open to hosting empty-stadium MLB season. Arizona Gov. Doug Ducey (R) welcomed the prospect of Major League Baseball playing the entirety of the 2020 season in the state, stating that he had been in contact with league officials and is “open-minded to hosting whatever [the league] would like from the state.” (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW  / China blasts Trump’s move to pull WHO funding, pledges support. China criticized President Trump’s move to temporarily halt funding to the World Health Organization and pledged to support the global health body. Trump on Tuesday said he ordered the move against the WHO because it took China’s claims about the coronavirus “at face value.” (Bloomberg)     China didn’t warn public of likely pandemic for six key days. In the six days after top Chinese officials secretly determined they likely were facing a pandemic from the new coronavirus, life proceeded as usual as the Chinese government remained silent. That critical delay from Jan. 14 to Jan. 20 set the stage for a pandemic that has infected more than 2 million people and killed more than 129,000 people. (Associated Press)    Germany heads toward steep recession and surge in unemployment. The German government on Wednesday issued a bleak assessment of the effects of the coronavirus, saying that the economy was headed for a steep recession and a surge in joblessness. Economic output in Europe’s largest economy will plunge almost 10 percent from April through June, the German Economy Ministry said. (New York Times)   SCIENCE Hydroxychloroquine alleviated symptoms, did not cure coronavirus in small study. Hydroxychloroquine, the popular anti-malaria drug that President Trump has called a "game changer" in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic, relieved symptoms of the virus, but didn't rid patients of the disease a small, recently released study shows. (The Hill)   BUSINESS     Consumers aren’t buying anything (but groceries). Retail sales plunged 8.7 percent in March, the biggest drop on record. A preliminary report from the Commerce Department showed the precipitous drop in sales as consumers reined in spending on goods ranging from cars and clothing to meals at restaurants and drinks at bars. (The Hill)   Big banks report their profit was nearly halved last month. Leading U.S. banks — Goldman Sachs, Citigroup, Bank of America and PNC — reporting quarterly earnings on Wednesday said they’re stocking away money to prepare for a wave of loan defaults by consumers and businesses over the coming months. (Washington Post)  Renters are hanging in there, for now. The National Multifamily Housing Council’s national rent tracker is showing that since the coronavirus outbreak started, the vast majority of renters have been keeping up with their payments. The latest survey of 11.5 million apartment units found that 84 percent of households made a full or partial rent payment by April 12. The surprising part — that number is up 15 percentage points from April 5.  ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSION  Misinformation about coronavirus is more troubling than you think. As grave a threat as the virus poses, with increased attention comes opportunities for the spread of another unwanted threat: misinformation. Whether they are debunked conspiracy theories about the cause of the virus or promises of cures that may actually cause harm, increases in public interest always seem to be met with outlandish explanations. (Stephen R. Barnard for The Hill)  Trump is right to push hydroxychloroquine. Patients are dying today; they need at least the possibility of help now, not in a year or so. A constitutional argument can also be made in support of giving hydroxychloroquine to a COVID-19 sufferer. If we have a constitutional right to defend ourselves against an attacker, why can’t we have that same right when the attacker is the coronavirus? (Ronald L. Trowbridge for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS  Here Comes The Sun! The famous Beatles song is taking on a whole new life in one hospital just outside New York City, where it is being used to celebrate patients who have overcome COVID-19. Take a look at the heartwarming video of the hospital staff celebrating the discharge of a coronavirus patient. (Fox News)  Sesame Street’s Elmo reassures families during coronavirus special. In a “virtual playdate” on HBO on Tuesday night, Sesame Street’s Elmo (and his dad, Louie) were joined by celebrities such as Anne Hathaway to reassure families that more sunny days are ahead. (TODAY)   ICYMI, STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews former AIDS czar MARK DYBUL > Steve interviews former GSK Global Vaccines President LUC DEBRUYNE > Steve interviews former Baltimore Health Commissioner LEANA WEN > Steve interviews former Trump homeland security adviser TOM BOSSERT > Steve interviews International Rescue Committee CEO DAVID MILIBAND > Steve interviews Miami Mayor and coronavirus survivor FRANCIS X. SUAREZ  > Steve interviews Rep. DEBBIE DINGELL (D-Mich.)    Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEAuthorities in Kenya are cracking down on civilians not wearing masks in public amid the coronavirus pandemic, with charges as severe as jail time for some offenders. Nairobi issued a new law last week imposing fines of $200 and jail time up to six months for people who are caught in public without masks, even those inside private vehicles, according to Fox News. "Now it is compulsory to put the face masks [on]," police inspector general Hillary Mutyambai said in a press briefing Wednesday. "I’ve instructed the police officers to enforce this." Officials in Kenya are also mandating social distancing measures keeping people six feet away from each other while in public, similar to guidance from the U.S. government. The African country also implemented a heavily enforced three-week lockdown that began on March 27 and will last until April 17. The lockdown includes barring all movement by railroad and air throughout the Nairobi metropolitan area. Kenya has reported a total of 225 cases of COVID-19, with 10 deaths, according to Johns Hopkins University data.Steve Clemons talks to Rep. Debbie DingellDeborah (Debbie) Ann Dingell18 states fight conservative think tank effort to freeze fuel efficiency standards Pelosi: George Floyd death is 'a crime' OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Coal company sues EPA over power plant pollution regulation | Automakers fight effort to freeze fuel efficiency standards | EPA watchdog may probe agency's response to California water issues MORE (D-Mich.) about the way we should be approaching safety and reopening the economy. Dingell, a member of the House Energy and Commerce Committee and the Health subcommittee, says that all discussions must start with the workers and establishing an environment where they are safe and that they can trust. Excerpts from the interview below:   On how her community is doing with the coronavirus challenge    Some are critical of the role of the federal government right now and seeing mayors and governors stand out. You are part of the federal government. How do you see the federal response? DINGELL: You know I say to do this. I'm not gonna be political right now. None of us can afford to be political. We're all in this together and we are fighting an invisible enemy. I have been frustrated on some days, but what I do is — you talked about when you opened the show — I write a personal blog every day because people need to know that how their feeling is normal. And I'm going through every feeling that other people have. I have not been physically with anybody. I've kept my physical distance for 30 days. I take my temperature every morning and just the ups and downs of that. But I have a twice weekly call with all of my mayors. ... I go to war. Trust me, I try to stay calm but I've lost it a couple of times. ... My job is to be in touch with everyone in my constituencies. I talk to my hospitals every day. I talk to the police and fire every day. I understand. I've been lucky that I've got several manufacturers that are starting to produce the PPE. I've been on the phone cutting red tape, getting masks flown in from China, finding airplanes to fly those masks, talking to Ford. They were the first people to really make some of the PPE equipment here. And the first thing they made were face masks. I mean face guards. I called every member of the Michigan delegation and got them face guards, we got them to all the fire and police and the hospitals. We are in there every single day. You’ve just got to see what's the problem? What do we need to solve it? You get people together, you brainstorm, you strategize. You keep fighting until you can deliver and then you hear the next problem.    You issued a joint statement with five other members about how we should approach tasks during this period. What were you trying to communicate? DINGELL: Well, the first thing we have to do is to worry about the health of every single American. We need to make sure that everybody has access to to health care, that they don't worry whether they can afford the test, whether they can afford to stay home. If they are sick. That they're going to get sick pay. That they see a doctor and they can afford their medicine. These are really scary times. People are losing their jobs or being furloughed, and they don't know how they're gonna live or whether they're going to be paid. And we need to worry about that. What we were trying to do is to set out core values, even in my own state, let alone I've said this to the White House. And I've said it here in Michigan and some pretty tough conversations, some days with well-intentioned business executives who don't understand that the worker matters. As you talk about how do you reopen the economy? Quite frankly, I was even having these discussions before the auto plant shut down. Workers were scared to go in those plants. People they were working with were COVID positive. Chrysler has lost 14 employees that were in the plant. Ford's now lost the dozen. People are afraid to go back in those plants, and any discussion about reopening has to include the worker, the asset, the greatest asset that an employer has so they know they're going to be safe and healthy when they return to work. I’m not going to get into politics right now ... but we do need to make sure that our election process is protected when we have our November presidential election.    Are we getting the stimulus package right?   DINGELL: So many of those people that are applying for unemployment are furloughed or they're on temporary unemployment. We have to figure out how they have a job to go back to when this is over, and what we want to do right now is keep employees. I called for a structure for a civilized society that people know that they have money to eat, that they've got electricity, cable, a roof over their head, which a lot of people, you know we're having to do with significant homeless populations, too. But the unemployment pay, combined with the $600 additional payment in that check, is giving people economic relief for the moment, and we may have to extend the period of time of which they are eligible. We'll be looking at that in the CARE two package, but I think we all have to work together to make sure that we are giving people that feeling of economic security, and then when we have protected life ... we will restart the economy.   What are we going to do to help the homeless? To help the most vulnerable? DINGELL: We're not doing enough. One of the things that I've been working with my local governments on is what to do about homeless because the homeless shelters, first of all, some of the religious homeless shelters start to close as the weather gets better. So we're having to make alternative arrangements. But even more frightening is in the tight living conditions that you have in homeless shelters where this virus is spreading very rapidly. My local governments have been renting hotels and making hotel rooms available to the homeless. But there are too many that are still on the street. They don't know how to get health care. You know, we're trying to make sure that we're getting more food to them. One of the first things that we did in our second bill was to make sure that kids who rely on schools to get two meals a day would still have food at home when the schools close. Uh, you know what? One of the things I’ve been working on with [Rep.] Rashida Talib, which I began two months ago was running water. We were telling people the biggest way to avoid this becoming a public health crisis — we didn’t succeed — was to tell people to wash your hands. But how can you wash your hands if you don't have running water? So we've had to really prioritize as a country what some of these basic needs are. Too many of us take running water for granted, and I have come to a conclusion that running water is a human right. Shouldn't every human being have access to water?     Clemons: I know you issue a thought of the day. What is your thought of the day today? DINGELL: You know a lot of people are going through tough times, and sometimes they don't think that they've got the confidence or they've got the emotional wherewithal to get through this. One, we're going to get through this as a community, but just remember that a diamond becomes what it is through pressure. An oak tree grows with a lot of hard wind. That was my thought for the day in my daily writing. But we are going to get through this together because we do have each other and it's hard. It's scary. You can go stark raving mad like me and even start to see the gray. But we will get through it together because we're there for each other. VIEW BREAKING NEWS ON CORONAVIRUS   WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > Trump hosts COVID-19 survivors at White House  > Cuomo pushes back: ‘Do we want a king or do we want a president?’ > Governors form regional coalitions to explore path to reopening  > South Dakota now a hot spot, threatening US food chain  > It’s not just Trump who’s angry with China, world leaders join in on criticism  > Obama endorses Biden    Cuomo: Trump isn’t a king. New York Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) said Tuesday that President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE is "clearly spoiling for a fight" but that he would not play along. When pressed about the president’s claim that he has “total authority” to reopen the country, Cuomo said the remarks were “factually wrong” adding “do we want a king or do we want a president?” (The Hill)    South Dakota becomes hot spot; governor under fire. South Dakota is now home to one of the largest coronavirus clusters in the U.S., with more than 300 workers at a giant pork processing plant falling ill. First-term GOP Gov. Kristi NoemKristi Lynn NoemSouth Dakota will not enforce social distancing at Mount Rushmore Fourth of July event South Dakota governor says she's working with Trump officials on Mount Rushmore flyover South Dakota governor asks Trump to intervene in checkpoint dispute with Native American tribes MORE, who told reporters earlier this month that “South Dakota is not New York City,” is under fire for refusing to issue a statewide stay-at-home order. (Washington Post)  Food supply worries grow after outbreak closes Smithfield meat plant. Pork processor Smithfield Foods's decision to shut down a major U.S. plant after a coronavirus outbreak among workers is putting a spotlight on the food supply chain during the pandemic. There are worries that if more plants close, American consumers could be hit by the shortages. (The Hill)  THE INTERVIEW Rep. Debbie DingellDeborah (Debbie) Ann Dingell18 states fight conservative think tank effort to freeze fuel efficiency standards Pelosi: George Floyd death is 'a crime' OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Coal company sues EPA over power plant pollution regulation | Automakers fight effort to freeze fuel efficiency standards | EPA watchdog may probe agency's response to California water issues MORE: Reopening-the-economy discussion must focus on worker safety first.       Dingell’s thought of the day. “You know a lot of people are going through tough times, and sometimes they don't think that they have the confidence or they've got the emotional wherewithal to get through this one. We're going to get through this as a community, but just remember that a diamond becomes what it is through pressure. An oak tree grows with a lot of hard wind. That was my thought for the day in my daily writing. But we are going to get through this together because we do have each other and it's hard. It's scary. You can go stark raving mad like me and even start to see the gray. But we will get through it together because we're there for each other.”  Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Tuesday, April 14.  Rep. Debbie Dingell’s (D-Mich.) thought of the day is of a diamond and all the pressure it takes to create it. She said during my interview with her today that people now are under that kind of pressure — and we will get through this.   Dingell said we need to focus on real people who are experiencing extraordinary challenges. She noted that almost all of the discussions thus far on reopening the economy have neglected to include workers, stating that the people making ventilators and other personal protective equipment at Ford and Chrysler plants deserve to be heard and their observations and fears known. Dingell added she speaks 10 times a day with Rep. Fred UptonFrederick (Fred) Stephen UptonBipartisan Senate group offers new help to state, local governments Bipartisan bill aims to help smallest businesses weather the coronavirus crisis Lawmakers press HHS for answers on coronavirus drug distribution MORE (R-Mich.), explaining that they approach and solve big problems together. She said this is no time for politics. These are some powerful messages from Dingell and the interview deserves a watch.   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.  On April 29, our new 3D journalism platform The Hill Virtually Live will host an online event - Protecting Seniors: Healthcare in a Health Crisis. We’ll be looking at how Medicare is stepping up to support seniors, what it will take to protect underserved communities and the role of telemedicine. Watch this space as we announce registration details and program speakers. Follow @TheHillEvents for updates.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE The global number of confirmed coronavirus cases is nearing another significant milestone of 2 million. There are 1,949,210 confirmed COVID-19 cases in the world as of the time of this newsletter. The United States is home to more than a quarter of global cases and 24,485 people have died in America from the virus. Spain is now the second hardest hit nation with 172,541 confirmed cases and more than 18,000 dead. Italy has lost 21,067 lives. France has reported 14,986 deaths. 12,125 have died in the United Kingdom. 4,683 in Iran. 1,296 in Turkey.    10,834 coronavirus deaths have been reported in New York, but the death rate is starting to slow, as Gov. Andrew Cuomo (D) said the worst could be behind us. New Jersey has nearly 65,000 confirmed cases and 2,443 deaths. Michigan has lost 1,602, Pennsylvania 592, Louisiana 884. Focus is shifting to South Dakota today, which now has 868 confirmed cases and six dead. With the exception of American Samoa, people have died from the virus in every U.S. state and territory.    Around the world, 1.9 million people have reported full recoveries from COVID-19.   WASHINGTON WATCH        A rift between the White House and states threatens a cohesive response. There are many constitutional questions about who has the power to restart the economy. (New York Times)    Trump hosts meeting with coronavirus survivors. President Trump hosted a group of patients who have recovered from the coronavirus at the White House today. During the meeting, Trump joked with a woman who said she was feeling 85 percent better to “stay away.” (Reuters)    Aides expect Schumer, Mnuchin to reach deal on coronavirus relief. Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin and Senate Minority Leader Charles SchumerCharles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerGOP lawmaker calls on Senate to confirm Michael Pack as head of US media agency McConnell blocks resolution condemning Trump over treatment of protesters House Democrat demands answers from Secret Service about role breaking up White House protests MORE (D-N.Y.) are expected to reach a deal this week on an interim coronavirus relief bill that would provide money to businesses, hospitals and state governments. The deal could lead to legislation being passed quickly through the Senate on Thursday, and through the House no later than early next week. But a swift approval is far from certain. (The Hill)    Obama endorses Biden. In a video recorded from his home in Washington, D.C., former President Obama endorsed former Vice President Joe BidenJoe BidenOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Davis: 72 hours cementing the real choice for November OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump signs order removing environmental reviews for major projects | New Trump air rule will limit future pollution regulations, critics say | DNC climate group calls for larger federal investment on climate than Biden plan MORE for president and made the case that Biden represents the nation’s best hope of emerging from the coronavirus pandemic as a united and prosperous country. (The Hill)  Manafort asks for early release. President Trump’s former campaign manager, Paul ManafortPaul John ManafortTrump taps Lewandowski, Bossie for Commission on Presidential Scholars Harris, Jeffries question why Manafort, Cohen released while others remain in prison Cohen released from federal prison to home confinement due to coronavirus concerns MORE, is asking to be released from prison early and serve the remainder of his 7.5 year sentence at home due to health concerns brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. Joni ErnstJoni Kay ErnstGOP lawmakers say Steve King's loss could help them in November The Hill's Campaign Report: Biden on the cusp of formally grasping the Democratic nomination  The Hill's Morning Report - Protesters' defiance met with calls to listen MORE (R-Iowa) @SenJoniErnst Iowa’s cattle producers are continuing to put food on Americans’ tables throughout #COVID19. But, like all Iowans, they need relief. I’m urging @USDA to provide assistance immediately. Rep. Veronica EscobarVeronica EscobarThe DACA recipients protecting all Americans The Hill's 12:30 Report: Pence visits Orlando as all 50 states reopen The Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Mnuchin, Powell: Economy may need more boost; Trump defends malaria drug MORE (D-Texas)  @RepEscobar The #coronavirus numbers in El Paso keep increasing and the uninsured fear what will happen to them if they get sick and can’t afford care. ⁦@GovAbbott, NOW is it time to expand Medicaid and get Texas out of last place for access to healthcare?     ACROSS THE NATION  New Orleans guessed wrong, went forward with Mardi Gras as virus spread. A cache of internal emails reveals city officials believed chances were “low” that the festivities would help spread the virus, a prediction that proved tragically off base. (New York Times)    Seven crew members on Mercy hospital ship test positive for coronavirus. Seven crew members on the U.S. Navy hospital ship docked in Los Angeles have tested positive for the coronavirus. The medical treatment facility crew members from the USNS Mercy who contracted the virus have been put in isolation off the ship, the Navy said in a statement. (The Hill)   Eight in 10 would wait to resume activities after lift of coronavirus restrictions. Slightly more than 8 in 10 Americans said in a new poll that they would wait to resume normal activities even after the government lifts restrictions put in place to mitigate the spread of the coronavirus. 71 percent of respondents said they would wait to see what happens with the novel coronavirus before resuming activities, according to the Gallup poll released Tuesday. (The Hill) Connecticut governor: No restrictions lifted before May 20. Connecticut Gov. Ned Lamont (D) said Tuesday that he would not ease restrictions on social distancing until at least May 20. “We’re just getting started and I don’t feel comfortable yet at all,” Lamont told CNN's John Berman on "New Day," referring to the state's testing capacity. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW  It’s not just Trump pointing fingers at China. It’s no secret that President Trump has harshly criticized both the Chinese government and the World Health Organization for their handling of the global pandemic — but it’s not just Washington that’s angry at China. From Britain to Brazil, a growing score of world leaders are directly challenging China over the pandemic and growing more wary of engagement with its government. (Washington Post)       China’s lab bats. State Department cables warned of safety issues at a Wuhan lab studying bat coronaviruses. Two years before the novel coronavirus pandemic upended the world, U.S. Embassy officials visited a Chinese research facility in the city of Wuhan several times and sent two official warnings back to Washington about inadequate safety at the lab, which was conducting risky studies on coronaviruses from bats. (Washington Post)    India extends lockdown. Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India extended a nationwide lockdown for nearly three more weeks, leaving 1 billion people under severe restrictions and urging Indians not to “let our guard down.” (Washington Post)   As death rates soar, experts fear calamity in Indonesia. Indonesia, a nation that had been widely criticized for its lack of coronavirus testing and limited social distancing measures, has seen a rapid uptick in coronavirus deaths in recent days, with 60 new fatalities reported Tuesday. (New York Times)   SCIENCE Study finds obesity the single biggest factor in NYC’s hospitalizations. Doctors at NYU Langone Health conducted the largest study so far of U.S. hospital admissions for COVID-19, focused on New York City. They found obesity, along with age, were the biggest deciding factor in hospital admissions. (ZDNET)     Airbags to the rescue. U.S. auto giant Ford is partnering with its airbag supplier to produce 1.3 million medical gowns for health workers. The production of the gowns will ramp up to a weekly rate of 75,000 by Sunday, eventually increasing to a rate of 100,000 gowns per week. (The Hill)  BUSINESS IMF predicts global economy will suffer worst year in a century. As the COVID-19 pandemic continues its grip on the global economy, the International Monetary Fund said Tuesday that it expects the global economy to shrink 3 percent this year — far worse than its 0.1 percent dip in the Great Recession year of 2009 — before rebounding in 2021 with 5.8 percent growth. (Associated Press)  ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSION  World War III isn’t what the strategists thought it would be. The world is now engaged in what legitimately can be labeled the Third World War — dramatically different from any war imagined decades ago, but massively lethal and destructive, nonetheless. The post-World War II era saw a rebuilding of the global order. This war must trigger a major effort to do likewise. (Robert Hormats for The Hill) Who’ll decide when we can reopen? It’s not who you might think. Make no mistake: Neither the president nor the governors unilaterally decide when America reopens. They have shared and competing responsibilities, and the most important actor remains the public. (Andrew C. McCarthy for The Hill)  GENEROUS SPIRITS  Cruz and Gillibrand launch #CombatCOVID19Challenge to encourage acts of public service. Sens. Ted CruzRafael (Ted) Edward CruzTexas Republicans call on county GOP chair to resign for saying Floyd's death was staged Rosenstein takes fire from Republicans in heated testimony Clyburn: Cowed GOP ascribes 'mystical powers' to Trump MORE (R-Texas.) and Kirsten GillibrandKirsten GillibrandSenate Dems press DOJ over coronavirus safety precautions in juvenile detention centers Senate Democrat introduces bill to protect food supply It's as if a Trump operative infiltrated the Democratic primary process MORE (D-N.Y.) have launched the #CombatCOVID19Challenge — a social media game that encourages people to perform acts of kindness or community service during the coronavirus pandemic.   David Ortiz, John Krasinski surprise Boston health care workers with Red Sox tickets. Krasinski talked with five workers from Boston's Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center on his “Some Good News” online show Sunday. During their chat, Ortiz joined the group and announced the Red Sox will donate four tickets for Beth Israel employees to share "for life." (Sports Illustrated)  ICYMI, STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews former AIDS czar MARK DYBUL > Steve interviews former GSK Global Vaccines President LUC DEBRUYNE > Steve interviews former Baltimore Health Commissioner LEANA WEN > Steve interviews former Trump homeland security adviser TOM BOSSERT > Steve interviews International Rescue Committee CEO DAVID MILIBAND > Steve interviews Miami Mayor and coronavirus survivor FRANCIS X. SUAREZ    Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.    VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVERita Wilson, who announced she had contracted the coronavirus with her husband Tom Hanks last month, warned that taking chloroquine, a drug that has been touted by the White House as a "game changer," caused her "extreme side effects." The couple has since recovered from their infection that was reported on March 11, after quarantining in Australia, where they were diagnosed with the illness. Hanks cited milder symptoms than Wilson, who was given chloroquine for her treatment, according to The Hollywood Reporter. Wilson said she was not sure if the drug worked or if her fever broke naturally. However, regardless of whether the drug worked, she said she thinks it caused "extreme side effects" that made her nauseous, dizzy and weakened her muscles. She added, "people have to be very considerate about that drug. We don't really know if it's helpful in this case." President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE has touted the drugs hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine as possible "miracle" solutions for treating the coronavirus, despite a lack of long-term research into its effects on COVID-19 patients. The drugs, previously proven to treat infections such as malaria, have been issued an emergency-use authorization, which is still not a full approval for the drug's treatment for the coronavirus. Health officials told Wilson and Hanks they are now immune to the virus, as the couple volunteers to donate their blood to a study working on developing a vaccine for COVID-19. Wilson added that she and Hanks feel "completely normal" with no lingering or residual symptoms of the virus.The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Miami Mayor Francis X. Suarez, who was one of the first people to test positive for the COVID-19 virus in Miami-Dade County, Fla. He donated his blood plasma, after recovery, to help with treatment for critically ill patients fighting the disease. Suarez was the first mayor in the nation to issue a stay-at-home order, suspending large gatherings and events, and asking both President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE and major airlines to suspend travel from Miami Airport to other global coronavirus hot spots.  Some excerpts from the interview are below:   On how both he and Miami are doing SUAREZ: I’m doing very well. ... Miami is doing well as well. We seem to have hit the peak so far with the data that we have on March 31. Miami-Dade County is lagging a little bit behind us. Their peak seemed to be April 3 and Florida ’s peak is probably April 3. Now that is the peak of new cases, new infection cases. In other words, ever since April 3 or March 31, it appears that the number of new cases are going down. And that's obviously very good news. The number of deaths, we know, lags a few weeks behind that number because, unfortunately, the cycle of the COVID-19 disease is somewhere between 14 and 21 days. In my particular case, it took me 17 days before I could test negative for the first time. And then the 18th day I tested negative for the second time. So we're seeing deaths still rise. While new cases are coming down, hospitalizations are also favorable in terms of discharges and new patients.     SUAREZ: I was actually the second person in all of Miami Dade County, which is an area with a population of 3 million people. ... Had I not immediately quarantined ... I could have infected hundreds, if not thousands of people and even crippled our government's ability to function. So I was very fortunate that fire chief, our medical director, took conservative steps to get me to quarantine, to get me to test, and then of course, I had to run the city virtually for 18 days from home.    What did you do early on to prepare your hospitals, your health care workers and your health ecosystem after you had been infected and saw this disease coming? SUAREZ: Our fire chief identified the threat in February, right around the time that we had the Super Bowl. ... He started purchasing personal protective equipment weeks before anyone else thought of it. We were also consulting with experts in Florida International University that helped us determine that we should cancel two large events. One of them was Ultra, which is an event that hosts 150,000 people from 105 different countries. ... I was actually criticized when I did that. I was criticized by a county mayor who said that I acted prematurely, that Miami was open for business. Unfortunately, he didn't close our beaches, which led thousands if not tens of thousands of, you know, spring breakers to come to Miami, to party in Miami. And unfortunately, and tragically, we have two that passed away after a music festival here in our city. So, you know, we saw the cost of inaction and we saw the benefits of acting. And fortunately, I saw that a lot of cities that acted benefited and those that did not suffered.    On whether Florida Gov. Ron DeSantisRonald Dion DeSantisDeSantis pushing to host Republican National Convention in Florida Florida bars and theaters to reopen starting Friday, DeSantis says DeSantis says he's sending 500 National Guard troops to DC MORE should have shut down earlier SUAREZ: To his credit, he let the municipalities lead the way. We are the areas with the largest aggregation of population. So he didn't stand in our way from implementing measures early, and so we're thankful for that. He also had to weigh the fact that he had 20 to 25 counties that had no cases. Shutting down Florida is very different from shutting down Miami or Tampa, Orlando or Jacksonville. He ultimately ended up shutting down South Florida. And then I think he realized that, you know, he was just getting behind all the other governors in the United States that were shutting down their states and and just in an abundance of caution, the right thing to do was to shut down Florida. You know, I'm sure if he had a do over, maybe he would have done it earlier. But you know, I'm glad that as mayor, I decided Miami early on to be the first city to put a stay at home order in Dade County, the first city to put a curfew. The first city, as you said to cancel large events. And to also require distancing in grocery stores, at banks and at construction sites, to wear masks and even customers at those of those establishments to wear masks.    What advice do you have for other mayors who are on the front end of this? SUAREZ: The first thing I would advise him is immediately implement a stay-at-home order. Immediately send out advisories on social distancing. I would recommend a curfew as well, because that's even stricter than your stay-at-home order during the daytime that almost limits to just emergency, people have to leave for emergency reasons. That would be my first piece of advice. The second piece of advice would be, you know, obviously, to make sure that you have sufficient beds. If you don't have sufficient bedding in your hospital, reach out to the federal government, reach out to your state government, make sure that they're giving you supplementary beds. But it's clear to me based on the data that we're looking at, that if you do implement these social distancing rules, if you do implement stay at home orders, people do respect those orders. Then in about a week to two weeks you're going to see a leveling off of the brand new cases. Obviously, the deaths, like we said before, lag behind a week or two weeks because of the cycle of infection. But at least in terms of the new cases, there will be light at the end of the tunnel, and it'll give you reason to believe that better days are ahead.    What should the federal government have done to be more on your side? SUAREZ: I think one thing that we need right now is funding. Obviously, you know the bailout, or what you want to call it, the stimulus, was important. It would have been great if it happened a little earlier in anticipation of April 1, which was the first day when everything was shut down when people have to pay the rent and their mortgages. So it would've been great if it would have happened a few weeks earlier. Obviously, you know, getting more testing, that's something that you know, this is an unprecedented time, and I don't want to lay blame on anyone. But I think people would have felt more confident have we been able to test sooner. And I think being a little more supportive of our message to stay home would have been helpful.   On things that regular people could be doing to help SUAREZ: Well, number one, I have had a few people that have donated blood plasma [as I did], but it's just very difficult because there is a lack of back end stuff for this, so that's one of the things we're gonna have to look at. Obviously, we're focusing a lot on testing people that are symptomatic. ... We have 7,000 people in Dade County that are positive. Those people should have a right to be retested and they should be able to donate plasma. I think that's one way to do it. ... But when we have a situation like this, two things worry me. One is suicides, from people who are alone, and the second is domestic violence. You know, our domestic violence complaints are way down, and that actually worries me because I don't think that people are being nicer. I think what's happening is that people feel afraid in this particular predicament where they're stuck at home from calling the police, from calling 911. And so those are the two things that as citizens, I would urge you to try to get involved either in helping someone — being a presence in someone's life — or making sure that if there's any sort of domestic violence happening in your community, to please urge those people to come forward. VIEW BREAKING NEWS ON CORONAVIRUS    WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > White House, governors at odds over who can reopen the economy   > #FireFauci? GOP worries he could be doing more harm than good  > Health or wealth? Washington debates when to get back to normal  > China sees another spike in cases  > Miami Mayor Francis Suarez worries about rise in suicides and domestic violence Trump claims he, not governors, has authority on opening state economies. President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE on Monday said he, not state governors, has the ultimate authority to loosen restrictions on states as the coronavirus outbreak eases, an assertion disputed by legal experts. This debate will continue in the weeks and months ahead.       George StephanopoulosGeorge Robert StephanopoulosPelosi: Presidents should not 'fuel the flame'  National security adviser defends Trump tweets: The president 'wants to de-escalate violence' Sanders pushes back on doubts supporters will back Biden MORE tests positive for coronavirus. ABC News host George Stephanopoulos on Monday said that he's tested positive for COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus. Stephanopoulos, who hosts "Good Morning America" and "This Week," announced his diagnosis on ABC about two weeks after his wife, Ali Wentworth, tested positive for the virus. (The Hill)  THE INTERVIEW Miami Mayor Francis X. Suarez, coronavirus survivor, worries about spikes in domestic violence and suicide         “I worry about suicides, first, and the second is domestic violence. You know, our domestic violence incidents are way down, and that actually worries me because I don't think that people are being nicer. I think what's happening is that people feel afraid in this particular predicament where they're stuck at home from calling the police, or calling 911. And so those are the two things that as citizens, I would urge you to try to get involved either in helping someone.  Being a presence in someone's life or making sure that if there's any sort of domestic violence happening in your community, then call the police and urge people to come forward.”   Watch the full interview here.  THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Monday, April 13.    The United States now has more than three times the number of COVID-19 cases as the next leading nation, Spain. There are more than 560,000 U.S. cases in a nation where testing remains elusive and hard to access. That number doesn’t include the asymptomatic transmission of the disease that we must get under control. Mark Dybul, the AIDS czar under former President George W. Bush, said in an interview with me last week that the testing deficit in America requires us to make other statistical estimates, and his view was that there were probably 4 million to 5 million COVID-19 cases in the U.S. today.    That is why there is so much frustration with the dysfunction and politics in the White House that delayed action plans to both mitigate the spread of the virus and to use the days after travel from China was suspended to stockpile personal protective equipment and ventilators and to plan for hospital bed expansion. After explosive, in-depth reporting by The New York Times, it’s worth noting there are a number of key leaders who tried hard to move the needle faster on protecting Americans. But as thousands of Americans die, we need to ask whether there were steps that could have prevented this crisis. That is how we learn from one natural disaster or storm to the next, or as in the case, from one pandemic to the next.   I had a quick conversation with my colleague The Hill’s Reid Wilson and he shared some sobering but guardedly optimistic notes on the country. Reid said most states are past their peaks. That's the good news. California recorded 902 new cases on Sunday, the first time since March 29 that the number of new cases dipped below 1,000. Illinois had its worst day of the outbreak on Sunday, reporting 1,672 new cases. The state had 1,000+ cases six days in a row. Indiana had its worst day on Friday, with 556 new cases and 54 deaths. Numbers eased Saturday and Sunday, but not very much. Massachusetts had its worst day so far Sunday, reporting 2,615 new cases. The Bay State crossed 25,000 cases, and 756 have died and added more than 2,000 cases in three of the past four days. Michigan's numbers are down, just 641 cases Sunday, but will probably pass 25,000 today. Minnesota had its worst day, adding 194 cases on Sunday. Nebraska also had its worst day, adding 91 cases, up to 820. New Jersey has crossed 61,000 cases and added at least 2,000 cases for the past 16 days, at least 3,000 for the past dozen days. New York has had at least 700 deaths for six days in a row. It's under 10,000 new cases a day for the past two days, happily.    Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.  In coming weeks, we will share with you our new 3D journalism platform, The Hill Virtually Live, to take stock of what is happening around the nation — for instance, empathy and building resilience across generations, acts of heroism, the way learning and credentialing are being reinvented, and how health delivery is going even more digital. Follow @TheHillEvents to stay up to date on our upcoming virtual programs.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Trump to #FireFauci? President Trump finds himself in hot water this morning after retweeting a message from a former GOP congressional candidate that closed with #FireFauci. With Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE now saying more lives could have been saved if the president listened to earlier warnings about COVID-19, Trump and his allies now wonder if Fauci is doing more harm than good. Trump will certainly be asked about Fauci’s job security at today’s briefing. (The Hill)    Trump lashes out over reports of failure to take early coronavirus actions. President Trump lashed out at The New York Times over a story it published over the weekend that reported Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar repeatedly warned the president of the possibility of a coronavirus outbreak weeks before his administration began to crack down in response to the threat. (The Hill)   Health or wealth? Balancing a public health emergency with a collapsing economy. Public health experts are debating the question of when to reopen portions of the U.S. economy, shuttered because of the coronavirus pandemic, with several Trump administration officials cautioning that a target date of May 1 — floated by Trump, among others — may not be realistic. Other experts are advocating for a “rolling reentry” into normal life based on conditions in different regions. (Washington Post)  Pelosi, Schumer urge GOP to “stop posturing.” Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE (D-Calif.) and Senate Minority Leader Charles SchumerCharles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerGOP lawmaker calls on Senate to confirm Michael Pack as head of US media agency McConnell blocks resolution condemning Trump over treatment of protesters House Democrat demands answers from Secret Service about role breaking up White House protests MORE (D-N.Y.) told their Republican colleagues to “stop posturing” and come to the negotiating table for an “interim” coronavirus relief bill. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. Marco RubioMarco Antonio RubioIf we seek resilience, we need liberty, not nationalism GOP senator blocks bill giving flexibility to small-business loans but says deal near GOP senators dodge on treatment of White House protesters MORE (R-Fla.)  @MarcoRubio #FireFauci? For what? 3 things true 1.Govt of #China did & continues to mislead own people & world 2. Most nations & govts at various levels in U.S. including Fed Govt reacted slow because didn’t want to harm economy or be alarmists 3. Can’t change past but can avoid repeating it   Rep. Marcia FudgeMarcia Louise FudgeThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Moniz says U.S. needs energy jobs coalition and Manchin says Congress is pushing Wall Street solutions that don't work for Main Street; Burr to step aside Hillicon Valley: Experts raise security concerns about online voting | Musk finds supporter in Trump | Officials warn that Chinese hackers targeting COVID-19 research groups The Hill's Campaign Report: Democrat concedes in California House race  MORE (D-Ohio)  @RepMarciaFudge This @OHdeptofHealth video is a simple yet powerful reminder of the importance of social distancing. #InThisTogether #StayAtHome (Ohio Department of Health)    Rep. Al GreenAlexander (Al) N. GreenThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Miami mayor worries about suicide and domestic violence rise; Trump-governor debate intensifies Overnight Energy: Iconic national parks close over coronavirus concerns | New EPA order limits telework post-pandemic | Lawmakers urge help for oil and gas workers Bipartisan lawmakers urge assistance for oil and gas workers MORE (D-Texas)  @RepAlGreen Make America great again. #KeepFauci #FireTrump  ACROSS THE NATION  Roosevelt sailor with coronavirus dies. A sailor from the USS Theodore Roosevelt was declared dead Monday after being taken to an intensive care unit last week, the Navy said in a statement. The sailor tested positive for the coronavirus March 30 and was in the middle of a 14-day isolation period on Naval Base Guam when he was found unresponsive during a daily medical check Thursday. (The Hill)    Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE calls for a “fair” federal stimulus bill. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo (D) criticized the federal government’s response to the pandemic at a press conference this weekend. Citing a report from The Hill, Cuomo raised concern that New York, the country’s hardest hit state, is receiving $12,000 per COVID-19 case while states like Minnesota, Nebraska and Montana are getting more than $300,000 per case.         Georgia urged to suspend Jim Crow-era mask law. Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp (R) is being urged to suspend a law against wearing masks in public that was initially passed to crack down on the Ku Klux Klan to allow Georgians to protect themselves against the coronavirus. State Sen. Nikema Williams (D) warned that racial profiling among black Georgians would be exacerbated without a suspension of the law. (The Hill)    Arkansas governor defends no stay-at-home statewide order as 'successful.’ Arkansas Gov. Asa Hutchinson (R) defended his decision to hold off on issuing a statewide stay-at-home order, arguing that the state’s “targeted approach” has been effective but adding further measures are still an option going forward. One of the few governors who has held off on issuing a statewide stay-at-home order, Hutchinson added that a lockdown remains “on the table.” (The Hill)    “Universally loved” NY Post sports photographer dies of coronavirus. Award-winning New York Post photographer Anthony Causi died Sunday from the novel coronavirus at age 48, prompting an outpouring of condolences from figures across the sports media world. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW China records most new cases in six weeks. China on Monday reported its highest number of new coronavirus cases since early March, most of them involving people returning from other countries. The uptick heightened fears of a second wave and led to new constraints on travel. (Washington Post)     With Euroscepticism on the rise, EU strikes deal to help hardest hit countries. The European Union announced a deal late Thursday that would send hundreds of millions of euros to the hardest hit countries. Much like the eurozone crisis of a decade ago, the union’s fractured response to the pandemic has given rise to Europe’s nationalist voices and cast doubt on the future stability of the organization. (Washington Post)  Italy is flattening the curve, new numbers are “trustworthy.” With only 431 newly reported coronavirus deaths on Sunday — the lowest increase in fatalities in two weeks — Italy appears to be making ground in its battle against the virus. A member of an Italian science committee advising the government said the downward trend in new cases is “now trustworthy.” (New York Times)   SCIENCE Small chloroquine study stopped as some patients die. A small Brazilian study on the effects of the anti-malaria drug chloroquine, which is similar to the drug that Trump has touted as a possible "game changer" in treating the coronavirus, was abruptly halted because some patients taking high doses have developed irregular heart rates generating "safety hazards." (The Hill) Experts see worrisome link between coronavirus, pollution. Advocates and Democratic lawmakers are raising concerns over new research that suggests air pollution, water access and other environmental conditions are exacerbating the effects of the coronavirus on low-income and minority communities. (The Hill)  BUSINESS Up to $60 million in relief checks to be deposited by Wednesday. According to a Department of Treasury official, many Americans will see their much awaited federal stimulus checks hit their bank account this week via direct deposit. (Fox Business)     ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSION  The next stimulus packages should help seniors. Everyone needs the federal government’s assistance during this crisis — from the unemployed to struggling businesses. But any new relief package must include desperately needed help for older citizens who contribute so much to the economy and to our quality of life. (Max Richtman for The Hill)    Could the coronavirus reelect Trump? The path of the coronavirus pandemic is incomplete and highly uncertain. We don’t know what will happen when the current restrictions are loosened. We don’t know how quickly the economy will respond. New outbreaks could occur unpredictably. New treatments could work or fail. At this time neither Trump nor former Vice President Joe BidenJoe BidenOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Davis: 72 hours cementing the real choice for November OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump signs order removing environmental reviews for major projects | New Trump air rule will limit future pollution regulations, critics say | DNC climate group calls for larger federal investment on climate than Biden plan MORE have much control over the election. (Keith Naughton for The Hill)  GENEROUS SPIRITS  North Carolina bride-to-be spends would-be wedding day making masks. JoAnna Lyne, whose wedding day was postponed due to the pandemic, spent her would-be wedding day turning decoration supplies into masks for health care workers in her community. (Fox News)    Andrea Bocelli’s moving Easter performance reaches millions, with no audience. Andrea Bocelli’s voice rose on Easter Sunday from an empty Piazza del Duomo in Milan and carried around the world. The live-streamed solo performance drew more than 22 million viewers online. (Washington Post)   ICYMI, STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews former AIDS czar MARK DYBUL > Steve interviews former GSK Global Vaccines President LUC DEBRUYNE > Steve interviews former Baltimore Health Commissioner LEANA WEN > Steve interviews former Trump homeland security adviser TOM BOSSERT > Steve interviews International Rescue Committee CEO DAVID MILIBAND Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES   SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.    VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVERepublican Reps. Andy Biggs (Ariz.) and Ken BuckKenneth (Ken) Robert BuckThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Val Demings calls for a new DOJ Office of Police Standards; Trump, GOP to pull convention from NC House GOP urge Trump against supporting additional funding for state and local governments House Judiciary Committee calls on Bezos to testify as part of antitrust probe MORE (Colo.) criticized Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE, the nation’s leading infectious disease expert, for the impact of his social distancing recommendations, claiming that the stay-at-home policies informed by those recommendations have forced businesses, workers and corporations into economic turmoil.  “For Fauci, is it merely a societal or economic inconvenience that about 17 million workers are unemployed because of the government’s response to the coronavirus pandemic, with many more to come in the weeks and months ahead? The economic calamity lies largely with the origination of policies resulting from Fauci's recommendations,” the lawmakers wrote in an op-ed in the Washington Examiner published Saturday. Biggs and Buck, both members of the conservative Freedom Caucus and staunch allies of President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE, join others on the right in criticizing public health officials on the administration’s coronavirus task force. On Tuesday, Tucker CarlsonTucker CarlsonComcast shareholders reject proposals for outside sexual harassment investigation at NBC Cable news audience numbers jump amid coronavirus, protests Tucker Carlson tees off on Trump, Kushner: 'People will not forgive weakness' MORE, a conservative commentator on Fox News, said that Fauci “shouldn’t be making economic decisions.” The lawmakers' op-ed comes as the United States has seen record increases in unemployment. In the first week of April, more than 6 million people filed for unemployment, according to data released by the U.S. Labor Department. More than 10 million people applied for unemployment in the last two weeks of March as businesses shuttered due to fears of the pandemic's spread.  “The longer government-imposed lockdowns go on, the more people will lose their jobs — millions more,” the lawmakers wrote. “Thousands of businesses will close their doors. The physical and emotional toll from this self-imposed economic destruction will be worse than the doomsday prophets projected.” Trump has shared similar concerns about closures in the past, tweeting, "WE CANNOT LET THE CURE BE WORSE THAN THE PROBLEM ITSELF." However, when asked by reporters about whether he would continue to listen to medical professionals on the coronavirus task force, Trump said yes. The president added that he would listen to health experts and balance their guidance with that of his economic advisers. Fauci, a public health official with the National Institutes of Health, does not advise the president on matters besides science and is concerned with the mitigation of the disease to contain the outbreak and prevent casualties. Both Fauci and Deborah Birx, the coordinator of the coronavirus task force, have said social distancing and the mass closures that result are the only ways to mitigate the spread of the disease. Once large-scale testing is available, they've asserted, the data they collect could help phase out the guidelines.  Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE signaled this week that the federal government is aiming to open up the economy by early May. However, state lawmakers and health experts are unsure of the feasibility of this date, as many states across the country have yet to reach their peak in confirmed coronavirus cases.  Biggs and Buck said they are skeptical of the doctors' expertise, noting their estimates have fluctuated in terms of projected deaths, spanning from a high of 240,000 deaths estimated in the past weeks to a recalibrated estimation of 60,000 deaths most recently.  Fauci has said the estimation has dropped because of Americans' efforts to self-isolate and practice social distance. “Surely, more revisions are to come,” the lawmakers said, adding that Birx's method of counting coronavirus deaths, which include those who have the virus and died as a result of preexisting health issues “almost sounds as if she is trying to boost the fatality rate.” The lawmakers conceded that Fauci and other public health experts deserve “some credit for mitigating the spread of this virus,” though they "should no longer be the primary voices at the table."  But, Biggs and Buck added the economic damage caused by “stay at home” order across the potentially irreversible.  “Many businesses have been shuttered forever,” the lawmakers wrote. “It will be almost impossible for countless other small businesses to reopen once the government gives the all-clear for the economy to restart.” Congress has made efforts to mitigate the economic fallout of the pandemic, signing into law a series of three coronavirus relief bills. The latest stimulus package, clocking in at about $2 trillion, has set up programs to administer loans to small businesses, pay workers as well as set up funds to help the airline industry.  There are currently more than 519,000 confirmed cases of the virus in the U.S. and 20,071 reported deaths. Updated 4:20 p.m.Adam Immerwahr, the artistic director of Washington, D.C.’s Theater J, realized that he had no choice but to deliver the bad news. It was his duty, just three days after the perilous Ides of March, to inform a group of 20-some-odd costume designers, lighting technicians, stage managers and a lone actress that the one-woman show they'd been rehearsing, "Becoming Dr. Ruth," would be canceled due to the expanding coronavirus pandemic. One burst into tears. Another wondered if they would be able to afford to stay in the city.   “It was heartbreaking, heart-wrenching,” Immerwahr said Friday, noting that many on the show’s crew were in danger of losing their health insurance. And their production is anything but an outlier. Across the country, theaters, museums, music venues, comedy clubs and other entertainment venues are facing a longer and more precarious road to recovery than other sectors of the economy affected by the pandemic. The arts, reliant on large groups of people gathering in often-expansive venues, are expected to struggle well after schools, small businesses and restaurants get up and running again. “Theater is all about gathering people together, whether they’re building scenery, hanging lights, rehearsing a play, being on stage where they might need to be connected and intimate with each other, and of course gathering an audience together in the same air to experience it in person. That’s the magic of theater” said Immerwahr, who also saw his Princeton production of “Sleuth” shuttered during previews as Americans began to follow social distancing guidelines. “I think the arts are going to be devastated by coronavirus,” he added. In many ways, the arts are facing the same challenges as most other businesses. The pandemic, and efforts to contain it, have sent the economy into free fall. Nearly 17 million people applied for unemployment in the past three weeks alone, blowing previous records out of the water. J.P. Morgan estimates that unemployment will rise to Depression-era levels of 20 percent this month, and the economy will contract at an annualized rate of 40 percent this quarter. Advocates point out that the arts are a key part of the economy. “The word ‘arts’ doesn’t sound as much like a business, but the arts are an industry just like any other industry," said Robert Lynch, president of the advocacy group Americans for the Arts. According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, creative and cultural production account for $877.8 billion in economic activity, some 4.5 percent of GDP. The sector accounts for 5.1 million jobs, the majority of them freelance positions lacking employment safety nets. “People spend more money on the arts than on sports events,” says National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) Chairwoman Mary Anne Carter. "That's something most people are really surprised to hear." And the arts are particularly vulnerable during pandemic conditions, with the one-fifth that are nonprofits facing unique challenges. Every revenue stream for arts organizations is getting hit, according to Lynch. Earned income from ticket sales, books, concessions and souvenirs, which account for about 60 percent of revenues for nonprofit arts groups, have all but evaporated. The donors who account for another 30 percent are stretched between the various arts and social service groups they often fund, all of which are struggling. Endowments invested in markets have seen roughly a fifth of their wealth disappear. Many sponsor corporations are struggling to keep their own businesses afloat. And local and state governments, which often distribute arts grants, are at their budgetary breaking points. About 40 percent of artistic nonprofits operate at the break even point at the best of times. “I would imagine there will be some fallout with organizations going out of business,” Lynch said. And the arts may be among the last sectors to find relief once the pandemic starts coming under control. “I think it will be a gradual opening,” said Paul Winfree, who directs economic policy at the conservative Heritage Foundation. The Foundation’s economic recovery plan, released Friday, says it won’t be possible to start reopening any parts of the economy until the virus’s spread is under control. “Testing needs to be much more widely available, and there needs to be some sort of contact tracing program in place,” Winfree said. Even when that happens, restrictions are likely to be lifted on businesses that rely on smaller gatherings well before stadiums, concert halls, arenas and theaters can reopen for business. Sports and the arts will likely be the last to return, said Winfree, who holds season tickets to a local Shakespeare theater with his wife. “It really pains me that we can’t experience that right now and that it might be not until next spring until we’re able to go again,” he added. Even when the government gives the all-clear, questions will remain as to when consumers will feel comfortable gathering in large crowds. Colleen Dilenschneider, a data analyst and expert on cultural organizations, says that when the economy opens up, people will not snap back into their old habits.   “The near-term demand for onsite cultural engagement is likely to be redistributed away from some organization types and towards others,” she wrote in a recent blog post. According to Dilenschneider, people say once the pandemic is over, they are more likely to visit public parks, zoos and beaches than they were before the pandemic. They said they’d be far less likely, however, to go back to a movie theater, performing arts venue or concert hall. “People whose normal behavior is to go to symphonies report being less likely to return to the symphony,” she said. The No. 1 thing that people said would convince them to get back to cultural events is a coronavirus vaccine, which is not expected for at least a year. The NEA’s Carter says that timeline raises questions for how many artistic institutions can withstand the downturn. “Before they can think about opening doors, the question is whether there will be doors to open,” she said. “A lot of it is going to depend on whether they even survive the current devastation, and that word is accurate.” In the meantime, the $2.2 trillion CARES Act President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE signed at the end of March allows nonprofits to apply for the same Payment Protection Program forgivable loans available to small businesses, which may offer a lifeline. It also provided $75 million to the NEA, which can distribute the money to struggling organizations without requiring the usual one-to-one match in outside donations. Advocates are hoping that Congress will temporarily strip that requirement of regular federal arts funding, too. Cultural institutions are also adapting, shifting their wares online and searching for additional revenue streams through the crisis. Immerwahr says Theater J has moved some of its theater appreciation courses online and opened up several new ones to keep up with demand. While questions remain as to which institutions will survive and exactly what the landscape will look like on the other end of the pandemic, he remains optimistic for the arts in the long haul. “Theater has come back from near demise over and over and over again. London theaters used to close all the time because of plague, even during Shakespeare’s time,” he said. “It’s clear to me that theater will thrive again, people will gather again, and it’s going to be a place of healing, a place of celebration, a place of sharing our hope, as it always has been.”British primatologist and scientist Jane Goodall blamed human behavior for the coronavirus pandemic, calling it "our disregard for nature," according to Agence France-Presse.  During a conference call before the debut of a new National Geographic documentary titled "Jane Goodall: The Hope," the 86-year-old said the advent of a pandemic such as the coronavirus was predicted years before.  She continued, saying it is "our disrespect of the animals we should share the planet with" that led to the current pandemic.  Goodall reportedly highlighted potential causes for rogue viruses, such as animals that are hunted and sold for food in crowded markets and deforestation that forces wild species closer to human inhabitants. "Because as we destroy, let's say the forest, the different species of animals in the forest are forced into a proximity and therefore diseases are being passed from one animal to another, and that second animal is then most likely to infect humans as it is forced into closer contact with humans," she said. She praised China's efforts to temporarily ban markets soliciting wild animal products, adding that she hoped other countries would follow suit, according to the news outlet.  China's agriculture ministry announced new guidelines Wednesday that would reportedly reclassify dogs as pets rather than livestock, a move animal rights activists call a "game-changer." She also called for careful consideration of people in African countries who hunt for bush meat, citing other global regions that are at risk for potential novel virus outbreaks.   "It will need a lot of careful thought on how it should be done, you can't just stop somebody doing something when they have absolutely no money to support themselves or their families," she said. "But at least this pandemic should have taught us the kind of things to do to prevent another one." Goodall said people should consider little choices they make, such as their diets, the origins of their food and whether it causes cruelty to animals. "So what we can do in our individual lives does depend a little bit on who we are, but we all can make a difference, everybody can," she said.Police in New York reported 22 vehicles found outside a hospital with slashed tires, some belonging to nurses aiding coronavirus patients. Overnight nurses from New York-Presbyterian Hudson Valley Hospital in Cortlandt Manor, N.Y., had just received praise for their efforts handling the virus when they discovered the tires of their vehicles had been slashed, according to the Journal News. Officials from the hospital said they would cover all charges for the damaged vehicles. "We were shocked to hear of this incident, especially at this time when our employees are working tirelessly and courageously" during the coronavirus pandemic, the officials said in a statement. The suspect was identified as 29-year-old Daniel Hall, who was arrested on charges of criminal mischief and possession of a controlled substance. Authorities said they found a small amount of PCP upon arrest. Hall's court date is slated for May 18. Before the incident, dozens of police and fire personnel visited the hospital to offer the workers a round of applause for managing the coronavirus outbreak. "What our hospital is focusing on today is the beautiful tribute given by our first responders last night," the hospital said in its statement.Seven GOP senators sent a letter to President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE on Friday asking that he commit to protecting the insurance industry from proposals in state legislatures that would require insurance companies to retroactively cover small-business losses due to the coronavirus pandemic. Many small-business insurance policies do not cover pandemics when it comes to losses from business interruptions. State lawmakers in New York, New Jersey, Ohio and Massachusetts have introduced bills that would retroactively require small-business insurance policies to cover losses due to closures from the coronavirus. The letter to Trump, obtained by The Hill, warns that the new state-level legislation would result in enormous financial losses for the business insurance industry. The letter is signed by Sens. Tim ScottTimothy (Tim) Eugene ScottPaul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  Rand Paul holding up quick passage of anti-lynching bill With capital, communities of color can lead our economic revival MORE (R-S.C.), Mike CrapoMichael (Mike) Dean CrapoOn The Money: US tops 100,000 coronavirus deaths with no end in sight | How lawmaker ties helped shape Fed chairman's COVID-19 response | Tenants fear mass evictions GOP senators urge Trump not to restrict guest worker visas How lawmaker ties helped shape Fed chairman's COVID-19 response MORE (R-Idaho), Thom TillisThomas (Thom) Roland TillisGOP Sen. Murkowski 'struggling' with whether to vote for Trump  Poll: Biden leads Trump, Cunningham neck and neck with Tillis in North Carolina Scaled-back Pride Month poses challenges for fundraising, outreach MORE (R-N.C.), Mike RoundsMarion (Mike) Michael RoundsGOP senators urge Trump not to restrict guest worker visas Burr decision sends shock waves through Senate Lawmakers move to boost federal cybersecurity in annual defense bill  MORE (R-S.C.), Pat ToomeyPatrick (Pat) Joseph ToomeyGOP senators push for quick, partial reopening of economy NSA improperly collected US phone records in October, new documents show Overnight Defense: Pick for South Korean envoy splits with Trump on nuclear threat | McCain blasts move to suspend Korean military exercises | White House defends Trump salute of North Korean general  MORE (R-Pa.), Ben SasseBenjamin (Ben) Eric SasseGraham postpones Russia probe subpoena vote as tensions boil over Clyburn: Cowed GOP ascribes 'mystical powers' to Trump Trump pushes back against GOP senators' criticism of dispersal of protesters in Lafayette Square: 'You got it wrong' MORE (R-Neb.), and David Perdue (R-Ga.). The GOP senators argued that the proposed changes “undermine our understanding of contractual obligations” and would serve to “help one segment of the economy by seriously harming another.” They said the insurance companies did not charge premiums associated with pandemic risks and therefore do not have the capital required to cover losses due to the coronavirus closures. “If the insurance industry were now forced retroactively to cover perils that were never accounted for commercial insurers could experience significant economic strain and/or insolvencies, given the magnitude of the current cumulative estimated claims,” the senators wrote. “Adding another point of stress during these times, this would likely put our businesses in an even worse position — draining the U.S. insurance reserves to pay these claims could leave us in a position of having inadequate reserves to cover claims that are actually intended to be covered, such as damage from wind, fire, hail, and other covered perils,” they added. Under the state-level bills, insurers would be able to seek recompensation directly from the states, which would pay out through new fees on the insurance industry. The idea has been met with fierce opposition from insurance industry lobbyists. The GOP senators argued that Congress has already addressed covering small-business losses through billions of dollars' worth of new lending facilities. The senators warned that retroactively requiring insurance companies to cover business closure losses because of the pandemic would “create major unintended consequences for new contractual relationships.” They warned that the changes would be “litigated in the courts for years,” guaranteeing that “no money would make it to small businesses that need it.” “We stand ready and willing to work with you and our Congressional colleagues to ensure that U.S. small businesses have the funds they need to survive this difficult time,” the senators wrote. “However, we cannot help one segment of the economy by seriously harming another. We must continue to work diligently to get the PPP funds out to as many small businesses as quickly as possible. If it becomes clear at some future point that we need additional funds or facilities to get necessary federal money in the hands of small businesses, we will work to achieve that goal at that time,” they added.VIEW BREAKING NEWS ON CORONAVIRUS    WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > Global coronavirus deaths pass 100,000 > Trump downplays widespread testing before reopening economy  > Surgeon general says most of U.S. won’t be ready to open by May  > CDC director says U.S. coming to the coronavirus peak > OPEC reaches historic deal, Mexico refuses to agree to terms > Election officials struggle to balance voting process with public health crisis > Cuomo joins in on WHO criticism: “Where were the warning signs?”     To get the latest news from President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE's Friday coronavirus task force press conference, go to TheHill.com.   Infections could spike if stay-at-home orders are lifted. New federal projections obtained by The New York Times indicate that lifting physical distancing restrictions after just 30 days will lead to a dramatic infection spike this summer and death tolls that would rival doing nothing. (New York Times)  Risking your life to vote? The Wisconsin Department of Health Services is monitoring potential coronavirus infections that may have occurred among voters who cast ballots in elections held Tuesday. Because of the speed with which the virus spreads, cases contracted during voting won’t be known for weeks. (The Hill)    China still testing Wuhan residents as lockdown relaxes. Wuhan is reportedly still regularly testing residents for the virus despite efforts to reopen the economy after a two-month lockdown of the city. China's central government coronavirus task force says the country needs to "actively create favorable conditions" to restore normalcy in the economy but warns there is still a risk of the pandemic rebounding. (The Hill)          Cuomo joins criticism of the World Health Organization. After the administration and congressional Republicans lambasted the World Health Organization over the agency’s handling of the pandemic, New York Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) on Friday criticized WHO for not blowing the whistle sooner on the spread of COVID-19. (The Hill)  Parties, public-gatherings played leading role in U.S. spread of virus. Across the country, large get-togethers — from New Orleans’s Mardi Gras celebration to a quinceañera in a small Nebraska town — are being credited for community spread of COVID-19. As President Trump told Americans that the virus would “go away” and before social distancing guidelines were enacted, revelers went on with life and, without knowing it, spread the virus to many of their peers. (Washington Post)    Navarro rang alarm bells internally, but told the public not to worry. White House trade adviser Peter Navarro publicly said Americans had "nothing to worry about" while he privately warned the White House that the coronavirus pandemic could cost trillions of dollars and hundreds of thousands of American lives. (CNN)   THE INTERVIEW David Miliband calls for global perspective on pandemic, says virus must be defeated worldwide before return to normal      Clemons asked David Miliband to give an overview of what’s happening to displaced persons and refugees in this time of COVID-19. Miliband responded: It's completely understandable that people in America are focused on the crisis in their own communities. But if you think it's tough to fight COVID in a country where there is a health system, where there are proper sanitary facilities, just imagine what it's like in densely populated refugee camps. Imagine what it's like for people fleeing the war inside Syria in the northwest of the country. Imagine what it's like for the 1,000,000 Rohingya Muslims who are being chased out of Myanmar. Those are the places where we're working on the imperatives that we know here — washing your hands, keeping distance, getting testing — but it’s many times more difficult, and it seems to me absolutely vital that we have a local perspective on this crisis in the US, but also a global perspective. Because the truth is none of us will be fully able to return to normal until we beat this disease worldwide. Not just locally.     Watch the full interview here.  THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill's Coronavirus Report. It's Friday, April 10.  How did we get here? America is the richest nation in the world and has the largest single-nation economy. We think deeply about national security and spend hundreds of billions of dollars on defense. Our national schtick does not include, as Susan Glasser writes today in The New Yorker, hospital workers wearing large plastic garbage bags as protection from a virus. We are going to need to look back and ask what needs to be rewired in our society. Clearly our many hundreds of billions spent annually on national security were pointed at the wrong immediate enemy. In today’s report, we highlight an op-ed by former Singapore State Minister for Foreign Affairs Kishore Mahbubani who channels Winston Churchill and posits what he would do in this crisis. Mahbubani writes he would maintain obsessive focus on the challenge and drop all other sideshows that are simply of less strategic consequence, like trade saber-rattling with China. And my interview today with former British Foreign Minister and International Rescue Committee President David Miliband highlights the more than 70 million displaced people and refugees in the world who have already suffered cruel treatment of the world and are at high risk for the coronavirus.    I think it’s important to remember that if the world’s poor and marginalized populations see COVID-19 run rampant through their populations, it will return to ravage the so-called privileged parts of our society.   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.  In coming weeks, we will share with you our new 3D journalism platform, The Hill Virtually Live, to take stock of what is happening around the nation — for instance, empathy and building resilience across generations, acts of heroism, the way learning and credentialing are being reinvented, and how health delivery is going even more digital. Follow @TheHillEvents to stay up to date on our upcoming virtual programs.   Sponsored Content  Sponsored by AHIP      No one should hesitate to get tested or treated for COVID-19 because of concerns about costs. Health insurance providers have proactively eliminated patient cost sharing for COVID-19 testing and treatment – no copay, no coinsurance required. Click here for a one-pager to learn how we’re protecting Americans. From expanding public health capacity, to ensuring access to testing, to taking action to mitigate the economic and societal impact, we know these are serious and significant times. Health insurance providers are taking decisive actions to help patients and curb the spread of COVID-19. See how health insurance providers are taking action.  CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE The global confirmed cases of COVID-19 are now more than 1.6 million, but most experts say this is a significant undercount of cases given the short supply and lack of availability of testing. South Korea, which has done some of the highest per capita testing in the world, believes that there were 10 cases of coronavirus infection for every person tested. If that ratio were correct globally, then the real numbers of infected people are closer to 16 million globally. More than 100,000 people have died from COVID-19.   New York continues to lead the nation in cases and deaths with 161,807 infections registered and 7,844 deaths. New Jersey is second in the nation with 54,588 cases and 1,932 deaths. Michigan takes third with 21,504 cases and 1,076 deaths. A sampling of other current mortality levels include Louisiana at 702, Illinois at 529, Massachusetts at 503, Washington at 457, Pennsylvania at 418, Maryland at 171, Arizona at 97, Mississippi at 82, Puerto Rico at 39, District of Columbia at 38, Iowa at 31, and West Virginia at 5.  WASHINGTON WATCH  We have heard this before, but federal deposits of stimulus checks expected to start within days. With more than 16 million Americans now jobless, many people await promised federal payments — a key part of the U.S. government's $2.2 trillion economic relief package in response to the coronavirus pandemic. (CBS News)   Trump downplays need for widespread testing before reopening economy. President Trump is shrugging off the need to significantly expand nationwide coronavirus testing capabilities in order to be able to restart the economy. “We want to have it and we’re going to see if we have it. Do you need it? No. Is it a nice thing to do? Yes. (The Hill)    U.S. approaching coronavirus peak. "I think we're coming to the peak ... we can see the other side of the curve," CDC Director Robert Redfield said in an appearance on CNN. Redfield credited the country's "aggressive social distancing" techniques for lowering the expected mortality rate. Still, he urged that there is work to be done. (The Hill)   Big fights over mail-in voting. Election officials across the country are scrambling to ramp up mail-in voting and other alternatives to in-person voting. The rush to expand polling options could bring a new wave of court fights and legal experts warn the nightmare scenario will closely resemble the Supreme Court’s decision on Bush v. Gore. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET   Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-CortezAlexandria Ocasio-CortezEngel says he refuses to seek NYT endorsement over Cotton op-ed The Hill's Campaign Report: Republicans go on the hunt for new convention site Trump calls New York Times 'fake newspaper' after headline change MORE (D-N.Y.) @RepAOC The Neighborhood Opportunity Network (NeON) Nutrition Kitchens, in partnership with the Food Bank of NYC and the NYC Young Men’s Initiative (YMI) are offering one week of free groceries to all New Yorkers throughout the five boroughs (NYC1).   Rep. Vern BuchananVernon Gale BuchananMORE (R-Fla.) @VernBuchanan Doreen from Longboat Key asked a great question during my telephone town hall this week: why doesn’t the government provide facemasks for all Americans? I’m going to ask the administration the same thing. They should.   Rep. Ami BeraAmerish (Ami) Babulal BeraThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: David Miliband says world won't be safe until poor nations get more aid; Cuomo rips WHO Democrats ask Trump for evidence that medical supplies are available Pelosi stands firm amid calls to close Capitol MORE (D-Calif.) @RepBera @RealDonaldTrump There’s no time to wait. We need a national testing strategy. Congress stands ready to assist.      ACROSS THE NATION  Immigrant doctors helping with the coronavirus still face challenges to work. Doctors and other health care workers who are not U.S. citizens are facing a second challenge as they fight the worst pandemic the nation has ever seen: Ensuring their paperwork will allow them to work in the United States. More than 3 million of the country’s 18 million health care workers and social workers are foreign born, according to a report by the Migration Policy Institute. (The Hill)   Tribal communities face economic ruin amid pandemic. In addition to failing infrastructure, lack of access to health care and a sizable percentage of the population at risk for the most severe COVID-19 complications, tribal communities are also facing bleak economic prospects. Tribal communities’ most consistent revenue generator — land-based casino gaming — has disappeared virtually overnight. (USA Today)    New York shutters golf courses, boat launches. New York quietly added golf courses and launches of recreational vessels at marinas to its growing list of nonessential businesses. The move comes as more rural areas of the state are seeing spikes in cases as city-dwellers escape to their country homes — and, in many cases, bring the virus with him. (Democrat & Chronicle)    Ohio’s Amish community stepping up. For centuries, the Amish community has been famously isolated from the hustle of the outside world, ‘social distancing’ from mainstream society, if you will — but, as the virus creeps ever closer, Ohio’s Amish are joining the fight. Sixty Amish home seamstresses mobilized to provide protective equipment to the Cleveland Clinic. (New York Times)    New coronavirus vaccine being tested in Kansas City. A new vaccine for COVID-19 is being tested at The Center for Pharmaceutical Research. Two people were given the vaccine in Missouri and one at another testing facility in Philadelphia. Forty people will be administered the vaccine during its trial phase. (KY3) Florida governor on fence about opening schools. Florida Gov. Ron DeSantisRonald Dion DeSantisDeSantis pushing to host Republican National Convention in Florida Florida bars and theaters to reopen starting Friday, DeSantis says DeSantis says he's sending 500 National Guard troops to DC MORE (R) signaled that there was still a possibility that Florida schools could reopen in May after being closed since March due to the coronavirus outbreak. He said the state is looking at the evidence before they make a decision, adding that “for whatever reason [the virus] just doesn’t seem to threaten, you know, kids.” (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW  Coronavirus a double emergency for conflict-ridden countries. A new report by the International Rescue Committee paints a dire picture for nations like South Sudan, Syria, Venezuela and Yemen. According to David Miliband, president and CEO of the IRC, the scale, severity and speed of the outbreak will be magnified in these fragile countries. South Sudan has four ventilators for the entire country; Northeast Syria has 11; Sierra Leone has 13; and in Venezuela, 90% of hospitals lack critical supplies. David Miliband is Steve Clemons’s guest interview today. Watch the interview linked above to learn what help is needed.   China recategorizes dogs and cats as pets — not livestock. A draft policy released by the Chinese Agriculture Ministry cited concerns over animal welfare and disease prevention as leading factors behind the policy reversal. (Fox News)  Israeli spy agency working to acquire ventilators abroad. Israel has turned to the Mossad, its top spy agency, to acquire ventilators and other medical supplies from abroad as the country races to handle a coronavirus outbreak that threatens to overwhelm its hospitals. (Washington Post)          Lockdowns across Latin America send Venezuelan migrants back. Nearly 5 million Venezuelans have abandoned the collapsing socialist state in recent years, most of them to scrape out meager livings elsewhere in Latin America. But as countries from Argentina to Peru to Colombia shut down to slow the spread of the coronavirus, thousands of desperate Venezuelans, now jobless, hungry and living without a safety net, are heading home. (Washington Post)   SCIENCE Coronavirus vaccine could take way longer than a year. If the past is any indicator, the world won’t have a coronavirus vaccine for more than a year, probably longer. Experts are warning that “a year to 18 months would be absolutely unprecedented.” (National Geographic) Potheads beware! Experts say it’s time to think twice about lighting up to curb your quarantine anxiety. Smoking marijuana, even occasionally, can increase your risk for more severe complications from COVID-19. (CNN)     BUSINESS Saudis, Russians reach historic oil deal but Mexico refuses to agree. A historic production cut agreement between OPEC and its allies, known as OPEC+, hit a roadblock after Mexico refused to agree to its share of the cuts after a marathon (virtual) meeting between the oil producing nations that lasted more than nine hours. A statement released by OPEC following the meeting outlined details of the cuts but noted the “the agreement is conditional on the consent of Mexico.” (CNBC)    Depression? JPMorgan forecasts 40 percent decline in economy, 20 percent unemployment rate. JPMorgan Chase economists issued an even more dire forecast, now foreseeing a 40 percent decline in the nation’s gross domestic product for the second quarter and a surge in April’s unemployment rate to 20 percent with 25 million jobs lost. If the pandemic starts to fade by June — a big if — the group predicted 23 percent and 13 percent growth rates in the third and fourth quarters, respectively. (CNBC)   IDEAS, CAUSES, PASSION       Great battles require strategic discipline — and Washington needs it in this crisis. Today, if Winston Churchill were leading America’s war against a pandemic, he would advise focusing on the main battlefront, COVID-19, rather than getting distracted by the ongoing geopolitical contest with China. Indeed, just as he dined with Joseph Stalin, Churchill would advise America to cooperate with China. Sadly, few voices in America are recommending such Churchillian wisdom. (Kishore Mahbubani for The Hill)    The bad guys are not waiting on coronavirus to launch an attack. While every country, surely ours, is struggling to manage a monster pandemic, there is mischief everywhere. The United States today is ripe for an asymmetric attack, be it garden variety terrorism, like the attack in France last weekend, regional warfare or cyberthreats. (Jane Harman for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS 10-year-old donating custom masks to health care workers. Zaria Hill and her mother, Latoya Carter, of Ohio are turning their sewing company into an all out effort to provide much needed face masks to local health care workers. The young entrepreneur has already donated hundreds of custom made masks. (Fox News)  Rihanna and Jack Dorsey set up $4M grant to help victims of domestic violence amid coronavirus. Pop star Rihanna joined forces with Twitter founder Jack Dorsey to set up a $4.2 million grant to help victims of domestic violence affected by coronavirus stay-at-home orders in Los Angeles. (The Hill)  YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES       That’s one way to social distance. Beth Johnson from Oregon shared a photo of a friend herding cattle. We are grateful to our farmers, ranchers and so many others who are playing an invaluable role in helping keep our grocery store shelves stocked. Thanks for sharing, Beth!    SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.   CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill’s Steve Clemons interviews David Miliband, president and CEO of the International Rescue Committee and a former U.K. foreign secretary.  Some excerpts from the video are below: On what’s happening to displaced persons and refugees in this time of COVID-19 DAVID MILIBAND: It's completely understandable that people in America are focused on the crisis in their own communities. But if you think it's tough to fight COVID in a country where there is a health system, where there are proper sanitary facilities, just imagine what it's like in densely populated refugee camps. Imagine what it's like for people fleeing the war inside Syria in the northwest of the country. Imagine what it's like for the million Rohingya Muslims who being chased out of Myanmar. Those are the places where we're working. And the imperatives that we know here — washing your hands, keeping distance, getting testing going — are many times more difficult, and it seems to me absolutely vital that we have a local perspective on this crisis in the U.S., but also a global perspective. Because the truth is none of us will be fully able to return to normal until we beat this disease worldwide. Not just locally.     MILIBAND: I think the truth is that you rely on local innovation. You rely hand-washing stations that are communal but nonetheless accessible for the 3 billion people around the world who have no safe hand-washing facilities in their own home. You establish testing that isn't based on something very high tech. You just take people's fever again and again and you try and triage people. You also have to take on fake news. There's a lot of fake news in the places where we work. I'm on the phone to our teams on the zoom calls to our teams, whether in Bangladesh, in northeast Nigeria, in Cameroon, all across the Middle East, and we have to make sure that information gets through to trusted parties. That's why off our 30,000 staff, International Rescue Committee staff around the world — we hire locally. And what I would plead with people is don't imagine that it's impossible to protect people around the world. It is possible if we take the right preventative steps. Once it gets to them relying on a ventilator, honestly, we've lost. I mean, there's three ventilators in the whole of the Central African Republic. There's 14 ventilators in the whole of Sierra Leone. It’s the basic prevention and primary care that gives people the chance to survive.    On Southern Sudan, Yemen, Syria and Venezuela MILIBAND: We've just had the first report of a COVID case in Yemen, and that is a country of 25 million people, 18 million of them dependent on humanitarian aid, the health system decimated for half of the population by bombings of hospitals and by the fighting. What we obviously fear is that this disease runs rampant across the country. It runs rampant and creates real carnage in the population. The report that you referred to highlights a double challenge. There's the challenge of the disease itself. And then there is the collateral damage to economy and society. Our message is simple. Surely the lesson of this disease is that we have to recognize the need to strengthen the global safety net, not just the local safety net, because that's how the disease runs rampant around the world.    Clemons: [As part of this series] I interviewed Mark Dybul, who had served as President Bush's global AIDS czar are and oversaw implementation of PEPFAR in Africa. He made the comment that if we don't invest in health infrastructure and protective gear and ventilators, etc., in the lesser developed part of the world ... [the virus] will come back.  MILIBAND: Yes, I think it's very important that we don't just say, have a big heart, help these people. But of course, there are people who need our help locally. We've also got to say, have a clear head. Recognize that if we don't go to this disease and its potential hot spots and tackle them, where they are, then the disease will end up coming back. It'll come to us through trips, through transport systems. It'll come to us through airports, will come to us through people movement. There will be no return to normality until this disease is tackled everywhere. There is no future in what a Yuval Harari rightly called a network of fortresses. If the world does become a network of fortresses, it isn't going to be the world as we know it, and as we enjoy it and as we benefit from it. And so I think we have to make a strategic hardheaded analysis in the call for universal health care and that call for the universal defeat of this disease, as well as the moral case that there are people who are otherwise will die if we don't get them our help.      On which nations are getting it right MILIBAND: I think obviously one looks at Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan as three countries that were in the first line of fire. But I think it's also very striking to see what's happening in Germany. Also, to some extent, in Austria, in New Zealand. It's not true that the democracies are failing and the autocracies of succeeding. What is true is that some democracies are getting it right and some wrong. Some autocracies are getting it right, and some are getting it wrong. ... I’m very concerned, obviously, about the U.S. — where I live — and the U.K. where I'm a citizen. But I think there are examples in the democratic world that show what is possible. ... We know this from our treatment of Ebola. We're going to be marking this weekend, seemingly, the end of the current Ebola crisis in Congo. What we know above all is that "trust" is the most precious asset, and my learning here is that there are democracies that have got the trust right between government and citizens. They've used scientific advice. We've got to make sure that that is learned out of this crisis.    On the U.N.'s call for a $2 billion emergency fund to help those struggling with the coronavirus MILIBAND: Yes, I'm afraid that the U.N. has been so attacked in recent years, including here in the U.S., that I’m afraid there was a modesty about that [number]. It sounded like a big number to many people, but when you think about the $2 trillion aid package just for the U.S., when you think about a World Health Organization appeal for global preventative activity, and it's $2 billion — and when you add to that that only $100 million is designated for the NGOs who have the front-line workers, you realize that we have to be more ambitious, and we have to be more front footed about where the money is going to go and how it's going to get there. The International Rescue Committee, on its own, has a $30 million appeal to use this window of opportunity over the next eight weeks to do the preventative work for which there is still time. The hand-washing, the triaging, the fever testing, the combating of fake news. We've got a small number of weeks to do that vital preventative work before health systems in poor parts of the world get overwhelmed. And that's what we're calling for.      Clemons: What do you need? What does the International Rescue Committee need that it doesn't have today to move the needle on this coronavirus challenge? MILIBAND: Thanks. I think there's a couple of things that are really important. I'm British, so I hate talking about money. But I've lived in New York for six years, so I'm no longer embarrassed about saying go to the International Rescue Committee website, Rescue.org — and see the impact that we're having and know that your dollar, your $10, $100, your $1,000 or in some cases I hope much more than that can really make a difference. And send a message that the heart of America still beats in its morality as well as its strategic judgment. I think the second thing, though, is really important. The most important thing from this crisis is that we learn the right lessons once we've had the chance to beat it. Learning the right lesson is that this is a disease of the connected world, and the connected world is not going away. So we have to fill and fix the holes in the safety net of that connected world. Until we make the world more secure and sustainable, we're not going to be able to benefit from its huge promise. And I think that the biggest lesson here is that we have to take seriously the rhetoric that says every human being needs a floor on their activity. If they haven't got universal health care, if they haven't got the universal access to hand-washing, then we're all at risk. I think that's a very big lesson. But it has to be the learning that comes out of this crisis — as big as the learning that came out of the Great Depression 100 years ago. VIEW BREAKING NEWS ON CORONAVIRUS    WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY  > Senate blocks dueling coronavirus relief plans > Fed unleashes another $2.3 trillion to support collapsing economy  > Attorney general calls stay-at-home measures “draconian,” urges reconsideration > Scientists warn warmer weather will not eliminate COVID-19  > Gottlieb says U.S. won’t be able to meet demand if vaccine is developed  > U.K. Prime Minister Boris Johnson leaves intensive care    Mnuchin says U.S. businesses could reopen in May. Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: BIO's Michelle McMurry-Heath says 400 projects started in 16 weeks in biotech firms to fight virus, pandemic unemployment total tops 43 million  IRS faces obstacles with remaining stimulus checks On The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility MORE said Thursday that he thinks the U.S. could reopen the economy during the month of May. “I do,” Mnuchin told CNBC host Jim Cramer in a phone interview on Thursday morning in response to a question about whether the country could be “open for business” in the month of May. This comes on the heels of President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE saying he’d like to see the economy open with a “big bang.” (The Hill)   Senate blocks dueling coronavirus relief plans. The Senate on Thursday blocked dueling plans to provide hundreds of billions of dollars to help small businesses contend with the coronavirus-fueled economic meltdown amid a stalemate over the scope of the package. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE (R-Ky.) accused Senate Democrats of holding Americans “as political hostages.” Maryland Sens. Ben CardinBenjamin (Ben) Louis CardinOn The Money: GOP turning against new round of ,200 rebate checks | Millions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks | Senate votes to give coronavirus relief program more flexibility GOP senator blocks bill giving flexibility to small-business loans but says deal near With capital, communities of color can lead our economic revival MORE (D) and Chris Van HollenChristopher (Chris) Van HollenDemocrats introduce bill to rein in Trump's power under Insurrection Act Democratic senators kneel during moment of silence for George Floyd Hillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues MORE (D) fired back, accusing McConnell of trying to pull “a political stunt.” (The Hill)    16 million jobless. Roughly 6.6 million American workers filed for unemployment last week. That means more than 16 million Americans are out of work since the start of the crisis. These figures were announced as the Fed said it could pump up to $2.3 trillion into the economy. With more people across the U.S. struggling to make ends meet, Washington is under greater pressure to speed up relief efforts as the pandemic tightens its grip on the nation’s economy. At this rate, unemployment is likely to reach its highest level since the Great Depression. (New York Times)   Pence vows U.S. will ask WHO ‘tough questions’ on being ‘so wrong’ on coronavirus. Vice President Pence told Fox News’s Sean HannitySean Patrick HannityCable news audience numbers jump amid coronavirus, protests Hannity scolds Ozarks partygoers: 'Could be a disaster' for vulnerable Americans Trump lashes out at Fox News after poll shows him trailing Biden MORE that the U.S. will ask "tough questions" of the World Health Organization over its handling of the coronavirus pandemic after the global health agency's director warned President Trump and other world leaders against "politicizing" the outbreak. (Fox News)  THE INTERVIEW Former Trump Homeland Security Advisor Tom Bossert Says To Reopen Country We Need To Test "The Well," NOT "The Ill"       On restarting the country, Bossert said: “ Here's the prescription for that. There are two forms of infectious people — those that know it and those that don’t.  Those that know it have symptoms, even if they're mild symptoms. And I think the public health community has moved to the state in which people have symptoms, even if they're miles are presumptively positive for Covid and isolate themselves accordingly and quarantine those that they've been in contact with. That's the contact tracing part that will help us slow the spread and maintain a slow spread until we get a vaccine. And then for those that are sick but don't know it. Those were “the well” right now. Those that feel well, they want to re-enter the workforce. We're going to have to prioritize the scarce, accurate diagnostic tests for them and start testing “the well.”    Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Thursday, April 9.    Scientists tell WH warmer weather won’t expel virus. In a letter to the White House, members of a National Academy of Sciences committee said data is mixed on whether coronavirus spreads as easily in warm weather as it does in cold weather, but that it might not matter much given that so few people in the world are immune to coronavirus. (CNN)    Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, Editor-at-Large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.  In coming weeks, we will share with you our new 3D journalism platform, The Hill Virtually Live, to take stock of what is happening around the nation — for instance, empathy and building resilience across generations, acts of heroism, the way learning and credentialing are being reinvented, and how health delivery is going even more digital. Follow @TheHillEvents to stay up to date on our upcoming virtual programs.   Sponsored Content  Sponsored by AHIP      No one should hesitate to get tested or treated for COVID-19 because of concerns about costs. Health insurance providers have proactively eliminated patient cost sharing for COVID-19 testing and treatment – no copay, no coinsurance required. Click here for a one-pager to learn how we’re protecting Americans. From expanding public health capacity, to ensuring access to testing, to taking action to mitigate the economic and societal impact, we know these are serious and significant times. Health insurance providers are taking decisive actions to help patients and curb the spread of COVID-19. See how health insurance providers are taking action.  CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE Global coronavirus “confirmed” cases now stand at more than 1.5 million people but are thought to be much higher given inadequate and incomplete testing globally. More than 90,00 people have died around the world. But more than 340,000 people have recovered from the virus.    The U.S. is home to nearly one-third of all officially recognized cases with 432,596 infected — and nearly 15,000 dead. Italy has reported 17,669 deaths. Spain 15,238. France 10,869. Germany 2,349. Turkey 812.   New York continues to lead in both infections and confirmed deaths with 151,079 cases and 7,067 deaths. A sampling of other U.S. states shows mortality levels for New Jersey at 1,504.  Michigan 959. California 507. Louisiana 652. Massachusetts 433. Pennsylvania 319. Georgia 370. Wyoming at 0 — for now.  WASHINGTON WATCH     AG Barr calls lockdown measures ‘draconian.’ Attorney General William BarrWilliam  Pelham BarrFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report Davis: 72 hours cementing the real choice for November Black Lives Matter, protesters sue Trump admin over aggressive crowd clearing MORE said Wednesday that some of the government-imposed lockdown measures meant to control the spread of COVID-19 are “draconian” and suggested that they should be eased next month. “When this period of time, at the end of April, expires, I think we have to allow people to adapt more than we have, and not just tell people to go home and hide under their bed, but allow them to use other ways — social distancing and other means — to protect themselves,” Barr said. (Washington Post)       Fauci thinks handshakes should become thing of the past. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE is suggesting that Americans should, perhaps, never shake hands again. "I don't think we should ever shake hands ever again, to be honest with you. Not only would it be good to prevent coronavirus disease; it probably would decrease instances of influenza dramatically in this country,” the key member of the White House coronavirus task force told The Wall Street Journal's podcast. In a post-COVID-19 world, Americans may look to undertake other forms of greeting our peers, such as bowing or other hands-free greetings. (The Hill)    Gottlieb says U.S. won’t be able to make enough treatment to meet demand. Scott Gottlieb, Trump’s former Food and Drug Administration chief, said Thursday that even if the U.S. has an effective therapy to treat COVID-19 by fall, “we’re not going to have the capacity to produce it at scale to give it to the millions of people who might be eligible for it, who might need it.” (CNBC) Sixth Member of Congress tests positive. Florida Rep. Neal DunnNeal Patrick DunnDon't victimize communities hit by disasters a second time The Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Small businesses, unemployed await Congress's next moves 12 things to know about coronavirus for today MORE (R) announced Thursday he has tested positive for COVID-19. Dunn, a former surgeon, is self-quarantining at home and “expects a full recovery soon.” (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. Tom CottonThomas (Tom) Bryant CottonNYT says Tom Cotton editorial 'did not meet our standards' Engel says he refuses to seek NYT endorsement over Cotton op-ed Cotton praises NY Times for 'standing up to the woke progressive mob' in publishing opinion piece MORE (R-Ark.) @SenTomCotton There will be more—much more—of this as the world turns against China. Japan set to pay its manufacturers to leave China. (South China Morning Post) Sen. Jack ReedJohn (Jack) Francis ReedBipartisan Senate panel leaders back fund to deter China The Hill's Coronavirus Report: National Portrait Gallery's Kim Sajet says this era rewiring people's relationship with culture, art; Trump's war with Twitter heats up  Overnight Defense: Trump to withdraw US from Open Skies Treaty | Pentagon drops ban on recruits who had virus | FBI says Corpus Christi shooting terror-related MORE (D-R.I.) @SenJackReed Let's focus on where Repubs & Dems agree: The #CARESAct aimed high, but not high enough. More help is needed. Congress should quickly deliver additional aid to families, hospitals & health centers, small businesses & employees, communities & states. Time is of the essence.   Representative Don Beyer (D-Va.) @RepDonBeyer The US economy just lost nearly twice as many jobs in three weeks as it lost in the entirety of the Great Recession. This is a catastrophe and it won't stop until we stop the pandemic. Americans will need sustained support from their government to get through this crisis.  ACROSS THE NATION  It’s an order! Masks mandatory in San Bernardino and DC.  San Bernardino County, California, residents cannot step out in public without a face covering. All religious services have to take place virtually and there’s no exemption for last-minute runs to pick up Easter eggs or candy. For those willing to defy these orders, violations are punishable by up to a $1,000 fine, imprisonment of up to 90 days, or both (San Bernardino Sun). Along the same lines, Washington, D.C., Mayor Muriel Bowser is directing all grocery stores and food markets in the city to require customers to wear face masks before entering. (The Hill)   Rural areas with vacation homes more susceptible to coronavirus. Rural communities with vacation homes are experiencing outbreaks of the coronavirus at a faster pace than rural areas without seasonal housing, according to a new study, suggesting residents of big cities who flee to the countryside are bringing the virus with them. (The Hill)   Washington, Oregon show promising coronavirus trends. Two states at the forefront of the coronavirus outbreak are beginning to see infection rates slow as strict social distancing requirements show early results of paying off. (The Hill)   West Virginia sees surge in coronavirus cases. In West Virginia, which was the last state to report a case of the virus, there is bad news. West Virginia added 71 new cases in the past 24 hours and, as more people get tested, the numbers will almost certainly continue to snowball. (WCHS/WVAH)   Virus spreading behind bars, Chicago prison emerges as big U.S. hot spot. Two inmates in Chicago’s Cook County jail tested positive for the coronavirus on March 23. They were isolated, but that didn’t help. The virus has now infected more than 350 people in the jail, making it the nation’s largest-known source of coronavirus infections, according to data compiled by The New York Times. (New York Times)   WORLD VIEW  Pope adapts his own method of social distancing. The novel coronavirus has forced Pope FrancisPope FrancisPope thanked Texas priest who took a knee at protest to pray for George Floyd Pope condemns racism, says street violence is 'self-defeating' The Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Trump tweets as tensions escalate across US MORE to scrap his public appearances and postpone his first overseas trip of the year, to Malta. He now recites his Sunday Angelus not from a window overlooking St. Peter's Square, but from a Vatican library. This week, he'll conduct the ceremonies leading up to Easter largely via livestream. (Washington Post)   Virus returns to some recovered patients. Coronavirus patients in South Korea are now testing positive for the virus a second time, health officials are warning, following similar reports in other countries. Bloomberg reported Thursday that the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said in a statement announcing a formal investigation that dozens of patients have retested positive for the disease. (The Hill)   Sweden's lax approach to coronavirus. Unlike the rest of the world, life in Sweden — by design — has not been greatly disrupted by the virus. Only the vulnerable have been advised to isolate and some are working from home. But with 9,141 confirmed cases and 793 deaths, experts worry weaker measures may be leading to a more severe outbreak in the country of just 10 million residents. (Time)      Surge in Turkish cases concerning WHO. The World Health Organization said it’s concerned about the spread of the coronavirus in Turkey, after the country announced its biggest daily jump in new cases. (Bloomberg)  SCIENCE Pfizer and BioNTech working toward COVID-19 vaccine. The pharmaceutical companies provided more details today about their joint efforts to develop and produce a coronavirus vaccine. Clinical trials in the U.S. and Europe could begin as soon as the end of this month.    New York coronavirus outbreak originated in Europe, studies show. “The majority is clearly European,” Harm van Bakel, a geneticist at Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai and co-author of a study awaiting peer review, told The New York Times. (The Hill)  BUSINESS Federal Reserve unveils details of $2.3 trillion in programs to help support the economy. The Federal Reserve on Thursday announced new moves aimed at getting another $2.3 trillion of financing into businesses and revenue-pinched governments. Stock futures jumped after the announcement, which came moments after the government reported that 6.6 million new jobless claims were filed last week. (CNBC)  Drizly, other delivery apps booming during pandemic. Drizly, an alcohol delivery company, is booming during the coronavirus pandemic as orders from Americans stuck at home surge and states temporarily relax their liquor laws to help companies meet that demand. (The Hill)  IDEAS, CAUSES, PASSION Migrants’ rights and health must be protected in the face of COVID-19. The COVID-19 pandemic is a test of our common humanity. It has revealed our shared vulnerabilities, and only a coordinated response based on justice, solidarity and humanitarian principles can help us overcome it. (Zeid Raad Al Hussein for The Hill) 5 critical factors needed to flatten the anxiety curve. While the coronavirus crisis is nothing like an actual war, there are invisible battles being fought and not just against COVID-19. For many, this battle is in our minds and we need to have a plan of attack on anxiety. (Rob Fazio for The Hill)  GENEROUS SPIRITS 103-year-old Italian woman says ‘courage, faith’ helped her beat virus. To recover from the coronavirus, as she did, Ada Zanusso recommends courage and faith, the same qualities that have served her well in her nearly 104 years. (Associated Press) Bethenny Frankel’s foundation to exceed $15M in coronavirus aid. The Skinnygirl CEO and former “Shark Tank” and “Real Housewives of New York City” star has raised more than $15 million for her foundation, BStrong, that is working to get protective equipment in the hands of medical professionals who need it most. (Daily News)  YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES    Othman Guennoun from Manhattan’s Financial District shared this photo of an eerily empty Wall Street, normally one of the most crowded blocks in the country. He writes that he got “the chills” walking through the empty streets, but the flag hanging from the New York Stock Exchange was a “hopeful reminder that this, too, shall pass.”    Thanks, Othman! Keep on keeping on. We’re all in this together.    SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Tom Bossert, former Homeland Security Advisor to President Donald Trump and  Chief Strategy Officer at Trinity Cyber. Bossert is also a national security analyst for ABC News. Some excerpts from the interview below:    Steve Clemons asked Tom Bossert to elaborate on his call three years ago while in the Donald Trump White House for a bio-defense strategy against a possible pandemic    On if Bossert were in the White House today and had seen the cases in Wuhan emerging, what he would have done TOM BOSSERT:  I think I'd be doing the same thing inside that I've been doing outside. And that is trying to educate people to wrap their minds around something that very few people ever think about. And, you know, I have to sometimes take a deep pause and try to remain humble here. I don't know anything that wasn't taught to me by some real gods in this field, public health officials and doctors that deserve really all the credit for this. Now they've been teaching this to me, and we've been exercising and planning and preparing ever since since 2005 — really since 2003 and 2004 with Sen. Bill Frist. But the idea of them taking all of that experience from 20 years and trying to educate others leaders in the political in public health fields overnight is a challenge. And, you know, it's It's a fine balance between sounding like an alarmist and giving a clear kind of alarm bell. ...One of the things that I started doing in January and would have been doing if I was in the White House would have been training to contextualize all of this kind of this difficult nomenclature. You know, if you talk in terms of curves and first root of amplitudes and so forth, people tend to gloss over. But if you say you know, this isn't like an iceberg. I tried that for a while. This isn't like a star. ...Then I moved to a fire analogy. People get that. And so what we'll do the rest of our conversation today is put this into context as if it were a fire. And when it's early and you see it coming, you yell "Fire!" Now that's not meant to cause panic. But you yell fire in a way that people understand so they could go still deal with it while there's time. The time will come to analyze what was done and not done.   TOM BOSSERT: Well President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE, at the first inflection point, did the right thing and that was shut down travel from China at the second inflection point. ... I guess the objective answer is that for seven states, including New York, we put in place these social distancing measures. We put in the social distancing guidelines after they had already reached a point where they wouldn't be as effective so late. But for 43 other states, we put them in early in time, and we're seeing a really, really significant reduction in the attack as a result. In fact, so much so — I don't want to say this in a way that people make me own this number, Steve — but, you know, early math, back of the envelope math suggests that when you disaggregate these numbers instead of looking at the entire country entire death per 1,000,000 population assessment. But when you separate with seven states where we see the worst problem from the other 43 you end up seeing that some had an attack rate of almost 20% that which we were trying to avoid, that we saw the Diamond Princess cruise ship early, right others, and the rest had an aggregate of 1% attack rate. So what people are saying on TV is that social distancing works. That's true, and we have to persist.    On reopening the country and jump-starting the economy TOM BOSSERT: You have to have a Plan B. Well, the Plan B was there. And you hear Dr. Birx talking about it now? But the Plan B was there. We have ah surveillance system that looks for flu-like symptoms every year, and it's really amazing if you go back to look at it. I was looking at a time with some of my informal advisers, and they were showing me that the seasonal flu does this right, and it always levels that where there's never a second spike. Well, what we were seeing was a second spike in seasonal flu reported or flu like symptoms being reported in the emergency departments in certain places, especially like New York. And now it was pretty clear back then. But it's really clear now that that second spike is still climbing and it's obviously a result of COVID. So you have to move to that syndromic surveillance as opposed to that diagnostic surveillance approach. Well, we didn't — we had some time in there. This is only a matter of days or weeks I'm talking about, although that matters. So the reason I raised it, Steve, your question is, now we have to determine whether we're making that same mistake twice. All of us with a great deal of humility have to admit that nobody's perfect as we run through so-called evidence like this. But in retrospect, I would say the next inflection point is this — a May 1st inflection point. And if what we're doing is relying on a set of diagnostic tests that were not at the volume that we like, we should kind of admit that to ourselves. It's not a failure. Admit that we're not going to have as many as we like and then prioritize their use right here.   On restarting the country TOM BOSSERT:  Here's the prescription for that. There are two forms of infectious people — those that know it and those that don’t.  Those that know it have symptoms, even if they're mild symptoms. And I think the public health community has moved to the state in which people have symptoms, even if they're miles are presumptively positive for COVID and isolate themselves accordingly and quarantine those that they've been in contact with. That's the contact tracing part that will help us slow the spread and maintain a slow spread until we get a vaccine. And then for those that are sick but don't know it. Those were “the well” right now. Those that feel well, they want to re enter the workforce. We're going to have to prioritize the scarce, accurate diagnostic tests for them and start testing “the well.” That's counterintuitive to your question, but if we do that, we'll take off the field the people that are “well but infectious” that don't feel it and those that do feel it. And if you reduce the number of people that are infectious from our society, then you have a good outcome. Two states at the forefront of the coronavirus outbreak that has infected hundreds of thousands of people across the country are beginning to see infection rates slow as strict social distancing requirements show early results of paying off. Officials in Washington, the first state to see a confirmed COVID-19 case in the U.S., and neighboring Oregon say they are cautiously optimistic that the case curves in their states are beginning to bend downward. The number of new cases in both states has dropped for four consecutive days, and the most recent data shows new cases are just a fraction of what they had been at each state’s peak. “We are cautiously optimistic that what we’re doing is working,” said David Bangsberg, founding dean of the Oregon Health and Sciences University-Portland State University School of Public Health. Washington reported 298 new coronavirus cases on Tuesday, a 3 percent increase, bringing the total number of cases to 8,682. As recently as last week, Washington reported almost 1,000 new cases on a single day.  On Wednesday, Washington Gov. Jay InsleeJay Robert InsleeMillions of Americans frustrated by delayed unemployment checks Trump rule limits states from blocking pipeline projects Inslee says Trump coronavirus response akin to if FDR called Pearl Harbor 'a hoax' MORE (D) said the number of cases had fallen enough that a Department of Defense field hospital set up in Seattle could be redeployed. It’s a sign that the state believes it has the hospital capacity to handle the number of cases it will eventually face. In Oregon, the case count rose by 49 on Tuesday, a 4 percent increase that brought the total number of cases to 1,181. That figure was half of the number of new cases Oregon reported on Friday, its worst day so far. “When we look at the various models and see what they're saying, probably the middle to end of April is where we'll see our peak,” Dean Sidelinger, Oregon’s health office and state epidemiologist, told The Hill. “We think that's a reflection of the early and decisive action that our governor and the state took to protect Oregonians.” In both cases, officials and public health experts said early actions were crucial, even though neither state had much of a playbook to follow.  Inslee declared a state of emergency after the second and third confirmed cases showed the virus had been spreading undetected through the community. He issued a stay-at-home order on March 23, among the earliest such orders in the country. “As the first state in the country with a COVID-19 case, Washington officials have had to make a lot of decisions with less information than we’d like to have, and develop guidance at the same time as we implemented it. Luckily, we have acted quickly at several key moments throughout the response, including implementing physical distancing strategies early on,” Kathy Lofy, Washington's state health officer, said in an email. Oregon’s first case of the coronavirus was not confirmed until much later, but Gov. Kate Brown (D) issued a stay-at-home order the same day as Inslee — and just nine days after the first Oregonian died from COVID-19. “We put [the stay-at-home] order in place around the same time as other states like Washington and California and New York, but we were earlier in our epidemic, and that's helped us keep cases low,” Sidelinger said. Those watching from the outside said both Washington and Oregon have some built-in advantages that helped them get ahead of what might otherwise have been startlingly broad outbreaks. Laboratories attached to some of the most cutting-edge medical technology companies in the world are in Seattle, and their experts quickly started tracking the spread of the virus.  At the same time, both cities have substantial percentages of workers who can work from home. Major institutions such as Microsoft and the University of Washington ordered those who could to work from home long before governors made orders more explicit.  And while the federal government downplayed the threat of the virus’s eventual arrival in the United States, both Washington and Oregon officials began planning for someone with the virus to show up at an airport on one of the many flights between the Pacific Northwest and Asian hubs. “They had begun planning for this before they saw their first case, because they knew they had extensive travel links to Asia,” said Jeremy Konyndyk, a senior fellow at the Center for Global Development who ran U.S. Agency for International Development’s Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance and helped organize the Obama administration's response to the Ebola outbreak. “They took those measures because their public health professionals who were advising their politicians were saying this is what you've got to do.” Perhaps most importantly, officials said, the curve is bending downward in both states because residents took seriously the orders to stay at home. “The longer people stay in, particularly as the weather gets nice, it gets harder and harder,” Sidelinger said. “The sacrifices they're making, we know they're huge. We're working hard to make sure that people know their sacrifices are working.” The outbreak in Washington and Oregon — and to some extent in California, the first state in the nation to order people to stay at home except for essential reasons — has developed much differently than in states like New York and Florida, and even in states with a smaller number of cases like Indiana. In those states, governors waited longer to tell residents to stay at home.  Several Southern governors refused to close their beaches to spring breakers and others who flouted the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s social distancing guidance. The case curves in those states are bending upward, as Washington's bends downward.  “I think the lesson is that implementing multiple interventions on the early side is a winning strategy,” said Janet Baseman, associate dean for public health practice and an epidemiologist at the University of Washington. But officials said that both Washington and Oregon face challenges ahead, especially as they begin to ease restrictions in the coming months. The first phase of strict social distancing has given both states a window of opportunity, one they can use to begin robust testing and tracing the contacts of those who have contracted the virus. But the strength of a potential second wave of infections will depend on how well those testing and tracking programs work. “As we establish control of this for the first wave and when we relax our social distancing interventions, testing and contact tracing will be a very important part to monitor for the second wave,” Bangsberg said. “We need to anticipate and look proactively for it. The earlier we detect the second wave, the easier it will be to contain it.”Alabama has removed controversial guidelines regarding who should receive a ventilator in the event of a shortage, the Trump administration announced Wednesday. Advocates had raised the alarm that the state's disaster preparedness plan would prioritize the treatment of able-bodied individuals over people with physical and intellectual disabilities. A complaint was filed with the Health and Human Services (HHS) Office for Civil Rights (OCR). Responding to the HHS investigation, Alabama said the guidance was not in effect. The state said it has issued new guidelines, and has completely disavowed the previous ones. "Every state should be aware there are lines that should not be crossed," OCR director Roger Severino said on a call with reporters. Alabama had incorporated a 2010 guidance for ventilator triage into its emergency preparedness plan. The criteria said that “persons with severe mental retardation, advanced dementia or severe traumatic brain injury may be poor candidates for ventilator support.”  Individuals with AIDS could also have been excluded, though the guidance noted that HIV "is not an automatic exclusion." Severino said HHS was concerned that ventilator services would be stopped or completely denied to people with intellectual disabilities.  Additionally, he said there was a concern the guidelines could be used to "impose blunt age categorizations, such that older persons might automatically be deemed ineligible for life-saving care without any individualized assessment or examination and based solely on missing a strict age cutoff." As states and hospitals develop plans about where to prioritize resources in the event care needs to be rationed, the administration recently issued a bulletin to say it is still enforcing civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, disability, age and sex. Decisions about whether an individual is a candidate for treatment should be based on the best available objective medical evidence.  Severino praised Alabama for its quick response, and said the state responded "within days" when OCR opened its review. However, he said there are still other states the agency is investigating. New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy (D) ordered all residents to wear masks in grocery stores as coronavirus cases and deaths continue to climb. Murphy announced Wednesday that he was signing an executive order enforcing restrictions to try to decrease the spread of coronavirus in some of the only businesses that remain open in the state. To lessen overcrowding, all “essential retail” stores will only be permitted to allow up to 50 percent of their approved capacity inside. All customers and employees will be required to wear face coverings while inside the store, and businesses must supply employees with masks, coverings and gloves.  We’re also aiming to mitigate overcrowding at essential retail stores – particularly in our grocery stores.Under this Executive Order, all essential retail must indefinitely limit the number of customers allowed in their stores to NO MORE than 50% of their approved capacity.  The executive order also mandates stores provide certain shopping hours for high-risk populations such as seniors, place physical barriers between customers and employees “where practicable” and regularly sanitize employee areas. He said during a press briefing Wednesday that those not wearing face coverings would “get asked to leave,” except for those who are under age 2 or with medical reasons to not wear a mask. “My personal guidance is you gotta go out and find something to put on your face before you come in," he said, according to NJ.com. Murphy also announced that all nonessential construction will “CEASE indefinitely” starting at 8 p.m Friday, with exceptions for hospital, school, transportation and affordable housing projects. Individual housing sites may continue construction if they can follow rules restricting the number of workers on the site.  New Jersey passed 1,500 deaths associated with COVID-19 Wednesday, leading the governor to warn that the state is “not at any plateau.”  The state recorded its highest single-day increase in deaths with 275 Wednesday, surpassing Tuesday’s 232 deaths.  New Jersey has confirmed 47,437 cases across the states, the second-most, behind its neighbor New York which has documented 149,401 cases. The Hill’s Steve Clemons interviews emergency physician and former city of Baltimore health commissioner Dr. Leana Wen. Wen is one of the leading public health voices in the United States. In 2019, she was named one of Time's "100 Most Influential People." Wen is currently a visiting professor of Health Policy and Management at the George Washington University Milken School of Public Health, where she is also a distinguished fellow at the Fitzhugh Mullan Institute for Health Workforce Equity. Some excerpts from the interview are below:   On what a major city’s health commissioner’s dashboard would look like during the coronavirus crisis  LEANA WEN: What I fear is that there are communities out there that think they are fine. But actually there are outbreaks that are happening right under their noses, and they just don't have the surveillance tools to find out. And by the time they see the number of cases rise, it's going to be too late.    On how we have done responding to the crisis LEANA WEN: Frankly, very poorly. You know, it's easy to look back and be the armchair quarterback and say, "Well, we should have done these things differently." And I think there is a lot that would be hard to predict because of just how quickly things were moving. And I think our public health officials federally and at the state and local levels have done a tremendous job with the limited resources that they have. But there are two major failings. One is the failure in the first place to invest in public health, recognizing that ... public health often works when it's invisible, and so it is challenging to put in that investment in the first place into something that doesn't look like there's a face to it. But I think the second thing, and this part is the one that I think is the least forgivable, which is that even after we realized how big of a crisis this is, and even after there were calls and continued to be calls by local officials about the desperate need for things like personal protective equipment (PPE) and ventilators and tests. Even after these desperate calls were made so public that the federal government still has not acted with the urgency that's required. And I think that is the part that I think we get a failing grade on and continue to get a failing grade on. LEANA WEN: There was a map of Baltimore that I often showed when I was the health commissioner, and then I actually stopped showing the map. Here's why: The map was the map of our city by life expectancy. You could see certain neighborhoods as you mentioned Steve, where there was a 20 year difference in life expectancy, well those same neighborhoods that had the lowest life expectancy also had the highest drug overdose rates. High mortality from cardiovascular disease, highest mortality from HIV, lowest socio-economic and lowest level of education attainment, highest level of incarceration. I mean, whatever you consider to be the social determinants of health were reflected in that map, and it's not surprising that with COVID-19 we see that same pattern of disparities because, frankly, these are the systemic inequities that have gotten us to where we are today. That's reflected in every single health crisis and every single crisis in general. And COVID-19 is unmasking many of these deep inequities and, frankly, systemic racism that have long plagued our country. LEANA WEN: There are health care workers, nurses, doctors, respiratory therapists, all those on the front lines. We go into our [public health] profession expecting to be sent in to battle. We expect to be fighting for our patients. We expect to go and work under these extremely challenging conditions because that's our job. That's our obligation. But we do not expect to go in without the protection that we need to do our jobs, and I think that's been what's the most troubling. I mean there were reports two, three months ago about what was happening in China with doctors who are going in with raincoats because they couldn't afford, because the hospital ran out of gowns or nurses were spraying down their masks and making them really wet and ineffective. But that's the best they could do because they were out of masks. And no way did we think that this could happen in the U.S. But that's what's happening every single day now. I mean, I was just in the hospital for birth, and I saw that in my hospital, which has yet to experience a peak in outbreaks. They are rationing masks to the point that every provider is issued one mask a week. One mask a week!VIEW BREAKING NEWS ON CORONAVIRUS                                        WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Pandemic totals may not reach worst fears > U.S. military medical intelligence officials predicted “cataclysmic” virus event arising from Wuhan in November > African Americans disproportionately dying from coronavirus  > Signs of optimism in slowing hospitalizations and ventilator demands in NYC  > CDC removes dosage guidance in drug touted by President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE  > Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey commits $1 billion to coronavirus relief   Trump, WHO trade blows on handling of virus. World Health Organization Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus hit back at President Trump’s criticism of the organization on Wednesday, saying countries should avoid politicizing the virus issue “if you don’t want to have many more body bags.” His comments came after Trump on Tuesday threatened to withhold funds from the U.N. agency, saying it “seemed to be very China-centric” and accused the WHO of “missing the call.” (Washington Post)     Epicenter of pandemic ends 76-day lockdown. Wuhan, China, where the coronavirus almost certainly originated, lifted its 11-week lockdown Wednesday. After restrictions on movement were lifted, thousands of people went outdoors and boarded the first trains and planes leaving Wuhan. A positive sign that there is life after COVID-19, although many fear a reemergence of the virus could be just as deadly. (AP)   Bernie OUT, but not conceding on “Medicare for All.” Sen. Bernie SandersBernie SandersOVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump signs order removing environmental reviews for major projects | New Trump air rule will limit future pollution regulations, critics say | DNC climate group calls for larger federal investment on climate than Biden plan Google: Chinese and Iranian hackers targeting Biden, Trump campaigns Sanders: Police departments that violate civil rights should lose federal funding MORE (I-Vt.) on Wednesday dropped out of the race but indicated he will continue to fight for Medicare for All, citing the pandemic. Sanders’s proposal is opposed by former Vice President Joe BidenJoe BidenOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Davis: 72 hours cementing the real choice for November OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump signs order removing environmental reviews for major projects | New Trump air rule will limit future pollution regulations, critics say | DNC climate group calls for larger federal investment on climate than Biden plan MORE, who now has a clear path to winning the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination. (The Hill)   Hospitals say feds are seizing masks and other coronavirus supplies without a word. Although President Trump has directed states and hospitals to secure what supplies they can, the federal government is quietly seizing orders, leaving medical providers across the country in the dark about where the materials are going and how they can get what they need to deal with the coronavirus pandemic. (LA Times)  THE INTERVIEW  Dr. Leana Wen says COVID-19 is unmasking systemic racism that has long plagued U.S.        “There are two major failings. One is the failure in the first place to invest in public health, recognizing that public health often works when it's invisible, and so it is challenging to put in that investment in the first place into something that doesn't look like there's a face to it. But I think the second thing and this part is the one that I think is the least forgivable, which is that even after we realized how big of a crisis this is, and even after there were calls and continued to be calls by local officials about the desperate need for things like personal protective equipment (PPE) and ventilators and tests. Even after these desperate calls were made so public that the federal government still has not acted with the urgency that's required. And I think that is the part that I think we get a failing grade on and continue to get a failing grade on.” Watch the full interview here.   Sponsored Content  Sponsored by AHIP     No one should hesitate to get tested or treated for COVID-19 because of concerns about costs. Health insurance providers have proactively eliminated patient cost sharing for COVID-19 testing and treatment – no copay, no coinsurance required. Click here for a one-pager to learn how we’re protecting Americans. From expanding public health capacity, to ensuring access to testing, to taking action to mitigate the economic and societal impact, we know these are serious and significant times. Health insurance providers are taking decisive actions to help patients and curb the spread of COVID-19. See how health insurance providers are taking action  THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Wednesday, April 8. A major disturbing headline for us today is that coronavirus is exploiting the racial inequities in our society by causing disproportionate deaths among the black community in America. As The New York Times has reported, “43 percent of people who have died from the disease and 28 percent of those who have tested positive are African-Americans, a group that makes up just 15 percent of the state’s population.” The disparities and high black mortality and infection rates are evident in New York, Louisiana, Michigan, North Carolina, South Carolina and elsewhere around the nation. American health and financial crises are the times when the political and policy world rewire the system to perform better, to mitigate risk — and in big cases, like the Great Depression, to redesign the social contract between citizens and their government, employers and financial institutions. The role of equitable health care in America’s social contract hasn’t been resolved — but it’s out there waiting as we witness the uneven and unfair impacts of the COVID-19 virus on our country.   New York Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) on Wednesday vowed to ramp up coronavirus testing in minority communities and investigate the racial disparities in deaths from COVID-19. Cuomo told reporters during his daily presser he will focus on learning more about racial disparities in infection rates adding, “Why are more African Americans and Latinos affected? It always seems that the poorest people pay the highest price. Why is that?” (The Hill)   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.    In coming weeks, we will share with you our new 3D journalism platform, The Hill Virtually Live, to take stock of what is happening around the nation — for instance, empathy and building resilience across generations, acts of heroism, the way learning and credentialing are being reinvented, and how health delivery is going even more digital. Follow @TheHillEvents to stay up to date on our upcoming virtual programs.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE Global coronavirus “confirmed” cases now stand at more than 1.45 million people but are thought to be much higher given inadequate and incomplete testing globally. More than 85,000 people have died around the world. But more than 315,000 people have recovered.   The U.S. now has about 28 percent of all officially recognized cases with nearly 403,000 people infected — and more than 13,000 deaths nationally. Italy has reported at least 17,669 deaths. Spain 14,673. France 10,343. Iran 3,993. China 3,337. South Korea 200. India 178. Japan 93. New Zealand 1.   New York continues to lead in both infections and confirmed deaths with 140,386 cases and 5,489 deaths. A sampling of other U.S. states shows mortality levels for New Jersey at 1,232. Michigan 845. Louisiana 582. California 452. Florida 309. Colorado 179. Virginia 66. Missouri 86. Oklahoma 67. Iowa 26. Montana 6. Alaska 6.  WASHINGTON WATCH        Pelosi, Schumer want aid to states, hospitals in GOP small-business bill. The Democratic response comes a day after Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE (R-Ky.) said he would ask for unanimous consent on the Senate floor Thursday to approve an additional $250 billion in funding for the popular small-business Paycheck Protection Program. Now the ball is in McConnell’s court. He must decide whether to agree to the Democratic demands or refuse, which could delay additional funding for small businesses until after Easter weekend. (The Hill) Signs of optimism in coronavirus fight. The first moderately hopeful signs are emerging regarding the coronavirus crisis — but those will also bring new challenges, both in public health and in politics. (The Hill)   Models show fewer deaths than earlier predicted. Even as deaths mount, officials see signs pandemic’s toll may not match worst fears. Coronavirus deaths continue to rise, but health officials see indications that the pandemic’s toll may be less devastating than the most pessimistic estimates. (Washington Post)   Cataclysmic threat. U.S. intelligence officials warned in November that the coronavirus spreading in China’s Wuhan region could become a “cataclysmic event,” ABC News reported Wednesday. (The Hill)  LAWMAKERS TWEET  Rep. Nydia Velázquez (D-N.Y.) @NydiaVelazquez People of color are among the hardest hit in this crisis. #COVID19 has further laid bare structural health and economic inequalities our nation has failed to address for far, far too long.   Rep. Robert AderholtRobert Brown AderholtLobbying world The Hill's Coronavirus Report: WHO vs. Trump; Bernie's out Bottom line MORE (R-Ala.) @Robert_Aderholt Two weeks ago I wrote about the critical need for rural broadband funding. Now, we have it: $200 million for FCC’s Connected Care Pilot Program, $100 million to the ReConnect Program, $25 million for Distance Learning & Telemedicine, $15 million for Rural Telehealth.   Rep. Debbie DingellDeborah (Debbie) Ann Dingell18 states fight conservative think tank effort to freeze fuel efficiency standards Pelosi: George Floyd death is 'a crime' OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Coal company sues EPA over power plant pollution regulation | Automakers fight effort to freeze fuel efficiency standards | EPA watchdog may probe agency's response to California water issues MORE (D-Mich.) @RepDebDingell Right now we're seeing the effects of decades of policies that incentivized offshoring at the cost of domestic manufacturing. Our supply chains are so dependent on other countries that we don't have the ability to respond rapidly in a time of crisis.  ACROSS THE NATION  Iowa health care workers infected at alarming rate. More than 1 in 5 confirmed cases in Iowa are health care workers, the state’s Department of Health announced. The nationwide shortage of critical protective equipment for medical staff could particularly hamper more rural areas of the country, like parts of Iowa, where 23 percent of those infected are health care workers. (The HIll)    Former congressman Charlie DentCharles (Charlie) Wieder DentThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: WHO vs. Trump; Bernie's out The biggest political upsets of the decade Ex-GOP lawmaker: Former colleagues privately say they're 'disgusted and exhausted' by Trump MORE says coronavirus is serious. Coughing into his arm as the interview began, former Rep. Charlie Dent (R-Pa.) detailed his COVID-19 symptoms: a cough, body aches and chills, fever and persistent fatigue. (ABC 27)   Rep. Ben McAdams (D-Utah) now “virus-free” after tough battle with coronavirus. The second lawmaker on Capitol Hill to test positive for the coronavirus says he is now “virus-free.” McAdams said that he lost 13 pounds during his hospital stay but that he is now “back on my feet and back at work.” (The Hill) Zoom, grocery delivery, self-isolation: How lawmakers are surviving coronavirus. Members of Congress, dispersed across the country until at least April 20, are leaning in to social media and video conference calls as they try to keep in contact with constituents and colleagues. (The Hill)         Chicago Mayor Lori Lightfoot is using humor to make city residents stay at home. The mayor is somber and business-like during her briefings, but in the past few weeks she has developed a different persona online. Through satirical videos on Twitter, memes on Facebook and even a DJ party thrown on her Instagram account, she has played against type in a way that is drawing many residents’ attention and appreciation. (Washington Post)  WORLD VIEW  Boris Johnson “critically stable” on third day in ICU. U.K. Prime Minister Boris Johnson is “responding to treatment” and breathing without a ventilator, according to Downing Street. (Washington Post)         New Zealand emerges as paradigm of virus response. Less than two weeks since New Zealand imposed one of the world’s strictest nationwide lockdowns, the country is showing signs that their curve is being not just flattened, but squashed entirely. (Washington Post) The brightside? India stunned by clean air, blue skies, nighttime stars. In New Delhi, one of the most polluted cities on earth, residents are stunned by how blue the sky actually is. With few cars on the road and most factories shut down, city residents are getting their first glimpse of clear, blue skies and nighttime stars. (NY Times)   SCIENCE CDC removes dosage guidance on drug touted by Trump. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention removed guidance from its website regarding drugs touted by President Trump as possible treatments for the coronavirus amid disputes over their effectiveness. The CDC had initially included guidance regarding dosage for hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine, the drugs recommended by Trump, noting that anecdotal evidence existed for their effectiveness. (The Hill)   NASA says pandemic could prepare us for life on Mars. NASA experts say that knowledge and understanding of how to stay safe and healthy will help us prepare for landing on another planet. Space exploration requires a level of care and caution that humans haven’t had to exercise in our daily lives — until now. (CNN)  BUSINESS GM to supply 30,000 ventilators. The United States on Wednesday awarded automaker General Motors Co. a contract worth $489.4 million to make ventilators needed to treat severely sick coronavirus patients. (Yahoo)   3D printing faces hurdles in coronavirus response. Shortages of medical devices and protective equipment driven by the coronavirus pandemic have led medical workers and manufacturers to turn to 3D printing to fill the void. However, the new technology still faces technical and legal hurdles before it can be fully deployed to address the shortfall. (The Hill)  IDEAS, CAUSES, PASSION Contemplating a post-coronavirus world: Something better than what we lost, perhaps? If we are fortunate enough to be survivors, it should not be enough to just reopen the business operations of America; rather, we should contemplate how work and family might be rebalanced. (Douglas Kmiec for The Hill) Getting ready to give birth amid a pandemic. COVID-19 has made having a bundle of joy a bundle of uncertainty, fear and frustration in an already vulnerable time for pregnant women around the world. As I walk into the hospital for an OB-GYN appointment that had me almost in tears a day earlier, I’m greeted with wide smiles by a pair of workers conducting coronavirus screenings. Perhaps they say this to everyone – but they yelled to me as I ever so slowly wobbled my way to the office elevator: “We’re all going to get through this!” (The Hill)  GENEROUS SPIRITS Home Run! Chef José Andrés and the Washington Nationals are using the baseball stadium to cook and distribute free meals to needy residents. Two large kitchens at the park will be used to prepare hot meals that will be delivered to neighboring communities by Uber Eats drivers. (Eater DC)      Vapers help with ventilators and masks. Philip Morris International is producing and donating ventilators, testing kits, masks, face shields, gloves and other personal protective equipment in factories and labs around the world and announced in a company wide email financial donations and in-kind contributions of $24 million.  YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  Rachel Tyree, from South Pasadena, California, shared some photos from her daily walks around her neighborhood. She writes that the calming effect of the beauty around her is a daily reminder that everything is going to be alright.    Thanks for sharing, Rachel! We’re with you   SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.   CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVEWarmer weather is unlikely to significantly impede the spread of the novel coronavirus, a National Academies of Sciences (NAS) panel told the White House on Tuesday. About a dozen members of the Academies’ Standing Committee on Emerging Infectious Diseases and 21st Century Health Threats published the report, addressed to Kelvin Droegemeier, head of the White House’s Office of Science and Technology Policy. Their report found that while studies of how temperature and humidity affect the virus’s transmissibility are not yet clear, previous research suggesting a connection were flawed. “There is some evidence to suggest that [the coronavirus] may transmit less efficiently in environments with higher ambient temperature and humidity; however, given the lack of host immunity globally, this reduction in transmission efficiency may not lead to a significant reduction in disease spread” without efforts such as social distancing, the report states. No such seasonal aspect has been observed in other coronaviruses such as SARS and MERS, the report noted. The report found various issues with data quality in existing research including the "estimates of reproductive rate, assumptions about infectivity period, and short observational time windows.” It also found they failed to account for factors like geography, per capita income, access to testing and the quality of local health care systems. Both President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE and Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, have suggested warmer temperatures may slow the spread of the virus, although Fauci has noted that without effective mitigation, another outbreak could occur in the fall. “I think it very well might,” Fauci said, when asked in March whether the virus could have a seasonal cycle. “And the reason I say that is that what we’re starting to see now in the Southern Hemisphere, in southern Africa and in the southern hemisphere countries, is that we’re having cases that are appearing as they go into their winter season.” The NAS cited similar cases, noting, “Given that countries currently in ‘summer’ climates, such as Australia and Iran, are experiencing rapid virus spread, a decrease in cases with increases in humidity and temperature elsewhere should not be assumed.” When a staffer working at Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) headquarters tested positive for the coronavirus late last month, agency leadership set about informing those who may have been exposed. FEMA leaders gathered others working on the same floor as the infected individual and put them in a room standing “shoulder to shoulder,” according to an official familiar with the episode, exasperating some who worried about crowding people together when the government was urging the public to practice social distancing. The handling of the positive test underscores the unusual position FEMA finds itself in as the lead agency in responding to the coronavirus pandemic. Typically asked to respond to wildfires, hurricanes and other natural disasters hitting a localized area, FEMA has been thrust into uncharted territory. While it has dealt with public health matters before when regions are decimated by hurricanes or impacted by hazardous materials, FEMA has yet to confront something of the nationwide scope of the coronavirus pandemic. The agency is being asked to manage a massive national supply chain and distribute ventilators, drugs, masks, gowns, gloves and other materials around the country. It must communicate with governors from all 50 states, acknowledge requests from the White House to pursue different avenues and ramp up its capabilities quickly after being pressed into a leadership role well after the virus had spread across the nation. After some initial struggles to find its footing, current and former officials believe the agency is starting to hit its stride. “It's not ideal that FEMA is having to step in and manage the pandemic specifically since it’s right before wildfire season and hurricane season, but they’re really the only agency in the federal government that can handle the incident command needs that are being presented to the nation as a result of COVID-19,” said Brock Long, a former FEMA administrator in the Trump administration. FEMA has 2,578 workers supporting the coronavirus response out of a total 20,550 agency employees, an agency spokesperson said in a statement to The Hill. The remaining roughly 18,000 employees are on hand to respond to other emergencies or disasters should they occur. The agency is attempting to meet demand for personal protective equipment (PPE) and other critical supplies by expanding domestic production of gloves, masks, goggles, gowns and other items. FEMA has also acquired shipments of those items from overseas as needed, including a flight from Asia that arrived March 29 with 80 tons of supplies for New York, New Jersey and Connecticut. FEMA said each flight will have varying amounts of PPE and acknowledged it will not have insight into the quantity until the flights are actually loaded. The agency has also looked to rapidly acquire PPE to replenish the national stockpile, and it is urging the reuse of certain materials when it's safe to do so. Rear Adm. John Polowczyk, who is leading the supply chain task force efforts at FEMA, has described the process at recent White House briefings, where he's touted the millions of gloves, N95 masks, surgical masks and gowns that have been allocated to hot spots facing acute outbreaks of the virus.  Polowczyk said Sunday that the agency is also working to distribute shipments of hydroxychloroquine, an anti-malaria drug President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE has pushed as a potential therapeutic for the virus despite limited evidence. “As challenging as it is for FEMA and the entire federal government, my view is it would be even more challenging if FEMA were not involved,” said Daniel Kaniewski, the former deputy administrator for resilience at the agency. “I think the federal government has finally hit its stride as far as their role in supporting state and local government,” added Kaniewski, who now works at Marsh & McLennan. But the recent progress has not come without obstacles and criticism.  FEMA had been playing a secondary role in the early stages of the pandemic, assisting Health and Human Services in its role as the lead agency. It was not until March 13, when there were more than 2,000 confirmed cases in the U.S., that Trump declared a national emergency and freed up billions of dollars in additional resources for FEMA. The agency said it officially took a leading role on March 18, when there were more than 13,000 cases, according to Johns Hopkins University. Even as FEMA gets acclimated, it has contributed to frustration among governors who have struggled to acquire desperately needed materials to combat the virus. Trump has repeatedly urged states to procure their own equipment and use the federal government as a backup, but governors have in recent days complained that FEMA has swooped in to buy up many of the needed supplies. Members of New York’s congressional delegation wrote to FEMA on Tuesday calling for more transparency in how the agency is distributing supplies and the creation of a centralized system where states can procure equipment from FEMA.    The virus itself has also led to some issues. In addition to the handling of the positive test on March 24, NBC News reported Tuesday that members of a supply chain task force must work remotely after one member tested positive. “Like many large employers, FEMA has employees who have tested positive,” a FEMA spokesperson told The Hill in a statement. “Individuals who need to be aware of their names and locations have been made aware. FEMA has taken every precaution recommended by the CDC to protect all employees.” The agency said the individuals who tested positive  did not come within 6 feet of the vice president or other “principal” members of the task force who had visited FEMA headquarters. The virus response will also put an additional strain on FEMA, which is facing a potentially daunting natural disaster season. Forecasters at Colorado State University projected an active hurricane season this year, with as many developing into Category 3, 4 or 5 storms. Climate change has further exacerbated wildfires in California and flooding in coastal regions of the country. A FEMA spokesperson said the agency is “preparing and maintaining the Agency’s readiness for other disasters” while responding to the pandemic. Long, the former administrator who now serves as executive chairman at Hagerty Consulting, said he's hopeful the pandemic will serve as a “wake-up call” for the country to develop a “culture of preparedness” at an individual level, at a state and local government level and at a corporate level to ease the burden on agencies like FEMA. “I just think that America needs to champion and rally around FEMA right now, rather than point the blame at them,” he said. “They’re like the sixth man coming off the bench in a basketball game down by 20 and being told to win the game. And there are a lot of things working against them that are out of their control.”The top lawmakers on the House Foreign Affairs Committee urged the CEOs of three domestic airlines to do more to help the State Department bring home Americans stranded abroad because of the coronavirus pandemic. In a letter, House Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Eliot EngelEliot Lance EngelEngel says he refuses to seek NYT endorsement over Cotton op-ed The Hill's Campaign Report: Republicans go on the hunt for new convention site The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges MORE (D-N.Y.) and ranking member Michael McCaulMichael Thomas McCaulOusted watchdog says he told top State aides about Pompeo probe US to slap restrictions on more Chinese media outlets: report Top GOP lawmakers invite Blue Dogs to meet with China Task Force MORE (R-Texas) urged American Airlines, Delta Air Lines and United Airlines to “participate to the fullest extent possible” in ongoing repatriation efforts. The lawmakers noted that repatriation requests from Americans overseas are increasingly occurring in remote and hard-to-reach places and asked the airlines for help. “As the possibility remains of additional border closures or travel restrictions around the world," the lawmakers wrote, "there is still much work to be done.”  “And as Americans’ requests for repatriation assistance come from increasingly distant locales with complex flight logistical requirements, our constituents will need the support of America’s airline industry leaders to help ensure that all Americans are able to make it home.” Tens of thousands of Americans remain stranded abroad amid unprecedented border closures around the world as countries try to stem the spread of COVID-19. The State Department has helped more than 46,000 Americans return from approximately 81 countries, with repatriation efforts ongoing. In a shift of its strategy to speed up repatriation efforts, the department is working to have foreign governments allow U.S. airlines to reestablish international routes specifically for stranded Americans, and in some cases create new routes for airlines that don’t typically serve such locations. “We’re looking to enhance the airline industry’s ability to go back into these places,” Ian Brownlee, the head of the State Department’s repatriation task force, said in a briefing with reporters on Tuesday. “What’s a bit more complicated is getting the necessary permissions at the other end, and this is particularly the case where some of these carriers had not previously served those destinations.” The number of Americans requesting repatriation flights is highly fluid as countries end commercial travel options on short notice. The State Department said its repatriation efforts are shifting toward South and Central Asia and Africa after weeks of focusing on South and Central America.New York Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) on Wednesday vowed to ramp up coronavirus testing in minority communities and investigate the racial disparities in deaths from COVID-19, the disease caused by the virus. “Why are more African Americans and Latinos affected?” Cuomo asked at his daily press briefing Wednesday. He noted that black New Yorkers comprise 28 percent of deaths in New York City and 18 percent of deaths in New York state, despite being 22 percent and 9 percent of the population, respectively.  Hispanics, meanwhile, are 29 percent of the population in New York City and 11 percent of the population statewide, but represent 34 percent and 14 percent of deaths, respectively. “We’re seeing this around the country,” Cuomo added, noting that other areas have worse disparities than New York’s. “Comorbidity, I understand that, but I think there’s something more to it. You know, it always seems that the poorest people pay the highest price. Why is that? Whatever the situation is.” Cuomo compared the disparities to the particular devastation Hurricane Katrina wrought on African Americans in 2005. “The people standing on those rooftops were not rich white people,” he said. “Let’s figure it out. Let’s do the work. Let’s do the research. Let’s learn from these moment and let’s learn these lessons and let’s do it now.” Those racial disparities have appeared across the country where the data is available, prompting lawmakers and health professionals to call for racial data on coronavirus cases and deaths nationwide. In Louisiana, African Americans account for 70 percent of coronavirus deaths despite making up 32 percent of the population. In Wisconsin's Milwaukee County, they account for half the cases and 80 percent of the deaths. Cuomo vowed to step up testing in majority-nonwhite communities, adding that there should also be more research into whether the number of Latino and African American public workers “who don’t have a choice but to go out every day and drive the train” were putting those communities at particular risk. Experts have pointed to underlying conditions that are more likely to affect minority communities and lack of access to medical care has factors which account for the differences. “Let’s learn from that, and let’s do it now,” Cuomo added, saying he would ask Havidan Rodrigeuz, president of the University of Albany SUNY, to head an effort to collect more comprehensive data on the spread of the virus in minority communities.New York experienced its largest single day death toll from the coronavirus, Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) said Wednesday, hitting a new record of 779. Cuomo said the number of deaths will continue to increase, even as hospitalizations fall because fatalities are a "lagging indicator" of the outbreak. That means people who have been hospitalized for a long time are starting to die, while fewer new people are being admitted. "Every number is a face. Every number is a family," Cuomo said during his daily media briefing. Still, he said social distancing measures are working, and the infection curve is flattening.  Cuomo credited an increase in hospital capacity, as well as the sharing of equipment among "different partners in the health system. "There is no doubt that we are now bending the curve, and there is no doubt that we can't stop doing what we are doing" Cuomo said, adding if the hospitalization rate continues to decrease, the state's hospital system "should stabilize over these next couple weeks." Cuomo cautioned that the positive news doesn't mean that mitigation measures should stop. "It is not a time to get complacent," Cuomo said. "We are not out of the woods, and do not misread what is on the charts. It is a pure product of our actions and behavior." Cuomo said 6,268 New Yorkers have died from coronavirus. To put it into perspective, he noted, 2,753 died at the World Trade Center in the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.  Cuomo also reiterated that earlier this week, he doubled the fine for people who disobey the state's social distancing order to $1,000.The total number of confirmed coronavirus cases in the U.S. has passed 400,000, with nearly 13,000 deaths reported as of Wednesday, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. The U.S., the epicenter of the global outbreak, has reported hundreds of thousands more cases than the next most-impacted countries of Spain, Italy, France and Germany. China, where the virus originated, has reported fewer than 83,000 cases, though the U.S. has accused the country of underreporting its total number of cases and deaths. "I would be willing to bet they have more cases than we do, but they don't do the testing like we do," Trump asserted during the White House coronavirus briefing Tuesday. The total number of cases and fatalities in the U.S. is expected to rise as the upward trajectory continues. Trump warned over the weekend of a “rough two weeks” ahead. "This will be probably the toughest week," he told reporters Saturday. "There will be a lot of death, unfortunately, but a lot less death than if this wasn't done," he added, pointing to the administration's efforts to combat the virus. The outbreak in the U.S. has been driven by cases in New York and New Jersey, though cases are quickly spiking in Florida, Louisiana, Michigan and elsewhere. The pandemic has led to scrutiny of the United States's preparedness before the virus threat, as well as the administration's rollout of testing across the country. Trump was asked Tuesday about newly revealed memos from a top trade adviser warning in January that a potential pandemic could be especially fatal in the country and have major economic consequences. The president said he had not seen the memos from Peter Navarro, but said it wouldn't have changed how he handled the outbreak. "I don’t think it would’ve changed it, because I basically did what the memo said," Trump said, referring to his decision to restrict travel from China at the end of January. The coronavirus has caused widespread economic turmoil, sending millions to the unemployment lines as restaurants and bars, hotels and other industries shutter. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said Tuesday he thinks the country will be in “good shape” for schools to reopen by the start of the next school year in the fall. Trump extended federal guidance aimed at helping reduce community spread to be in place until April 30.Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE said Wednesday morning that he thinks the number of U.S. deaths from coronavirus will end up being less than the original projection of 100,000 to 200,000.  Fauci, the government’s top infectious disease expert, attributed the drop to the success of social distancing measures that have directed people to stay home and closed many businesses.  “Although one of the original models projected 100- to 200,000 deaths, as we're getting more data and seeing the positive effect of mitigation, those numbers are going to be downgraded,” Fauci said on Fox News. “I don't know exactly what the numbers are going to be, but right now it looks like it's going to be less than the original projection.” By the end of March, the White House was projecting 100,000 to 240,000 deaths as America's best-case scenario for the pandemic. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Robert Redfield made similar comments on Tuesday, saying he expected the number of deaths to be “much lower” than what was predicted by the models.  A closely watched University of Washington model is now projecting about 60,000 deaths in the U.S.  Despite some hopeful signs, Fauci emphasized that now is not the time to ease up on social distancing measures, the best way to keep improving the outlook.  “We're going to start to see the beginning of a turnaround, so we need to keep pushing on the mitigation strategies because there's no doubt that that's having a positive impact,” he said.  “Now's not the time to pull back at all,” he added. “It's a time to intensify.” President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE has been eager to reopen the economy, and Fauci said planning for that is underway at the White House, where late Tuesday night there was a meeting on the subject in the Roosevelt Room.  “If in fact we are successful it makes sense to at least plan what a reentry into normality would look like,” Fauci said. “That doesn't mean we're going to do it right now, but it means we need to be prepared to ease into that. And there's a lot of activity going on.”A majority of U.S. adults say the news media "have done an excellent or good job" covering the coronavirus pandemic, according to a new survey by the Pew Research Center. Fifty-four percent of Americans approved of the coverage, with 46 percent saying it was "poor" or "only fair." The survey — conducted in March among more than 11,000 U.S. adults — comes as the outbreak has blanketed the news cycle at the national and local level, with most Americans staying home to help slow the spread of the virus. Overall, 92 percent of those surveyed said they are following the news about the virus "very closely or fairly closely." Network TV and print publications fared the best, with 68 percent of respondents approving of the coverage, followed closely by 66 percent say print publications have covered the outbreak well. The survey has a margin of error of 1.5 percentage points. Social media and radio rank lowest on the list, with 47 percent saying radio has performed well in covering the pandemic and just 41 percent rating social media positively. A Pew survey in late March showed that the perception of media performance has largely broken down along party lines, with 68 percent of Democrats and Democratic-leaning independents approving of the media's performance, compared to just 37 percent of Republicans and Republican-leaning independents who said the same. According to the RealClearPolitics index of polls, 47.1 percent of Americans approve of President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE's handling of the pandemic.The Health and Human Services Department (HHS) on Wednesday announced a $500 million contract with General Motors under the Defense Production Act (DPA) to deliver 30,000 ventilators to the Strategic National Stockpile by August.  President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE said last month that he'd use the powerful Korean War-era law to compel GM to help the federal government address a surge in hospitalizations stemming from the outbreak of the novel coronavirus in the U.S.  The new contract between HHS and the automaker includes a production schedule in which more than 6,000 ventilators will be transported to the national stockpile by June 1, HHS said. A total of 30,000 ventilators will be manufactured and shipped to the stockpile by the end of August.  It is unclear how many ventilators will be shipped to the stockpile each month until the end of August.  "By rating contracts under the DPA, HHS is helping manufacturers like GM get the supplies they need to produce ventilators as quickly as possible, while also ensuring that these ventilators are routed through the Strategic National Stockpile to where they’re needed most," HHS Secretary Alex Azar said in a statement. "We’re grateful to the GM team for working with the federal government to expand our nation’s supply of ventilators as the pandemic evolves.” The announcement marks the first federal contract for ventilator production under the Defense Production Act. Trump said earlier this month that he would expand the use of the law to help several manufacturers secure supplies for ventilators. The U.S. has reported nearly 400,000 confirmed COVID-19 cases and roughly 12,000 deaths caused by it, according to a Johns Hopkins University database. The rapid outbreak has overwhelmed health care systems in states such as New York, leading to growing warnings from governors and other officials about a lack of testing and necessary medical equipment.  New York Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) has said his state would need 37,000 ventilators once the outbreak reaches its "apex."  Trump claimed last month that GM was "wasting time" and that the Defense Production Act would "help ensure the quick production of ventilators that will save American lives." He issued a memorandum April 2 allowing Azar to use authority under the law to help six companies, including General Electric and Medtronic, secure supplies for ventilator production.  Federal government officials warned House lawmakers last week that demand for ventilators is exceeding the national stockpile's capacity. The House Oversight and Reform Committee said officials from the Federal Emergency Management Agency told them that only 9,500 ventilators were in the national stockpile.  California, Washington and Oregon have sent hundreds of ventilators back to the national stockpile to help states experiencing more severe impacts of the outbreak.   View Breaking News on Coronavirus Sponsored Content Sponsored by AHIP      THE INTERVIEW Luc Debruyne Says Permanent Global Virus Research & Action Platform Needed    “It's very clear that this is an unprecedented challenge.  This kind of pandemic comes once in 100 years time, I would say. And what does that mean? That you absolutely need all the best people. The best experts, the best scientists, but also the political will and the financial support.  Two. We need to take this challenge on.”   Watch the full interview here.  THE HILL’S CORONAVIRUS SPECIAL REPORT Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Tuesday, April 7, and World Health Day. There is a struggle between science and President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE’s desire to quickly get through the dark tunnel of these times and into good news. The president’s belief in his own instincts over data and scientific evidence is consistent with his approach to public policy choices and regulation. But what is happening is that scientists are now emerging as politically enabled actors whether they want that power or not. Science is in the ring now, and like any contender competing for victory, it can win — or lose. The good news: There are signs that what the administration and governors are doing is working.   Your Coronavirus Report team today includes Steve Clemons, Editor-at-Large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @A_Wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our OVERNIGHT HEALTHCARE newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.  In coming weeks, we will share with you our new 3D journalism platform, The Hill Virtually Live, to take stock of what is happening around the nation – for instance, empathy and building resilience across generations, acts of heroism, the way learning and credentialing are being reinvented, and how health delivery is going even more digital. Follow @TheHillEvents to stay up to date on our upcoming virtual programs.  CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE THE WORLD STANDS AT 1,381,014 REPORTED COVID-19 CASES. AMERICA HAS THE MOST CONFIRMED CASES IN THE WORLD with 378,298 cases. 11,830 people in America are confirmed dead. New York City has registered 3,485 deaths, but the growth in the infection rate has continued to decline.   A sampling of states cases: New York is at 138,836 cases. New Jersey at 41,090. Michigan at 17,221. California at 16,373. Louisiana 14,867. Florida 14,504. Indiana 5,507. Virginia 3,215. Utah 1,687. District of Columbia 1,211 Kansas 864. North Dakota 225. 292,973 people have fully recovered.   NEWS OF THE DAY        WISCONSIN PRIMARY ELECTION A S--- SHOW.  Wisconsin Lt. Gov. Mandela Barnes (D) called Tuesday’s primary election a “shit show” as reports of long lines were forming at polling locations after Democrats in the state fought to postpone the election amid the coronavirus pandemic. “Good morning and welcome to the Shit Show!,” Barnes tweeted Tuesday. “Today’s episode has been produced by the Supreme Court and directed by the incomparable Speaker and Senate Majority leader duo.” “Buckle up, this one’s sure to disappoint!,” he added. (The Hill)   KEY CORONAVIRUS TASK FORCE MUST WORK REMOTELY. A critical White House unit that is getting, shipping and distributing goods to fight the spread of the coronavirus has been ordered to vacate its war room and begin working remotely after a "partner" of the group tested positive for COVID-19. (NBC News)  WASHINGTON WATCH       WASHINGTON HAS EYES ON U.K. PM BORIS JOHNSON British Prime Minister Boris Johnson is “in good spirits” and was stable overnight after being moved to intensive care Monday with the coronavirus, the BBC reported. In a Tuesday statement, a Downing Street spokesperson said “the prime minister has been stable overnight and remains in good spirits. He is receiving standard oxygen treatment and is breathing without any other assistance.” (The Hill)   KAYLEIGH McENANY NAMED NEW WH PRESS SECRETARY. This development comes on the heels of an earlier announcement by the White House that Stephanie GrishamStephanie GrishamPence names new press secretary McEnany: Prayer 'made a lot of difference' in 2016 election McEnany stamps her brand on White House press operation MORE would depart the role and return to the first lady’s office in the East Wing. McEnany joins the White House after holding similar posts for the Trump campaign and Republican National Committee. (The Hill)   NAVARRO SAW IT COMING. President Trump’s trade adviser Peter Navarro reportedly warned his White House colleagues about the threat the novel coronavirus posed to the U.S. public in a memo in late January, when Trump was still publicly downplaying the risk. In memos written in January and February and reported by The New York Times and Axios, Navarro estimated up to 2 million Americans could die and appealed for $3 billion to support prevention, treatment, inoculation and diagnostics. He also called for an immediate travel ban on China. (The Hill)   CONGRESS FACES PRESSURE TO MOVE NEXT PHASE OF CORONAVIRUS RESCUE. Lawmakers are facing mounting pressure to move to the next phase of coronavirus legislation, less than two weeks after passing a historic $2.2 trillion economic relief bill. (The Hill)    MEA CULPA! Navy chief apologizes to aircraft carrier crew, former captain after leaked speech. Acting Navy Secretary Thomas Modly apologized to crew members of the USS Theodore Roosevelt and its former commander Monday evening over remarks he made earlier in the day calling Capt. Brett Crozier "naive" or "stupid." (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Rep. Seth MoultonSeth MoultonEx-CBO director calls for more than  trillion in coronavirus stimulus spending Overnight Defense: Trump's move to use military in US sparks backlash | Defense officials take heat | Air Force head calls Floyd's death 'a national tragedy' Democrats blast Trump's use of military against protests MORE (D-Mass.)@sethmoulton The hardest decisions I ever made in the Marines were when I protested the commands of those above me. This is a time for courageous leadership. The troops are watching.   Sen. Marco RubioMarco Antonio RubioIf we seek resilience, we need liberty, not nationalism GOP senator blocks bill giving flexibility to small-business loans but says deal near GOP senators dodge on treatment of White House protesters MORE (R-Fla.) @marcorubio With only 6 days to launch a massive emergency program for over 90% of companies,glitches will happen. But #PPP will get better as: 1. SBA portal adds capacity;& 2. New lenders enter the program Also, Congress already discussing how to add more funding. Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.) @SenBlumenthal I am calling on FTC to investigate@zoom_us. Zoom’s pattern of security failures & privacy infringements should have drawn the FTC’s attention & scrutiny long ago. Advertising privacy features that do not exist is clearly a deceptive act.  AROUND THE NATION CUOMO NEWS. At his daily coronavirus press briefing, New York Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) said that eventually his state (and the country) need to restart the economy — but not right away. Cuomo warned, “We’re not there yet ... this is not a light switch that we can just flick one day and everything goes back to normal.” (MSNBC) BLACK, LATINO COMMUNITIES SUFFERING DISPROPORTIONATELY. Emerging statistics show black and Latino communities are being disproportionately affected by the coronavirus pandemic, leading to pressure from lawmakers and others that states release the racial breakdown of their cases and deaths. (The Hill) AMERICANS WORRIED ABOUT JOBS, WAGES. Voters in pivotal 2020 election states are worrying about losing their jobs or wages, a poll released Tuesday found. More than a third of respondents in the six key states who have already lost income or employment said they could afford food, housing and other essential costs for less than a month, according to States of Play, a joint CNBC-Change Research survey of swing states. (CNBC) BASEBALL IS ARIZONA’S SPORT? Putting all 30 teams in the Phoenix area this season and playing in empty ballparks was among the ideas discussed Monday by Major League Baseball and the players’ association. (AP)  WORLD VIEW BRITISH FOREIGN MINISTER DEPUTIZED, LEADING COUNTRY AS JOHNSON REMAINS IN ICU. U.K. Foreign Minister Dominic Raab is deputizing for Prime Minister Boris Johnson as he remains in intensive care with persistent COVID-19 symptoms. Raab chaired the government’s Tuesday coronavirus meeting and says there is an “incredibly strong team spirit behind the PM.” (The Hill) SPAIN DEATHS SURGE AGAIN, P.M. TO ANNOUNCE ECONOMIC AID. Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez is expected to seek cabinet approval on a new economic aid package Tuesday. This comes after the country saw a sharp rise in cases of the coronavirus and deaths Tuesday, after the numbers had slowed for days. (The Hill)     JAPAN DECLARES STATE OF EMERGENCY. Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe declared a state of emergency for Tokyo and six other prefectures Tuesday, as the nation works to stem the spread of COVID-19. (The Hill) OPEN FOR BUSINESS, BUT SLOWLY. In Germany, where more than 100,000 people have tested positive for coronavirus and more than 1,800 have died, a group of economists, lawyers and medical experts are recommending a gradual revival of Europe's biggest economy that would allow specific industries and workers to resume their activities while steps are taken to prevent a resurgence of the coronavirus. (CNN)  SCIENCE PROMISING DRUG ON THE HORIZON. Scientists are reporting promising results for a new drug to treat COVID-19. The drug is known as EIDD-2801. It works by interfering with the coronavirus's ability to make copies of itself once it infects a cell. Click here to read more about the promising research. (NPR)   HUMAN TESTING BEGINS ON SECOND VACCINE CANDIDATE. Human testing is beginning on a second coronavirus vaccine candidate after approval from the Food and Drug Administration, Inovio Pharmaceuticals announced Monday. Inovio said phase one of the clinical testing is set to begin this week after animal testing showed promising results. (The Hill)   A WHODUNNIT EVERYONE WOULD LIKE SOLVED. CNN spoke to more than a half-dozen virus experts about the origins of the outbreak and all of them say anyone who claims to know the source of COVID-19 is guessing. The scientists say there is zero evidence the Chinese or American governments purposefully introduced the novel coronavirus to the public. To date, one thing seems likely: It came from bats. (CNN)  BUSINESS DOW JUMPS 900 POINTS AS CORONAVIRUS DEATHS SLOW. Stock markets on Tuesday continued to rise for a second day in a row after the number of new daily coronavirus cases dropped from peak levels late last week. While the coronavirus death toll in the U.S. passed 10,000 on Monday, markets appeared to focus more on news that the daily number of confirmed cases has begun to drop. (The Hill)   GROCERY WORKER DEATHS SPARK NEW WORRY. Major supermarket chains are beginning to report their first coronavirus-related employee deaths, leading to store closures and increasing anxiety among grocery workers as the pandemic intensifies across the country. Industry experts say the rise of worker infections and deaths will likely have a ripple effect on grocers’ ability to retain and add new workers at a time when they’re looking to rapidly hire thousands of temporary employees. (Washington Post)   STAY AT HOME DISCOUNT. At least two auto insurance companies say they will refund Americans some of their monthly premiums as millions stay at home due to the coronavirus outbreak. The New York Times first reported that insurers Allstate and American Family Insurance say they plan to refund part of customers' monthly fees, a response to savings the industry is reaping as a result of fewer cars being on the road. (The Hill)  IDEAS, CAUSES, PASSION WHILE THE WORLD BATTLES CORONAVIRUS, ADVERSARIES PLAN NEXT ATTACK. Every nation is engaged in fighting the coronavirus. The pandemic has caused tens of thousands of deaths, and many nations are using drastic measures to fight its spread. While we seek to make common cause with our allies in this effort, it is worth remembering that our adversaries often use crises to further their agendas. (Keith B. Alexander and Jamil N. Jaffer for The Hill)   WE NEED TO BE ONE AMERICA. Our political system remains almost as divided as ever. Two-thirds of the public believe that our politicians are up to partisan games as usual, instead of doing what is best for the country. (Mark PennMark PennThe Hill's Campaign Report: Biden leads Trump by 6 points in new poll Biden leads Trump by 6 points as voters sour on pandemic response: poll Poll: Two-thirds of voters say the economy is on the wrong track MORE for The Hill)  YOUR LIFE, YOUR STORIES SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our OVERNIGHT HEALTHCARE newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House coronavirus task force briefings.   View All -- Coronavirus Report Archive The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Luc Debruyne, the former president for global vaccines of GSK and is a strategic adviser to the CEO of the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, a global collaborative platform of research scientists and international resources to respond to epidemics and, as in the case of the novel coronavirus, global pandemics. He is widely respected as one of the world’s leading authorities on building capacity in the virus response space. Excerpts from the interview are below:  LUC DEBRUYNE: It's very clear that this is an unprecedented challenge. It comes once in 100 years time, I would say. And what does that mean? That you absolutely need all the best people. The best expertise, the best scientists, but also the political will and the financial support ...  to take this challenge on. We are very glad, actually that we are working actually across the board with multinational companies like GSK, Johnson & Johnson, the big vaccines firms like Sanofi, Merck, Pfizer, Takeda. They have all stepped up to the challenge to make sure that we work together to get to the prevention, because ultimately, let's call a vaccine. If we have a vaccine, then actually that is the real exit strategy from this big crisis. LUC DEBRUYNE on hydroxychloroquine: We need to listen to the scientists and look at evidence-based trials that can show that this therapy is working before we bring this to a global scale. The relfexes that you see of nations stockpiling are exactly what we do not want because there should be a global coordination effort to make sure that there is an allocation where it's most needed. And that will be true as well for the vaccines, because, let's be clear, those vaccines will not be available on day one in billions of doses. So we will have a staged approach of distributing those, allocating those, and that can only be done in a global, coordinated effort. Otherwise, nationalism is not helpful to beat something like this that doesn't stop at the border.VIEW BREAKING NEWS ON CORONAVIRUS THE INTERVIEW 
  
 DYBUL FEARS FOCUSING ON AMERICAN HEALTH NEEDS ALONE WILL LEAD TO DEADLY SECOND COVID-19 WAVE  Former Ambassador Mark Dybul was U.S. global AIDS coordinator during the George W. Bush administration and led the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), the largest international health initiative in history for a single disease; served as executive director of The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria from January 2013 to May 2017; and is now a professor at Georgetown University in the Department of Medicine at the Medical Center and the co-director of the Center for Global Health Practice and Impact.   “America can’t turn its back on lesser developed nations. The virus is going there and will rage there during their winter, while the U.S. goes into its summer. Unless we slow the spread there – it will come back. Just like the Spanish flu of 1918-1919.” 
  
 Sponsored Content
  
   Sponsored by AHIP 
  
    
  
 THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS SPECIAL REPORT 
  
 Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. It’s Monday, April 6. The president’s Daily Coronavirus update press conferences are increasingly hold-our-breath sessions for new revelations on which areas of the nation are in for living hell in the near term and which have yet to be hit. As much as they are settings to discuss the science of pandemic spread and how to combat coronavirus, they are also launch pads for scientifically untested treatments such as hydroxychloroquine. The CDC is suggesting all Americans begin to wear some kind of mask when out and about among others, but the President has said he won’t wear one while sitting behind the Resolute Desk in the Oval Office. He said they are optional.  Some Americans will wear them and others won’t. The good news is that there is discussion of a potential ‘peak’ of disease spread in NYC and other parts of the country. The bad news is that Florida, which had wide open beaches during spring break, may not achieve peak until late May. Every person infected is a potential Patient Zero, and that is one of the key challenges combating this disease.   Your Special Report team today includes Steve Clemons, Editor-at-Large of The Hill and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our OVERNIGHT HEALTHCARE newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House Coronavirus Task Force briefings.    In coming weeks, we will share with you our new 3D journalism platform, The Hill Virtually Live, to take stock of what is happening around the nation – for instance, empathy and building resilience across generations, acts of heroism, the way learning and credentialing are being reinvented and how health delivery is going even more digital. Follow @TheHillEvents to stay up to date on our upcoming virtual programs. 
  
 DEFINING WEEK IN COVID-19 FIGHT
  
 BREAKING NEWS. Prime Minister Boris Johnson moved to intensive care after being admitted to hospital with coronavirus. (ITV)   SURGEON GENERAL SAYS THIS WEEK WILL BE OUR PEARL HARBOR, 9/11 MOMENT. U.S. Surgeon General Jerome Adams said on the Sunday show circuit that this week is going to be the “hardest and the saddest” of “most American’s lives.” Adams went on to liken the upcoming week to Pearl Harbor and 9/11, suggesting that the pandemic’s death toll could be worse than the most infamous American tragedies of the past century. President TrumpDonald John TrumpFederal plan to contain Washington protests employs 7,600 personnel: report GOP Rep calls on primary opponent to condemn campaign surrogate's racist video Tennessee court rules all registered voters can obtain mail-in ballots due to COVID-19 MORE also offered a grim forecast this weekend warning that “there will be a lot of death” around the country. (The Hill) 
  BIG NEWS IN WISCONSIN. Wisconsin’s governor has suspended in-person voting in Tuesday’s primary election. Amid the threat of the coronavirus, Wisconsin Gov. Tony Evers (D) released an executive order that postpones in-person voting and the receipt deadline for mail-in ballots to June 9. (Washington Post) 
  
 CORONAVIRUS CASES AT A GLANCE
  
 THERE ARE 1,324,907 REPORTED COVID-19 CASES ACROSS THE GLOBE. AMERICAN CASES CONTINUE TO SOAR AND HAVE REACHED 347,003 REPORTED CASES WITH MORE THAN 10,000 DEATHS FROM THE VIRUS. (The Hill)   NEW YORK HAS SEEN 4,159 FATALITIES, NEARLY 40 PERCENT OF ALL U.S. DEATHS. The nation’s leading experts have collectively warned that this week will be the most difficult to date as both confirmed cases and deaths are both expected to rise dramatically.    A sampling. New York is at 130,689 cases and New Jersey, home to a rapid rise over the weekend, is second with 37,505 cases. Michigan has 15,718 cases followed closely by California with 15,201 and Louisiana with 13,010 cases. Texas is at 7,316. Tennessee at 3,633. The District of Columbia at 1,097. Wyoming at 210.  
  The ever-thin silver lining? Some 273,546 people have successfully recovered from COVID-19 across the globe, with 18,999 in America reporting a full recovery from the virus. (John Hopkins) 
  
 QUOTE OF THE DAY – THIS IS OUR CHERNOBYL MOMENT
  
 @GeorgeTakei  Sorry. This isn’t our “Pearl Harbor” moment. That was a surprise, dastardly attack by an enemy nation. This is our “Chernobyl” moment: a preventable catastrophe that was denied, downplayed and mismanaged until tens of thousands were dead. 
  
 WASHINGTON WATCH 
  
 WHO BOWS TO CHINA, HARMING GLOBAL RESPONSE TO PANDEMIC. Last week Sen. Rick Scott (R-Fla.) called for a congressional investigation into the World Health Organization’s “role in helping Communist China cover up information regarding the threat of the Coronavirus.” The trouble at WHO goes beyond its relationship with Beijing, but that’s a good place to start. The Wall Street Journal Editorial Board has also urged Congress to “investigate how WHO performed against the coronavirus and whether its judgements were corrupted by China’s political influence.” (Wall Street Journal)   FAUCI SAYS U.S. IS ‘STRUGGLING’ IN BATTLE WITH CORONAVIRUS. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciDemocratic lawmakers introduce legislation to ensure US can mass-produce COVID-19 vaccine The Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges Overnight Health Care: Hydroxychloroquine ineffective in preventing COVID-19, study finds | WHO to resume hydroxychloroquine clinical research | WHO says no evidence coronavirus is mutating MORE who has emerged as one of the most trusted voices in the country as the COVID-19 pandemic drags on, said yesterday on CBS’s “Face the Nation” that it is a “false statement” to say Washington has the pandemic under control. As the country braces for a painful week, Fauci added that the U.S. is “struggling to get [the virus] under control.” (The Hill)   SITUATION ROOM SPAT! Fauci, Navarro engaged in heated argument over unproven COVID-19 treatment. Anthony Fauci reportedly clashed with White House trade official Peter Navarro over the anti-malaria drug hydroxychloroquine and its use as a possible treatment for COVID-19. During a meeting Saturday first reported by Axios, Navarro sparred with Fauci over the difference between anecdotal information and scientific assessments. Navarro argued Sunday that as a “social scientist,” he is qualified to engage and disagree with Fauci. (The Hill)   BIDEN HINTS AT VIRTUAL DEMOCRATIC CONVENTION. Former Vice President Joe BidenJoe BidenOVERNIGHT DEFENSE: Murkowski, Mattis criticism ratchets up pressure on GOP over Trump| Esper orders hundreds of active-duty troops outside DC sent home day after reversal | Iran releases US Navy veteran Michael White Davis: 72 hours cementing the real choice for November OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump signs order removing environmental reviews for major projects | New Trump air rule will limit future pollution regulations, critics say | DNC climate group calls for larger federal investment on climate than Biden plan MORE said Sunday that the Democratic National Convention may need to be held virtually. With the convention already being pushed to August, Biden told ABC’s “This Week” that his party’s convention is “necessary,” but added it may not be possible to bring thousands of people to one location safely amid the pandemic. President Trump and the Republican National Committee are moving forward with their Charlotte, N.C., convention in late August and have not spoken to the possibility of scrapping an in-person meeting and transitioning to a virtual forum. (The Hill)    SCHUMER DOUBLES DOWN ON PUSH FOR CORONAVIRUS CZAR. Senate Minority Leader Charles SchumerCharles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerGOP lawmaker calls on Senate to confirm Michael Pack as head of US media agency McConnell blocks resolution condemning Trump over treatment of protesters House Democrat demands answers from Secret Service about role breaking up White House protests MORE (D-N.Y.) has offered the White House candidates for a potential czar to oversee the production and disbursement of medical equipment. Schumer spoke with the president, vice president and new White House chief of staff Mark MeadowsMark Randall MeadowsHouse Judiciary to hear whistleblowers on 'politicization' of Justice Dept under Trump How Trump cleared the park around the White House for church photo op Trump visits historic DC church after protesters cleared with tear gas MORE on Sunday night about his plea for a “coronavirus czar,” sources familiar with the matter confirmed to The HIll. Potential candidates for the position include Air Force Gen. Paul Selva, Obama’s Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs Adm. Sandy Winnefeld and Vice Adm. Mark Harnitchek, who ran the Defense Logistics Agency. (The Hill)  
  PELOSI, McCONNELL CLASH OVER NEXT RELIEF BILL. Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy PelosiPelosi: 'Scary' to see uniformed troops on steps of Lincoln Memorial Pelosi: Democrats to unveil sweeping criminal justice proposal Monday Pelosi demands Trump clarify deployment of unidentified law enforcement in DC MORE (D-Calif.) and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrump vows to campaign against Murkowski after senator's criticism Senate advances conservation fund bill, House introduces companion Paul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  MORE are publicly at odds over a potential fourth coronavirus stimulus package. The two leaders are sparring through the media on next steps to address the devastating health and economic impacts of the pandemic. The mixed messaging, which comes as lawmakers are out of town until at least April 20, underscores the looming challenge of keeping the congressional response to the coronavirus bipartisan. (The Hill) 
   
  UNDOCUMENTED AND UNPROTECTED. Undocumented workers are among those hit first — and worst — by the coronavirus shutdown. Many people in the country illegally are working in construction, restaurants and other service sectors, and they have already lost their jobs. Others, in industries such as agriculture and health care that have been declared essential, work in jobs that typically require close quarters or interacting with the public, putting them at higher risk of getting sick. Unlike many American workers, undocumented immigrants can’t count on the social safety net if they lose their jobs or get sick. (Washington Post) 
  
 LATEST FROM LAWMAKERS
  
 Sen. Brian SchatzBrian Emanuel SchatzTrump calls New York Times 'fake newspaper' after headline change Calls for police reform sparks divisions in Congress Overnight Defense: Esper, Milley part of 'command center' for response to protests over George Floyd killing | Several West Point cadets test positive for coronavirus ahead of Trump commencement speech | UN report says Taliban, al Qaeda not breaking ties MORE (D-Hawaii) @brianschatz I actually think the press is going to have to get a bit more disruptive. If Trump is going to lie and shout journalists down in order to dangerously misinform the public during a pandemic, they should consider interrupting and other impolite tactics to get to the truth.   Sen. Kamala HarrisKamala Devi HarrisPaul clashes with Booker, Harris over anti-lynching bill  Rand Paul holding up quick passage of anti-lynching bill Minority caucuses call for quick action on police reform MORE (D-Calif.) @SenKamalaHarris Native American communities in rural areas are especially vulnerable to the spread of coronavirus, and yet their needs are still not being prioritized. We need significant investments in tribal and native communities now more than ever.   Rep. Lee ZeldinLee ZeldinFlynn urged Russian diplomat to have 'reciprocal' response to Obama sanctions, new transcripts show The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Surgeon General stresses need to invest much more in public health infrastructure, during and after COVID-19; Fauci hopeful vaccine could be deployed in December  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of another relief package; Warner says some businesses 'may not come back' at The Hill's Advancing America's Economy summit  MORE (R-N.Y.) @RepLeeZeldin Signed, sealed, delivered-Earlier today, 150,000 surgical masks were delivered to Suffolk County for our great hospital workers & other front line warriors. Tomorrow, 200,000 n95 masks will arrive to Suffolk after the announcement tonight by @realDonaldTrump! One team, one fight!   House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthyKevin Owen McCarthyThe Hill's Morning Report - Floyd eulogies begin; Trump-Esper conflict emerges The Hill's Morning Report - Protesters' defiance met with calls to listen Top GOP lawmakers invite Blue Dogs to meet with China Task Force MORE (R-Calif.) @GOPLeader China is opening up their wet markets again. Have enough people not already died? Has there not already been enough financial destruction around the world? The Chinese Communist Party’s coverup has cost far too many lives.   Rep. Ted BuddTheodore (Ted) Paul BuddHouse Republican introduces bill to hold up members' pay if they vote by proxy House GOP lawmakers urge Senate to confirm Vought The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Dybul interview; Boris Johnson update MORE (R-N.C.) @RepTedBudd While we focus on keeping our country physically healthy, we have to keep an eye on our fiscal health as well. 
  
 AROUND THE NATION 
  
 GLIMMER OF HOPE IN NEW YORK. New York City is operating in a wartime capacity as the city’s health care system continues to be overrun by COVID-19 patients. A slight dip in new infections over the weekend may be a glimmer of hope that the virus is slowing its spread across New York. With 595 new coronavirus deaths reported Sunday, Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo says he 'never apologized' to NYPD for saying they 'did not do their job' CDC director warns Floyd protests could be 'seeding event' for coronavirus Former Obama aide goes off on looters: 'There are human beings that live in this goddamn neighborhood' MORE (D) said, despite slivers of “hopeful” news, “the coronavirus is truly vicious” and “it’s an effective killer.” Cuomo urged New Yorkers to “stay isolated and protected.” (NY Times)   TIGER KING? NOT SO MUCH. A tiger at the Bronx Zoo in New York City has tested positive for the coronavirus, while several other animals are being monitored for similar symptoms. The Wildlife Conservation Society, which operates the zoo, said the animals were likely infected by carriers of the disease who did not show symptoms. Nadia, a 4-year-old female Malayan tiger at the Bronx Zoo becomes the first reported case of the virus in a tiger in the world. All cats being monitored are expected to make a full recovery and the zoo remains closed to the public. (The Hill)   ARKANSAS GOVERNOR DEFENDS LACK OF STAY-AT-HOME OF ORDER. Arkansas Gov. Asa Hutchinson (R) defended his decision to hold off on a statewide stay-at-home order on NBC’s “Meet the Press” on Sunday. Hutchinson insisted that social distancing, business closures and other measures have proven successful in stemming the spread of the virus across his state, one of nine yet to be locked down. With the apex of the virus quickly approaching, Hutchinson conceded “we’ll do more as we need to.” (Washington Post)   GEORGIA BEACHES REOPEN AFTER GOVERNOR ISSUES EXECUTIVE ORDER. Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp (R) issued an executive order over the weekend that allows popular beaches in the state to reopen, overriding local shelter-in-place mandates from a number of cities. This questionable move by Kemp comes after the governor faced widespread criticism last week for saying he “just found out” that the virus could be spread from people who are not showing any symptoms. Georgia beaches will remain open, but the public will not be allowed to place chairs, tents or umbrellas on beaches until after April 13, when the statewide shelter-in-place order is set to be lifted. (The Hill)   MIAMI MAYOR BECOMES STATE’S FIRST COVID-19 PLASMA DONOR. Miami Mayor Francis Suarez has become the first Floridian to donate COVID-19 convalescent plasma after making a full recovery from the virus. COVID-19 convalescent plasma is an experimental treatment approved by the Food and Drug Administration and could hold the promise to effectively treat patients battling the virus. Saurez said he had “a moral responsibility” to donate, adding, “We have to fight until the end, until the last person is cured.” (WSVN Miami)    NEBRASKA GOVERNOR UNDER FIRE TO TAKE ACTION. More than 40 Nebraska doctors are calling on Nebraska Gov. Pete Ricketts (R), to implement stricter social distancing requirements that "force people to stay at home” amid the pandemic. The physicians warn that the virus has already begun to strain the capacity of the state’s health system and cautioned that a lack of testing could lead to a more powerful outbreak throughout the state. Ricketts is one of only a handful of governors who has refrained from issuing a statewide stay-at-home order. (The Hill)   
  
 WORLD VIEW
  
 EXPERTS URGE CLOSURE OF CHINESE WET MARKETS. In Wuhan, China, massive “wet markets” that sell live and dead animals for human consumption — and where the virus is thought to have originated — have begun to reopen. Anthony Fauci said late last week that such markets should be shut down right away. Fauci added he “would like to see the rest of the world really lean with a lot of pressure” on China and other countries where wet markets are commonplace. (The Hill)   UNITED NATIONS MISSING IN ACTION DURING GLOBAL PANDEMIC FIGHT. U.N. Secretary-General António Guterres has called the coronavirus pandemic the most challenging crisis the organization has faced since its founding after World War II. As the virus continues its spread across the globe, the U.N. Security Council has remained largely quiet. The council’s inaction seems to be a reflection of a larger diplomatic standoff between the U.S. and China over the origin of the pandemic. (NY Times)   HOSPITALS ON WHEELS. India has closed its railways for the first time in 167 years. Now trains are being turned into hospitals. When Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi imposed a nationwide lockdown on March 25, Indian Railways took the unprecedented move of suspending passenger trains across the country until April 14. It was the first time in 167 years that Asia's oldest rail network had been suspended. Now the railway network has decided to convert as many as 20,000 old train carriages into isolation wards for patients as the virus spreads. (CNN) 
  SPAIN CASES SURGE, COUNTRY NOW HOME TO SECOND MOST PATIENTS IN WORLD. Spain is among a growing list of countries that have been ravaged by the spread of coronavirus. There are 135,032 reported cases of the virus in Spain with more than 13,000 deaths. The 637 deaths in the past 24 hours is the country’s lowest death roll in two weeks, a sign that new infections appear to be slowing. Health Minister Santiago Illa argued today, “These figures confirm the downward trend and stabilization” of the virus. (Washington Post) 
  JAPAN DECLARES STATE OF EMERGENCY. Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe said this morning that he will declare a state of emergency across parts of the country. People will be asked to stay indoors, but no legal penalties will be imposed for noncompliance. Abe made clear that the stay-at-home order is voluntary and Japan will “not lock cities down as has been done overseas.” (Washington Post)   QUEEN ELIZABETH ADDRESSES U.K. AMID COVID-19 CRISIS. In a rare televised speech from Windsor Castle, Queen Elizabeth II addressed citizens of the U.K. on the coronavirus crisis that has her nation in lockdown. This marks just the fifth time in her 68 year reign that the Queen has addressed the nation. The Queen’s son, Prince Charles of Wales, is recovering from the virus and just after the speech, Prime Minister Boris Johnson was sent to the hospital after persistent COVID-19 symptoms. (The Hill)   SOUTH AFRICA’S PAST EXPERIENCE WITH INFECTIOUS DISEASES COULD PROVE VITAL. South Africa may have an advantage in battling the virus, honed during years battling HIV and tuberculosis. South African health officials are stressing lessons they have learned from similar infectious disease outbreaks: extensive testing, quickly quarantining people who test positive and tracking who those people came into contact with. The country currently has the capacity to conduct 5,000 tests per day as the virus spreads throughout more densely populated areas and threatens to overwhelm health systems. (Associated Press) 
  
  FOR THE KIDS. New Zealand labels Easter Bunny and Tooth Fairy 'essential workers.' New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern confirmed for young residents that both the Easter Bunny and Tooth Fairy are deemed "essential workers" amid the coronavirus pandemic. However, she did warn that perhaps the Easter Bunny and Tooth Fairy may be “quite busy at home with their family.” (The Hill) 
  
 BUSINESS
  
 DOW GAINS 1,000 AS TRADERS SEEK SIGNS OF OPTIMISM. Stocks rose Monday morning as traders clung to small signs of optimism as the coronavirus tightens its grip on the U.S. economy. The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained more than 1,000 points as the market opened, rising nearly 5 percent after a week of heavy losses. The S&P 500 rose 4.6 percent, and the Nasdaq composite rose 4.5 percent. Monday’s rally comes as Wall Street seeks a silver lining amid the rising U.S. death roll and a stark uptick in the nation’s unemployment claims. (The Hill)   XEROX PLANS TO MASS PRODUCE DISPOSABLE VENTILATORS. Xerox, best known for making copies, is set to announce Monday that it will be “rapidly scaling up” production of inexpensive, disposable ventilators that could serve as a critical stopgap for hospital-grade ventilators that are in short supply across the country. Xerox confirmed to NBC News that it has a deal with Vortran Medical, a small medical device manufacturer in California, to scale up production of the Go2Vent, a low-cost resuscitation device commonly used by first responders in emergencies and disasters. (NBC News)
  
  
  DIMON PREDICTS A ‘MAJOR RECESSION’ IS ON ITS WAY. JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon captured the mood around the country in his annual shareholder letter saying he expects a "bad recession.” In the most adverse scenario, he expects the gross domestic product could plunge at a 35 percent annual rate in the second quarter and that a downturn would last through the rest of the year. The unemployment rate would spike as high as 14 percent in the worst case scenario. The silver lining: Dimon thinks "this scenario is quite severe and, we hope, unlikely." An additional silver lining: JPMorgan Chase — the largest U.S. bank by assets — still plans to lend an additional $150 billion to its customers. (CNN) 
  
 BUBBLE BURSTING? MORTGAGE INDUSTRY RISKS COLLAPSING. Fears of a repeat of the 2008 financial crisis are ringing throughout the mortgage industry. The mortgage market is on the brink of another catastrophic collapse as thousands of borrowers suddenly pour into the government bailout without any proof of hardship. Mortgage industry leaders sent a plea for desperately needed cash to federal mortgage regulators as requests from borrowers for the Federal Mortgage Forbearance Program are flooding in at an alarming rate. (CNBC)   YELLEN SAYS FEDERAL RESERVE DOESN’T NEED TO BUY EQUITIES NOW. Janet YellenJanet Louise YellenHow lawmaker ties helped shape Fed chairman's COVID-19 response Fed chair issues dire warnings on economy Black Caucus moves to front and center in COVID fight MORE, former chair of the Federal Reserve, said she does not think the central bank is in a position where it needs to buy equities, but thinks Congress should consider allowing such a move. Normally, the Fed is only allowed to own government debt and agency debt with government backing. Yellen urged Congress to reconsider the powers of the Fed and provide more leeway for the central bank to take action to keep the U.S. economy afloat during the pandemic. (CNBC)   THANK YOU FOR YOUR SERVICE. BP, Amoco offer 50 cents off per gallon of gas for first responders, medical workers. BP and Amoco have announced they will be offering first responders, doctors, nurses and other hospital staff a discount of 50 cents off per gallon at their locations throughout April in the midst of the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic. The oil giant also said that am/pm stores, a convenience store brand owned by BP, will be offering emergency service workers and hospital staff that provide their “official ID in store” free coffee, fountain drinks or hot dogs, starting Monday. (The Hill)   
  
 SCIENCE
  
   UPMC ANNOUNCES POTENTIAL VACCINE. Scientists at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center announced late last week that they believe they’ve found a potential vaccine for the virus. When tested on mice, the vaccine produced enough antibodies to successfully counteract the virus. A positive development — but the debate surrounding fast tracking FDA approval for any COVID-19 vaccine is about to flare up. (WTAE Pittsburgh)   EXPERTS SAY THEY HAVE FOUND CORONAVIRUS ACHILLES’ HEEL.  A newly published study suggests researchers may have found what is being described as the “Achilles’ heel” of the coronavirus. The research highlights new findings that a specific portion of the virus could be targeted with vaccines after mapping human anitbody’s interaction with COVID-19. Targeting specific sites of the virus could aid with the structure-based design of vaccines and therapeutics  — and protect against other coronaviruses that may emerge in the future. (Fox News)   CORONAVIRUS EPIDEMIC HAS A NATURAL ORIGIN. Researchers have confirmed that COVID-19 is the product of natural evolution and found no evidence that the virus was made in a laboratory or otherwise engineered. With the U.S. and China currently at odds over the origin of the virus, this new body of research appears to confirm that the virus was originally transmitted to humans via animal consumption in Wuhan. (ScienceDaily)   CUE MUSIC. Scientists have turned the structure of the coronavirus into music. Why, you ask? It seems setting the virus to music can help scientists find locations on the protein where antibodies or drugs might be able to bind, simply by searching for specific musical sequences that correspond to these sites. This, the researchers say, is faster and more intuitive than conventional methods used to study proteins. As for the instruments, they were entirely the researchers’ choice. In this case, a Japanese koto plays the main notes — soothing sounds that might bring some comfort in a time of trouble. Take a listen. (Science) 
  
 GENEROUS SPIRITS
  
 BROOKLYN LANDLORD WAIVES APRIL RENT FOR THOUSANDS OF TENANTS. Michael Salerno, a Brooklyn landlord, told tenants in 18 of his buildings across the city not to worry about April rent payments as the city grapples with a pandemic that has wreaked havoc on the financial well-being of millions of New Yorkers. Salerno told an NBC affiliate that he waived rent out of concern for the neighborhood’s health and told tenants, “Don’t worry about paying me, worry about your neighbor and worry about your family.” (The Hill)  
   
  OUR HEROES. Walmart employees sing ‘Lean on Me' in an uplifting new commercial. Walmart has released an emotional ad featuring the voices of its workers around the U.S. to lift people's spirits. Walmart employees — from Pennsylvania to Alabama — were filmed singing a few lines from Bill Withers's 1972 classic "Lean on Me." The song choice is especially poignant since Withers died last week at the age of 81. (TODAY)   WE’RE CASTING A BANISHING CHARM ON BOREDOM!  J.K. Rowling has launched “Harry Potter at Home,” a digital hub with a cauldron full of treats to keep young children occupied while they are held captive at home during the coronavirus crisis. The site, offered free of charge, proclaims: “We’re casting a Banishing Charm on boredom!” Rowling announced the launch in a tweet Wednesday. “Parents, teachers and carers working to keep children amused and interested while we’re on lockdown might need a bit of magic, so I’m delighted to launch harrypotterathome.com.” (Variety)   RECREATING GREAT ART WORKS FROM HOME. During this challenging time, the J. Paul Getty Museum has found a way to keep people engaged with their art — even though they can’t see it in person. They’ve challenged their social media followers to “recreate a work of art with objects (and people)” from the comfort of their own homes. And the internet did not disappoint. (MyModernMet) 
  
 IDEAS, CAUSES, PASSION
  
 HISTORY’S LESSONS FOR DONALD TRUMP. History’s lesson is that presidents who suffer crises and either handle them well or can change the subject thrive. But those who either handle crises poorly or cannot change the subject never recover. What about Donald Trump? His approval rating during the coronavirus crisis has fallen by 8 points and has now slipped into negative territory, with 47 percent approving and 52 percent disapproving. Whatever the outcome, Trump’s presidency will be judged by his handling of this. (The Hill)    COVID-19: WE HAD THE WARNING BUT WE LACKED THE LEADERSHIP. While the coronavirus crisis will cost immeasurably more in lives and treasure than 9/11, the parallel between the two is eerie, and the difference is tragic. In both cases, the country had exquisite strategic warning and did nothing. The difference is that in the instance of COVID-19, there was also plenty of tactical warning — China announced cases at the end of December and identified the new virus a few days later. But still we did nothing. (The Hill and for an alternative view, read Andrew C. McCarthy)   AN ENERGY JOBS COALITION CAN HELP THE ECONOMY BOUNCE BACK. In normal times and in crisis, we are completely reliant on energy, water, transportation, communications and finance infrastructures to keep our economy running. Energy has a special place in this critical infrastructure mix. As the public and private sectors turn their attention to rebuilding our economy, we need to seed new industries that underpin our low-carbon future and build infrastructure aligned with that future. (The Hill) 
  
 YOUR LIFE, YOUR STORIES
  
     Here is a pic from Steve Clemons’ daily walk in the eastern shore colonial town of Chestertown, Maryland. The tall ship is the schooner Sultana rebuilt from the plans of the constitutional era ship by the same name.   SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?   Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now – and it’s not a good story for everyone – that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.   CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Special Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our OVERNIGHT HEALTHCARE newsletter for the latest developments from the daily White House Coronavirus Task Force briefing.  View All -- Coronavirus Report ArchiveThe Hill's Steve Clemons interviews former U.S. global AIDS coordinator Mark Dybul, who is currently the co-director at Georgetown Center for Global Health Practice and Impact.  Some excerpts from the interview below:  MARK DYBUL: What we need to do now is get as many possible test kits out and test as many people as possible because if we don't test, we don't know where the virus is going or what it's doing in our population. Once we have those tests out — it's a little late for us to do what South Korea and Singapore did, but at least we can catch up on the contact tracing and quarantine. MARK DYBUL: This is a global pandemic, one that really no one alive right now has experienced. We've had things that looked like it could be, for example in 2009 the swine flu, there were concerns about SARS and MERS, but really this is the first time we've had this. This is like 1918, in the flu epidemic of 1918. So, what we know is that the virus is all over the world. It's not just in the United States. And you just look at China, as soon as you they started to lift restrictions, the virus came back because the virus is all over. So unless we close our borders indefinitely, not only to the outside countries but within ourselves, we will likely see sporadic outbreaks of the virus. MARK DYBUL: If it comes back in the fall, it could be more deadly, more virulent. And if we're not prepared for that, we're in deep trouble. So we need to understand what the replication rate of the virus is, where it's going and how quickly it's mutating. Are those mutations related to being more infectious or more deadly. And that's what we think happened in 1918. MARK DYBUL: We should definitely be suspicious of quick fixes. Science has its methods, and they can be a little bit slower than people like. But if we don't know — and I'm just following Bill Gates's op-ed here because I'm not inside the conversation in the U.S. government ... If we don't know something works, stockpiling and telling people to use it, can be dangerous. And very importantly, that drug is life saving for people with lupus. If they can't get that drug [hydroxychloroquine], people are going to die from lupus as we're stockpiling something that might not work at all. MARK DYBUL: There's no question that states that have not implemented the orders that others have followed are putting their populations at risk. There's absolutely no question about it, because we got behind [in testing], we couldn't do what South Korea and Singapore did because the epidemic is widespread. ... South Korea has said that they believe they have 10 COVID-19 infections for every one they've diagnosed. So if you look at the United States, that means we're somewhere around 4 [million] to 5 million. ...We haven't tested enough, so we're now at probably more than 10 to 1. So there are a lot of infections, a lot of asymptomatic infections. Young people could be carrying asymptomatic virus around and spreading it all over. MARK DYBUL: The one thing we know is that we cannot ever defeat a pandemic without deep engagement of the community. And communities all over this country and all over the world are solving and creating solutions to these problems. So whether it's Italians singing from their balconies or people doing exercises online. We found personally ways to do it by doing face time and staying in touch with people. There's a difference between a phone call and seeing someone in person. With that connectivity. The shelter in place orders allow people to get outside, get a little exercise, get some fresh air. But I would say the solution of this is for us, talking heads, in capitals, NOT to solve that problem, but actually be reaching out to people in the communities and ask them, "What do you need?"