Rep. Ro KhannaRohit (Ro) KhannaHillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues Khanna calls for internet 'fairness doctrine' in response to controversial Trump tweets Khanna: Coronavirus has 'accelerated' the need for rural broadband MORE (D-Calif.) said the coronavirus pandemic has “accelerated” the need to expand broadband into rural parts of the country as more of the country works remotely. “I think it's accelerated the need for that,” Khanna, a top progressive in the House, told The Hill's Steve Clemons.  “I mean, first of all, tech companies realized that remote work is more possible. Facebook has said that they're going to go all remote, or at least half of their staff of their employees are going to be remote. Twitter has said the same thing. So, I think we're seeing that we're gonna have more decentralization of technology jobs and opportunities.”  Khanna pointed to legislation introduced by House Majority Whip Jim ClyburnJames (Jim) Enos ClyburnKlobuchar on defense as Floyd death puts spotlight on record Khanna: Coronavirus has 'accelerated' the need for rural broadband Lifting our voices — and votes MORE (D-S.C.) that would spend over $80 billion on expanding broadband as an avenue to help bring better internet connection to the whole country. Democrats, particularly those representing rural states and districts, have underscored the need to expand internet access for months, saying there is a noticeable gap in broadband capabilities between their constituents and people in more urban areas.  Clyburn last year announced the creation of an all-Democrat task force on rural broadband, saying it is “unacceptable” that rural areas have limited internet access.  “If rural America is to thrive in the 21st century information economy, it must have affordable and accessible internet service to every community,” he said.  Khanna added that expanding rural broadband and enabling more people to work across the country could ease partisan tensions, citing animosity from conservatives toward social media platforms. “Imagine, just for a thought experiment that some of these social media companies had decentralized work. They actually had employees in the Midwest, in the South who also were part of creating this 21st century public forum,” he said. “They would be much less likely to label these tech folks as other. I think this would actually not just help our economics it would help some of the national cohesiveness that’s missing in this country.” View the discussion thread.

WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Trump terminating relationship with WHO  > US savings rate his record high as pandemic causes Americans to stockpile cash  > New York City mayor announced possible phased reopening of city, likely to begin next month  > Senate Democrats pump brakes on new round of stimulus checks  > How poop – yes poop – could help warn of the next coronavirus outbreak > VA says it has ‘ratcheted down’ use of hydroxychloroquine to treat veterans > No-lockdown Sweden reports economic growth in first three months of the year  > The mystery of the virus: Researchers puzzled why coronavirus has been more deadly  in US and Europe than Asia  > Rep. Ro KhannaRohit (Ro) KhannaHillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues Khanna calls for internet 'fairness doctrine' in response to controversial Trump tweets Khanna: Coronavirus has 'accelerated' the need for rural broadband MORE says President TrumpDonald John TrumpDonald Trump and Joe Biden create different narratives for the election The hollowing out of the CDC Poll: Biden widens lead over Trump to 10 points MORE threatening violence against US citizens, says we need a ‘21st Century Social Media Fairness Doctrine’; claims that early Santa Clara shelter-at-home order saved many lives  THE INTERVIEW  Rep. Ro Khanna (D-Calif.)  Rep. Ro Khanna says President Trump threatening violence against US citizens, says we need a ‘21st Century Social Media Fairness Doctrine’; claims that early Santa Clara shelter-at-home order saved many lives         Watch the full interview here.       THE HILL’S CORONAVIRUS REPORT Editors’ Note.   There is a long-documented tension between America’s global do-gooders, usually called liberal internationalists, and realists, those who believe that the world is a nasty, anarchic and lawless place where self-interest rules. Realists often say that their mantra is “seeing the world as it really is, not as one would hope it to be.” This tension is a polite one in my view, usually anyway. But the need to see the world as it really is seems to me to be fundamental even if working on important projects that help others and make the world a better place. Helping lesser-developed nations and their citizens can be an effort embraced by both liberal internationalists and also realists. The liberal internationalists are deploying American soft power and reaping good will and trust in return. But the realists are also calculating, appropriately, that COVID-19 infections that break out anywhere in the world — particularly lesser-developed nations where there is less than adequate health infrastructure — will come back into the U.S. and spread elsewhere in the world. In other words, even idealism depends on an empirical understanding of the world and an understanding of returns built on investment and effort, which are grounded in elements of realism.   What worries me at the moment is the attack on realism — as defined by data, empiricism, science, by rationality. Michael Lewis in his book “The Fifth Risk” saw the attack on data coming. If there are no counters of things, no data to measure performance, then it’s harder to hold government officials, or a presidential administration, accountable. Certainly, the nation’s health will erode, planes may crash, crops falter and investments in science collapse — all of which will have a massive impact on national welfare, in the wrong direction. But Lewis profiled people in his book worried about a new political culture that wanted to wipe out our pursuit and management of “data.”   But it’s happening. The White House has just announced that it will forgo a summer economic forecast of predicted economic performance, given the pandemic. This is simply staggering. This is trying to jimmy the deck, to escape the gravity of realistic, empirical economic data and just skip beyond it.    On top of that, some U.S. cities and states as well as other nations may be purposely undercounting and underreporting COVID-19 deaths. Whether intentional or simply because the health system was overwhelmed, the undercounting may be very large. My colleague Reid Wilson wrote a fascinating piece Thursday on how sewage testing for the novel coronavirus may provide a far more accurate picture of virus incidence in a community. In one case, when there were 446 reported cases in Boston, a sewage-based survey indicated that the number of infected was approximately 115,000.   Without a commitment to data collection and management, there is no way for us to see the world — our world here in America as it really is — and no way to improve things and empower the kinds of innovations and approaches that will rid our society of this disease.   – Steve Clemons  Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik.    Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus   THE HILL ‘VIRTUALLY’ LIVE  ICYMI: Catch up on last week’s programs     On Thursday, The Hill hosted “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy anchored by Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinHillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues On The Money: Senate Dems pump brakes on new stimulus checks | Trump officials sued over tax refunds | Fed to soon open small-business lending program Schumer slams Trump's Rose Garden briefing on China as 'pathetic' MORE.   Watch the full program video here.    On Wednesday, The Hill hosted “The Vir[Tech]tual World of Tomorrow.”    Watch the full program video here.  We want to hear from you! Follow us @TheHillEvents and keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE There are 5,867,727 reported cases of COVID-19 throughout the world and a reported death toll of 362,238.    The U.S. is reporting 1,729,185 cases and 101,963 deaths as of the time of this newsletter. Brazil’s cases continue to rise dramatically and the country is reporting 438,238 cases of coronavirus. Russia, with its 387,623 reported cases, saw a record daily rise in COVID-19 deaths today. The United Kingdom is reporting 272,604 cases. Spain, 238,564. Italy, 232,248. France, 186,364. Germany, 182,559. India, 172,569. Canada, 90,027. China, 84,119. Mexico, 81,400. Qatar, 52,907. Ecuador, 38,471. Singapore, 33,860. Columbia, 25,406. Japan, 16,673. South Korea, 11,402. Ghana, 7,616. Greece, 2,906. Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2,485.    New York is reporting 366,733 cases. 157,815 in New Jersey. 115,833 in Illinois. 103,936 in California. 94,895 in Massachusetts. 74,729 in Pennsylvania. 60,416 in Texas. 42,533 in Virginia. 33,915 in Ohio. 25,107 in Colorado. 23,531 in Minnesota. 18,791 in Iowa. 16,974 in Wisconsin. 12,989 in Missouri. 10,788 in South Carolina. 8,538 in the District of Columbia.    15,646,041 COVID-19 test results have been recorded in the U.S. and 399,991 have reported full recoveries from the virus.   WASHINGTON WATCH         Senate Democrats pump brakes on new stimulus checks. House Democrats looking to deliver another round of $1,200 relief checks to Americans are encountering skepticism from an unexpected source: fellow Democrats in the Senate. The $3 trillion House-passed measure is not only facing opposition from GOP senators, it’s also prompting Senate Democrats to raise concerns about what they see as a huge untargeted expenditure. (The Hill)    VA says it has “ratcheted down” use of hydroxychloroquine to treat veterans. The Department of Veterans Affairs has drastically scaled back the use of hydroxychloroquine to treat veterans with coronavirus infections after a major study raised questions about its efficacy and linked it to serious side effects, including higher risks of death. (Washington Post)    COVID-19 workplace complaints surge; unions rip administration. A surge in coronavirus-related workplace complaints is fueling criticism from unions and Democratic lawmakers that the Labor Department is ill-equipped to ensure workers are safe as more businesses reopen. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration, a division of the Labor Department, has received more than 5,000 complaints pertaining to COVID-19, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary Loren Sweatt told a House panel Thursday. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEETS Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy Pelosi Sunday shows preview: Leaders weigh in as country erupts in protest over George Floyd death 5 things to know about US-China tensions over Hong Kong Pelosi calls Trump's decision to withdraw US from WHO 'an act of extraordinary senselessness' MORE (D-Calif.)  @TeamPelosi As we are grieving the loss of 100,000 souls in America to the #coronavirus that has disproportionately impacted communities of color, bearing witness to the murder of George Floyd is especially painful. Mr. Floyd, his family and our country deserve for justice to be done.   Rep. Dan NewhouseDaniel (Dan) Milton NewhouseThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Khanna says President Trump threatening violence against US citizens; Trump terminating relationship with WHO  GOP lawmaker introduces bipartisan guest worker bill Overnight Energy: Murkowski, Manchin unveil major energy bill | Lawmakers grill EPA chief over push to slash agency's budget | GOP lawmaker accuses Trump officials of 'playing politics' over Yucca Mountain MORE (R-Wash.)  @RepNewhouse There is no reason we should be reliant on a communist country like China to maintain our status as defenders of liberty. By bolstering US mining & manufacturing, we can create jobs, strengthen our economy, and enhance our national supply chain into the future.   Sen. Chris MurphyChristopher (Chris) Scott MurphyMissouri state lawmaker sparks backlash by tweeting 'looters deserve to be shot' The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Khanna says President Trump threatening violence against US citizens; Trump terminating relationship with WHO  Senators weigh traveling amid coronavirus ahead of Memorial Day MORE (D-Conn.)  @ChrisMurphyCT FYI everything is not terrible. You helped me raise tens of thousands of dollars to get free books to low income kids in New Haven, Bridgeport, and Norwalk - key bc school and public libraries are closed. It's been a huge success. Here are some pics from last Friday in Norwalk.  ACROSS THE NATION As some hard-hit regions move to reopen, pandemic’s hotbeds shift. Slowing rates of infection in some of the hardest-hit parts of the United States have offered a glimmer of hope, as New York City, once the country’s main coronavirus hot spot, announced plans Thursday to ease restrictions after 10 weeks under lockdown. Yet as officials say a possible phased reopening there is likely to start next month, other parts of the nation and the world are bracing for the worst. Globally, the pandemic has shifted to Latin America and the Middle East, as the death toll — now at least 362,000 around the world — continues to rise. (Washington Post)   Millions of New Yorkers had been infected with COVID-19 by the end of March. More than 2 million New Yorkers had been infected with COVID-19 by the end of March — about 10 times the official count, according to a new study. State data, however, shows only about 189,000 cases by the end of March. That means about 1.8 million cases potentially went undetected. (CNN)  And this comes as NYC Mayor Bill de BlasioBill de BlasioOcasio-Cortez rips de Blasio after police cruiser drives into crowd of protestors Cuomo calls Brooklyn clashes 'disturbing,' asks attorney general to review NYPD officer under investigation following video of female protester being shoved  MORE (D) has announced a possible phased reopening of the city, likely to start next month:    Half of new COVID-19 cases in Washington state occurring in people under 40. Half of new confirmed coronavirus cases in Washington state are being recorded in people under the age of 40, according to a new analysis. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW  No-lockdown Sweden reports economic growth in the first three months of the year. Sweden’s economy expanded at an annual rate of 0.4 percent during the first three months of the year, official data published Friday showed, following the government’s contrarian decision not to impose a full coronavirus lockdown. The Nordic country reported stronger-than-anticipated gross domestic product data for the first quarter, even as many other European countries recorded a severe economic contraction over the same period. (CNBC)     Researches ponder why COVID-19 appears deadlier in the U.S. and Europe than in Asia. It is one of the many mysteries of the coronavirus pandemic: Why has the death toll from COVID-19 apparently been lower in Asia than in Western Europe and North America? Even allowing for different testing policies and counting methods, and questions over full disclosure of cases, stark differences in mortality across the world have caught the attention of researchers trying to crack the coronavirus code. (Washington Post)    Monkeys steal coronavirus blood samples in India. A troop of monkeys in India attacked a medical official and snatched away blood samples of patients who had tested positive for the novel coronavirus, authorities said on Friday. (Reuters)   SCIENCE How poop – yes poop – could help warn of the next coronavirus outbreak. Scientists looking for new ways to identify potential coronavirus outbreaks are turning their attention to what could be an early warning sign: the stuff you flush down the toilet. New studies increasingly show that the coronavirus's genetic code can be detected in the remnants of fecal matter that flows through sewers and into sewage facilities, either in raw wastewater or in what is euphemistically known as sludge. (The Hill)   BUSINESS Lockdown shopping: Chocolate chips, frozen pizza up; energy bars nosedive. Americans bored at home during the coronavirus lockdown are rediscovering their love of baking and cooking, reversing a decades-long trend that has reshaped the grocery store experience. Consumer data shows sales rising in what the grocery industry calls its center store, the aisles where cereals, baking products and cooking staples are found. On the other hand, deli sales are down, and sales of products like store-prepared meals have dropped sharply. (The Hill)    U.S. savings rate hits record as coronavirus causes Americans to stockpile cash. The personal savings rate hit a historic 33 percent in April, the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis said. This rate — how much people save as a percentage of their disposable income — is by far the highest since the department started tracking in the 1960s. (CNBC)  GM increasing U.S. production of pickup trucks following coronavirus shutdowns. General Motors will return American plants that produce pickup trucks such as the Chevrolet Silverado to pre-coronavirus levels of three shifts. GM is expected to have the vast majority of its roughly 48,000 hourly workers back to work in U.S. plants by Monday. (CNBC)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS   Many patients, little drugs: Who should get scarce COVID-19 treatment. How should we decide who gets promising drugs in short supply? In April, the National Institutes of Health announced that an experimental drug, remdesivir, accelerated recovery from COVID-19. Its manufacturer offered to donate 940,000 vials of the antiviral to the U.S. With no end to the epidemic in sight, this donation will likely be insufficient to treat all patients. But who should get the drug, if it cannot be made available to all patients? (Alison Bateman-House for The Hill)    Journalists and politicians love science, but traffic in fear. COVID-19 news coverage has put science in the middle of the news agenda. That makes sense on one level, given the nature of the biological threat and the expectation that science is called on to eliminate the crisis. The obsession with and worship of science, however, has its limitations. Science alone can’t address the broader sociopolitical, economic and ethical aspects of the COVID-19 emergency. The news industry hasn’t figured that out. (Jeffrey M. McCall for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS Ford Motor Co. donates thousands of COVID-19 face shields to US military. Ford Motor Co. has finalized an agreement with the U.S. Department of Defense to donate 200,000 face shields to military bases across the U.S. and abroad to protect against the coronavirus. The face shields are constructed from car parts and made in Michigan as part of Ford's response to the pandemic crisis. (Fox News)   ICYMI: STEVE’S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  > Steve interviews Mastercard CEO AJAY BANGA  > Steve interviews Teva USA President and CEO BRENDAN O’GRADY  > Steve interviews US Surgeon General JEROME ADAMS  > Steve interviews former NIC Director GREG TREVERTON  > Steve interviews Topeka, Kansas Mayor MICHELLE DE LA ISLA  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.  Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus   VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVE View the discussion thread.

Steve Clemons: Thanks so much for joining me today. Let's just start with the fact that this nation was a mess before COVID[-19] hit. COVID[-19] has hit and on top of that now we have protests in Minneapolis. We had yet another case of alleged police abuse and the death of a man. And I just want to ask you, as we start this conversation, how do you as a congressman find your way through this moment where you're dealing both with the national health crisis, but we are also somewhat dealing with a crisis over our own soul? Rep. Ro KhannaRohit (Ro) KhannaHillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues Khanna calls for internet 'fairness doctrine' in response to controversial Trump tweets Khanna: Coronavirus has 'accelerated' the need for rural broadband MORE (D-Calif.): Well, Steve, it's a difficult time for all of us as citizens. Our country is deeply divided. You have the president of the United States threatening violence against American citizens. Even Richard Nixon was remorseful after Kent State. Even he understood that the United States government shouldn’t be shooting its own citizens. And now you have a president literally going on social media and threatening to shoot protesters. And a president who has called protesters fighting for racial justice “thugs” but unwilling to call those marching in Charlottesville the racist thugs. So, it is a time of a lack of moral leadership in our country. I mean, on the Minneapolis situation, if you want to stop the protests, the way to do it is to arrest the officers; that’s why they're protesting. Have an investigation into the police department there, the sheriff — the PSC called for that. Why they're not arresting those officers is beyond me.   Clemons: We're also in a time where we've been in a tug of war between those who have, I mean, this may be an unfair distinction, but between those who have been saying, we need public health first, public health guardrails that are very strictly adhere to versus those that want to have a rapid reopening. I know there's a middle ground there, but I'd love to get your insights, at this moment when we are seeing so much of the country reopen again, and we're seeing incidents like in Lake of the Ozarks, where there's a kind of human jam going on. What are the equities? What's the equilibrium that we have to get right between those different impulses? Khanna: Well, first we should have listened to science. I mean, had we done what South Korea, which is tell people to wear masks early on, had we gotten private testing companies involved in February, had we sheltered in place back then, like my district did in Santa Clara. March 15 we sheltered in place even though we were one of the first hit we've only had 120 deaths, that’s obviously significant, but it's nowhere near what other regions have faced because we sheltered in place.   Clemons: I mean, let me stop you there for a minute. Can you just profile that? Because when I was reading about Santa Clara and how hard it was hit at the beginning, can you just go through those numbers? Because at the beginning of March you had about 400-some odd cases, which was a lot at that time, and tell us how things have unfolded. Khanna: Well, we were the first county in the nation to shelter in place and as a result the deaths have been much fewer, the cases have been growing at one of the slowest rates in the entire country. In fact, the former CDC head had said that if New York sheltered had place when we did, it would have been 80 percent, 80 percent fewer casualties in New York. Now, this is not because of me or any of the elected officials. It was Sara Cody, the health official, who had the insight after having spoke to epidemiologists to do that. So, you know, that should be a lesson for the country about listening to science.   Clemons: Now, how are you reopening now? I've seen California Governor Gavin NewsomGavin NewsomSupreme Court denies California church's challenge to state restrictions Supreme Court denies Illinois churches' request for action after state eases restrictions Coronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Rep. Ro Khanna MORE's plans. Where does Santa Clara fit in that right now? How is your own reopening process going?  Khanna: We’re opening cautiously. I mean, we are opening some of the manufacturing businesses we are opening businesses that are essential. We are not opening high-contact businesses. And we're making sure that people have [personal protective equipment] PPE and they have social distancing. And I guess that to me seems to be a way forward. Open up, but do it with social distancing. Do it with worker protection. Do it with providing PPE. And then monitor the results and be willing to slow down or shut things down if the results spike; otherwise, continue to open up in a responsible way. And that's I think a way forward. I think, unfortunately, you had people try to politicize it where most Americans understand the common sense of what we need to do.   Clemons: You've been an advocate and you continue to push the buttons of, we need free testing, we need ever-present testing and we need free treatment for people. Where do those stand?  Khanna: Well, it's not just that we need testing — and we should be at about 600,000-700,000 tests a day. We're still a way from that. But we need to know then what to do with the testing. I mean, we need people who then will engage in contact tracing like they've done in other countries and have people trained for that. [Sen.] Bernie SandersBernie SandersExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support The battle of two Cubas Coronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Rep. Ro Khanna MORE [I-Vt.] and I called for massive production on the Defense Production Act to build the things that would be, that are the bottlenecks to the testing, because the challenge is we don't have some of the swabs and the equipment for the testing. Look, we're getting better, but we're still not where we need to be. And then we want to be treating people, and you shouldn't fear a bill to go get treatment.   Clemons: You know, I talked to CDC Director Robert Redfield recently, and he said he was looking to hire about — somewhere between 30,000 and 100,000 contact tracers. Do you think that's enough?  Khanna: I would defer to him. I mean, I don't want to second-guess a CDC director, and he's pretty nonpolitical. If he says 30,000 to 100,000 then we should do that. You know, there was an MIT professor who had a great idea for a digital work progress administration. Sort of a New Deal idea but in terms of digital skills, that we have such need for contact tracing or electronic records or other areas that the country could employ people in some of these digital tasks and get people back to work.   Clemons: I know, and there been some companies — and I know you're in the tech community and you're a tech guy yourself —  I interviewed recently Andrew Frame, the CEO of Citizen who has created something called SafeTrace in a way to kinda begin looking at how you can create what Taiwan has done and look at how you instantly alert people if they've come into contact with, you know, someone who was diagnosed with COVID[-19] and whatnot. So, there's a lot out there. But getting into the tech area, congressman, I know that you've been, I mean, I think one of the interesting things about COVID[-19] is that it has exacerbated problems and tensions we had in the country before. One of the areas you worked on was rural development and trying to get tech jobs and tech investment into rural areas. And I’d love to hear where that stands now and whether that continues to be, you know, an important priority for you as you look at a more inclusive economic development plan in the country at a time when we've got 41 million officially unemployed.  Khanna: Well Steve, I think it's accelerated the need for that. I mean, first of all, tech companies realized that remote work is more possible. Facebook has said that they're going to go all remote, or at least half of their employees are going to be remote. Twitter has said the same thing. So, I think we're seeing that we're gonna have more decentralization of technology jobs and opportunities. Majority Whip [James] Clyburn [D-S.C.] has an extraordinary bill, $80 billion to finally get the country hooked up to high speed internet so that every part of the country has that. Consider this: We are spending $3 trillion on relief. Can't we spend $80 billion to hook up the internet for every American? And then look at the controversy on Twitter with the president where he's demonizing social media and trying to appeal to his base. Imagine, just for a thought experiment, that some of these social media companies had decentralized work, they actually had employees in the Midwest, in the South who also were part of creating this 21st century public forum. People would feel much more agency. They would be much less likely to label these tech folks as elite or “other.” I think this would actually not just help our economics, it would help some of the national cohesiveness that’s missing in this country.   Clemons: Now the president has, you know, issued an executive order on censorship and social media firms, and he is angrier than I think we've seen him in a while at Twitter. Jack Dorsey is attaching tags to tweets that he sees as either big mistruths or as glorifying violence, breaking rules that Twitter has set up. Previously, Twitter had decided not to take any more paid political ads on its site. Facebook, which you also know well, is on the other side of that. Facebook is taking lots of political ads and saying it's not going to be the arbiter of speech. Where's the right point between those two?  Khanna: Well, look, the president is just engaged in political theater. You know, he wants this fight. I mean, he operates on the premise that all conflict is good. The courts aren’t gonna uphold his executive order. He knows that, but he's just engaged in rhetoric. Here's what I think we need. I think we need a fairness doctrine for the 21st century. Let me explain how that would work. Let's say the president is tweeting out conspiracy theories about Joe ScarboroughCharles (Joe) Joseph ScarboroughThe Memo: Trump ratchets up Twitter turmoil Hillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues Khanna calls for internet 'fairness doctrine' in response to controversial Trump tweets MORE. Well, why not allow the widower who doesn't want the president tweeting about his deceased wife, why not give him the opportunity to send a response, and that response Twitter could send to every person who clicks on the president’s tweet? Or why not allow someone to respond to the president’s claims about vote, ballot fraud? So, what I would say is, you defeat speech with speech. But you didn't give one person a huge megaphone and not allow a fair response. And that was what the fairness doctrine that Reagan got rid of was all about. We need something similar in a social media age   Clemons: Where are you on the issue of mail-by ballot? You know, you're in California right now, I think. But here in Washington, you know, there's also this stuff brewing. Even the president's spokesperson has voted by mail 10 out of the last 11 elections, the president has himself. But we see these assertions that the process would be endemically corrupt and rigged. Where are you on this? And how likely is it that we're going to see most states adopt a mail-by-ballot system? And what does the federal government need to do to make that happen?  Khanna: Well, I’m for it. This is actually a very simple debate. If you want more people to vote or do you want less people to vote? And let's just be blunt: The Republicans believe the less people that vote, the better their chance is. Democrats believe the more people that vote, the better our chance is. The philosophical issue is that more people should vote. And if you believe more people should vote, we ought to have mail-in-ballots. The idea that there is some fraud in that is absurd and there's not a single study that says that vote-by-mail is more fraud than voting in person. And it’s such a miniscule number in either case. So, California’s shown that it could work. It’s been empowering for many people. And we ought to be doing that at the national level, and the HEROES Act we passed provides the resources for states to do that.   Clemons: You know, Ro, you and I have talked a lot about technology and its impact on society and how it can be, you know, essentially something that extends human aspiration in contrast to dislodging human aspiration, if you will. And I guess the question I have at the moment —  you're such a thoughtful guy — is what does our social contract need to be after this period we're in? What does it need to look like? How can we look back to the time of FDR and see things like the WPA or the Tennessee Valley Authority or the CCC? Are there big projects that we need to have people put on the dock that could be part of a new infrastructure that brings this country out of this? Or are we too early for that right now? Khanna: Well, I think our social contract should be that everyone in this country should have the chance that I did. If this country can give the son of immigrants a chance to have a good public education, to have a parent employed with a job that provided health care, to not — to live in a safe neighborhood. If this country can do that for the son of immigrants, why can't this country do that for every American? So, our social safety net should say we believe that you should have the freedom to succeed or fail. But before you get to do that, you also have health care, you also have a good education, you have to have an early childhood education. [James] Heckman, the Nobel laureate, said that by the age of five so much of our life chances are determined based on our upbringing. We have to make those basic investments, and then we ought to be making the investments in the infrastructure for the 21st century. Just like electricity was a necessity, the internet is a necessity. Basic digital skills are necessities, and people don't want to just be taken care of. They want to participate in the new economy, and we have to provide those opportunities. So, I think that the road map on what we need is pretty clear; the question is will we have the political will?   View the discussion thread.

WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Unemployment surges to 41 million with 2.1 million more added to rolls > Trump marks 'very sad milestone' of 100K coronavirus deaths > Sen. Tim KaineTimothy (Tim) Michael KaineOvernight Health Care: Trump says US 'terminating' relationship with WHO | Cuomo: NYC on track to start reopening week of June 8 | COVID-19 workplace complaints surge 10 things to know today about coronavirus The Hill's 12:30 Report - Presented by Facebook - Twitter says Trump violates rules with 'shooting' threat MORE and wife test positive for COVID-19 antibodies > Sen. Elizabeth Warren calls for investigation into OSHA inspections during pandemic > Trump accuses Michigan Gov. Whitmer of 'double standard' following marina flap > NAM reports despite worsening business conditions, industry keeping doors open > Topeka Mayor Michelle De La Isla says cities don’t have enough tests for minorities and homeless communities, says CNAs are unrecognized tireless heroes making $7.25 an hour  Grim milestone: U.S. tops 100,000 coronavirus deaths with no end in sight. A staggering wave of death has brought the world's largest economy to its knees as the federal government struggles even now to mount a concerted nationwide response. As of Wednesday evening, the U.S. had recorded 1,695,776 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 100,047 deaths, according to a Johns Hopkins University tracker. (The Hill) 2M more Americans file new jobless claims, pushing coronavirus toll past 40M. Since the week ending March 22, more than 40 million Americans have filed initial claims for unemployment benefits as the spread of COVID-19 and the restrictions imposed to slow it forced thousands of businesses to close up shop. The national unemployment rate rose to 14.7 percent in April, and 14.5 percent of the U.S. workforce had received jobless benefits as of the week ending May 16, according to the Labor Department. (The Hill) THE INTERVIEW Topeka, Kansas Mayor Michelle De La Isla Some highlights from interview with The Hill’s Steve Clemons:  About the tensions between those who do not take health concerns seriously and those who do: “But the keyword was something that you just said. It's liberty. We in our country talk about our liberty. … We are responsible as well not only for ourselves, but for our fellow citizens. And as we are exercising those liberties, we have to have the facts so that we are able to protect each other.” About whether the federal government is doing enough: “But the tests are still not enough in order for us to do broad testing like we need in the African American, the Hispanic population, and in the homeless population.” About her health heroes: “You know, I think that this is a great time in our country for us to talk about not just the nurses and the doctors, but our CNAs. Our CNAs are phenomenal. The clerks at the pharmacy desk that are not the certified pharmacist, but they are the ones that are having that face-to-face contact with you. Those individuals that are delivering food, the people that are helping Meals on Wheels, the people that are working that cash register, the people that are helping you get your food and your nourishment, these are individuals that are being paid more than likely $7.25 or $7.50, and these are heroes. These are the individuals that are keeping our economy going, and I think that we have to take a broader look at how we sustain these individuals.” Watch the full interview here. THE HILL’S CORONAVIRUS REPORT Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Thursday, May 28.  Editor’s Note.  I have been wondering for years what would trigger a profound collapse of confidence in U.S. global leadership along the lines of the British Suez Crisis of 1956-57, which accentuated America’s definitive “coming out” as the world’s leading superpower and sent the British looking for new and smaller things to do. This pandemic may be that moment, and certainly there are other writers including my friend Parag Khanna and Stephen Marche who are thinking along those same lines. But even before them there were others who pointed to the trend. Charles Kupchan’s book, “The End of the American Era: U.S. Foreign Policy and the Geopolitics of the 21st Century,” written in 2003 amid the U.S. invasion of Iraq, punctured America’s superpower mystique and showed the world the limits of American financial, military and leadership power. And another was Princeton’s G. John Ikenberry, who wrote the seminal “Liberal Leviathan: The Origins, Crisis, and Transformation of the American World Order.” Kupchan and Ikenberry teamed up recently in a very smart op-ed titled “Global Distancing” in The Washington Post. They write that “traditionally, a catastrophe like this — something that touches everyone — triggers an ordering moment in international politics. Nations should be aligning their efforts to develop a vaccine, contain the disease, produce and allocate medical equipment, and stabilize the global economy. They should be strengthening the World Health Organization (WHO). But nothing of the sort is happening. Countries are competing for, and hoarding, medical equipment as they engage in a biotech arms race to find a vaccine. They are closing their borders and scapegoating foreigners. The United States is treating the WHO like a punching bag.” They go on to write that the United States, Russia, India and China are all essentially derelict in their roles as leading global stakeholders and are doing little to converge together in response to the human and economic carnage wrought by this pandemic. Singaporean scholar and diplomat Kishore Mahbubani wrote essentially the same thing in The Hill. In particular, Mahbubani calls for strategic focus, and his hypothetical question of “what would Churchill do?” in such times — perhaps as a way of reaching the reading pile of President TrumpDonald John TrumpDonald Trump and Joe Biden create different narratives for the election The hollowing out of the CDC Poll: Biden widens lead over Trump to 10 points MORE. The Cliff Notes version: Don’t carry on a trade war with China and block scientists from working together across those two key nations when they are both under siege from a vicious and destructive, highly contagious virus. The flaw of all of these thinkers at the moment, from my vantage point, is that they believe the times can be managed. Mahbubani believes that China’s time has arrived and America should just learn to live with it — acquiesce and all will go smoothly. Ikenberry and Kupchan think “global cooperation on the pandemic” can best be achieved by Trump’s electoral loss in November with a vibrant return to the liberal ideals of Woodrow Wilson and FDR, and perhaps to American global leadership along with China. If this is America’s “Suez moment,” the truth is that the rest of the world is already moving on and won’t easily trust U.S. leadership or prerogatives again. We saw some of that when the U.S. tried to guide economies after the 2008-09 financial crisis. That was a foreshock of the downfall of American leadership we are seeing today — and there will be no quick fix, sadly. This virus has generated significant geopolitical tensions and mistrust, not attacking only our bodies, but our willingness to solve great global problems. And it’s going to be that way for a long time. We have to prepare and get better at the choices we collectively make as we make the slide down in our relative weight in the world.  – Steve Clemons Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up to date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare.  THE HILL ‘VIRTUALLY’ LIVE  ICYMI: Catch up on last week’s programs The U.S. is reporting 1,709,996 reported cases and 101,002 deaths. Brazil still leads the rest of the world with the most cases and stands at 411,821. The next national leaders are Russia at 379,051 and the United Kingdom at 270,507. A sampling of others includes Turkey at 160,979; India at 165,358; Saudi Arabia at 80,185; and Singapore at 33,249. New York has reported that 29,529 people have died from COVID-19 as of the time of this newsletter. 11,339 dead in New Jersey. 5,083 in Illinois. 6,547 in Massachusetts. 3,918 in California. 5,373 in Pennsylvania. 5,334 in Michigan. Texas, 1,581. Maryland, 2,428. Georgia has lost 1,963. Virginia, 1,338. 1,392 in Colorado. 1,095 in Washington. 539 in Wisconsin. 590 in Alabama. 693 in Mississippi. 453 in the District of Columbia. 329 in New Mexico. Oklahoma, 325. 54 in South Dakota. 131 in Puerto Rico. 55 in Vermont. 14 in Wyoming.  15,192,481 COVID-19 test results have been recorded in the U.S. WASHINGTON WATCH Trump marks “very sad milestone” of 100K coronavirus deaths. President Trump on Thursday morning said that the United States had reached a “very sad milestone” in exceeding 100,000 deaths due to the novel coronavirus, expressing sympathy for those who have lost loved ones. (The Hill) Tim Kaine tests positive for COVID-19 antibodies. Sen. Tim Kaine (D-Va.) said on Thursday that he and his wife tested positive for COVID-19 antibodies, an indication that they have previously been infected with the disease.  (The Hill) Lack of child care poses major hurdle as businesses reopen. Child care remains a central obstacle to reopening the economy as the school year ends and camps and summer programs remain on hold due to the coronavirus pandemic. (The Hill)  PILING ON... Two Indiana billboards suggest people think twice about going to Michigan during the pandemic. As vehicles leave Indiana, they encounter an electronic sign that reads: "Now Entering Michigan: Really? You're sure about this?" Likewise, southbound travelers are greeted with a sign as they cross into Indiana that reads: "The Great State of Indiana Welcomes Michiganders To A Free-To-Roam State. We Thank You for the Revenue!" But the man behind the billboards said they are actually meant to support Michiganders during their quarantine, not poke fun at the restrictions in place. (CNN) LAWMAKERS TWEETS Sen. Bernie SandersBernie SandersExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support The battle of two Cubas Coronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Rep. Ro Khanna MORE (I-Vt.) @SenSanders 1.4 million people who work in the health industry have no health insurance at all. Americans are working in hospitals amid a deadly pandemic without any health coverage. How insane is that? We need Medicare for All. Rep. Kathy CastorKatherine (Kathy) Anne CastorThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Unemployment claims now at 41 million with 2.1 million more added to rolls; Topeka mayor says cities don't have enough tests for minorities and homeless communities Bright says his warnings on supply shortages were ignored Overnight Energy: 600K clean energy jobs lost during pandemic, report finds | Democrats target diseases spread by wildlife | Energy Dept. to buy 1M barrels of oil MORE (D-Fla.) @USRepKCastor Horribly, in just a few months time, far more than U.S. military deaths in Vietnam, Iraq + Afghanistan wars combined; 39 times the # of Americans who were killed at Pearl Harbor and 31 times the number of victims of the September 11 terrorist attacks. Sen. Susan CollinsSusan Margaret CollinsDemocrats gear up to hit GOP senators on DACA OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump administration gives renewables more time to take advantage of tax credits | House Republicans introduce bill to speed mining projects for critical minerals | Watchdog faults EPA communications in contamination of NC river The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Unemployment claims now at 41 million with 2.1 million more added to rolls; Topeka mayor says cities don't have enough tests for minorities and homeless communities MORE (R-Maine) @SenatorCollins During this public health crisis, America’s first responders have continued to work on the front lines and keep our communities safe. The next COVID-19 relief package must include additional funding to support these brave men and women. ACROSS THE NATION Immigrant doctors prepare for family's deportation if they die of coronavirus. Immigrant doctors practicing in the United States are bracing for their family's deportation, should the doctors die from coronavirus. “If I get sick and if something happens to me, it’s basically over for my family,” Parth Mehta, a hospitalist in Peoria, Ill., told NBC Asian America. He added: “It’s kind of weird that we are considered essential when it comes to saving lives, but we are considered nonessential when it comes to immigration purposes, and your family faces the risk of deportation if you die." (The Hill) Here’s what will be different Friday, when most of the state of Illinois (but not Chicago) moves into phase three of Gov. J.B. Pritzker’s (D) reopening plan. All four regions of the state are poised to move into the next phase of Pritzker’s reopening plan Friday, which means many restaurants will be back open for outdoor service and “nonessential” retailers will be open to shoppers. Except in Chicago, where Mayor Lori Lightfoot has said restrictions won’t be loosened until “early June.” (Chicago Tribune) Big Wyoming Summer Rodeos Canceled Over Virus. A little over an hour after news broke that Cheyenne Frontier Days has been canceled, Governor Mark Gordon (R) announced Wednesday that the Central Wyoming Fair and Rodeo also will not take place in 2020. (K2 Radio) WORLD VIEW Salvadoran leader says he takes hydroxychloroquine. Salvadoran President Nayib Bukele said he uses hydroxychloroquine, the antimalarial drug touted by President Trump as a potential coronavirus cure, even though international health experts have questioned its efficacy and have warned of harmful side effects. "I use it as a prophylaxis. President Trump uses it as a prophylaxis. Most of the world's leaders use it as a prophylaxis," said Bukele during a press conference. (CNN) What Bolsonaro said as Brazil's coronavirus cases climbed. That Brazil saw warning signs would be a dramatic understatement. As COVID-19 raced across Europe, knocked the U.K. prime minister flat and throttled New York City earlier this year, Brazil had plenty of notice that a catastrophe was on its way. But was some of the danger drowned out by the megaphone of its bombastic President Jair Bolsonaro, who has repeatedly dismissed the virus as a "little flu"? (CNN)  English Premier League to return on June 17 after 100-day break amid coronavirus. The Premier League is set to resume on June 17 after the clubs gave "Project Restart" the green light at a shareholders meeting on Thursday. (ESPN)  SCIENCE Researchers ponder why COVID-19 appears more deadly in the U.S. and Europe than in Asia. It is one of the many mysteries of the coronavirus pandemic: Why has the death toll from COVID-19 apparently been lower in Asia than in Western Europe and North America? Even allowing for different testing policies and counting methods, and questions over full disclosure of cases, stark differences in mortality across the world have caught the attention of researchers trying to crack the coronavirus code. (Washington Post) BUSINESS NAM survey: Despite drop in optimism, majority of manufacturers keeping doors open. The National Association of Manufacturers on Thursday released the results of the Manufacturers’ Outlook Survey for the second quarter of 2020 showing that despite a historic drop in optimism, to nearly 34 percent, and challenging business conditions, the vast majority of manufacturers (98.7 percent) have continued or only temporarily halted operations. (NAM) CVS says it will reach goal of opening 1,000 coronavirus test sites on Friday. CVS will reach its goal of opening 1,000 coronavirus testing sites across the country on Friday, the drug store chain announced. Final sites will open across 30 states and Washington, D.C., the company said in a press release. (The Hill)  GDP fell 5 percent in the first quarter. America's economy shrank at an annualized rate of 5 percent in the first quarter of the year, according to the Commerce Department's second estimate, more than the 4.8 percent level first announced. The first quarter's economic numbers included two months of normal growth followed by a devastating March, as the coronavirus pandemic took hold and lockdowns across the country slowed commerce to a trickle. (The Hill) ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS The Paycheck Protection Program excludes black and Latino small businesses, so fix it. While the House prepares to revamp the government's small-business aid program, there needs to be a serious reckoning about how this program is driving racial inequality in our country. (Rashad Robinson and Janet Murguía for The Hill)  We cannot ignore the links between COVID-19 and the warming planet. The emergence of COVID-19 suggests that global warming may present an even graver threat to human welfare than many recognize. (Richard Richels, Henry Jacoby, Gary Yohe, and Ben Santer for The Hill)  GENEROUS SPIRITS Dolly Parton releases new song 'When Life is Good Again'. The legendary singer/songwriter released her quarantine-inspired song with Entertainment Weekly. "When Life is Good Again" touches on themes of friendship, compassion and becoming better people. Parton donated $1 million to Vanderbilt University for coronavirus research in April. She also launched "Goodnight with Dolly," a virtual series in which she read children's bedtime stories. (CNN) ICYMI: STEVE’S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH > Steve interviews National Portrait Gallery Director KIM SAJET > Steve interviews former Senate Majority Leader BILL FRIST > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  > Steve interviews Mastercard CEO AJAY BANGA  > Steve interviews Teva USA President and CEO BRENDAN O’GRADY  > Steve interviews US Surgeon General JEROME ADAMS  > Steve interviews former NIC Director GREGORY TREVERTON  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.  YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?  Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare. VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVE View the discussion thread.

Steve Clemons: It's wonderful to see you. Thank you much for joining us. You know, very on early in this crisis, I began getting Google alerts on what you were saying and what you were doing early. And early in the crisis Topeka was a place where there wasn't much incidents. It was everywhere else. It wasn't there. But then it began to perk up, and we wouldn't say it went to DEFCON Five, but maybe to DEFCON Three. So, I would just like to hear from you how this has changed the community, how you have tried to comfort them, but not panic them.  Michelle De La Isla: You know, I think that being completely transparent with all the information that we have available is paramount at this time. I think that all of us at this point in time are being bombarded. I think that Gallup this week used the word “infodemic,” of having so much information that you just don't know what to sort through. And we here in our community, Topeka and Shawnee County, have been very consistent with regular factual information to our constituents so that they know exactly what is happening at the local level without being bogged down with what's happening at the national. Our community has changed in the sense that we just like everybody had a safer at home ordinance. Everybody had to stay at home. We were very successful early on on stopping the incidents of the virus. But just yesterday we had 17 cases in our community and we're seeing 51 cases that are active as of this morning. So, we're not in a fear situation. But we're constantly communicating not only with our community through Facebook, through press conferences, but also through working with specific stakeholders that we're working on understanding the data mutually so that everybody understands what the risks are and so that we can learn to live with the virus.   Clemons: Mayor, I mean, what we've been seeing in some of the tenser parts of the country is a real clash from people who are just tired of being told to stay at home. This opens up a lot of fissures and pressures, whether it's business, whether it's just personal liberty. And there are other people saying “Look, don't infect us, don't infect our children, don't have our children endanger our grandparents.” How have you held that together? Have you had those kinds of problems? Or have you been able to get buy in from both corners of that tension?  De La Isla: You know, I would characterize our community like most communities in the United States, we have three camps, right? We have the individuals that are extremely concerned with regards to the virus and they don't want to leave. They don't want to leave their home. They want to stay home. They want to work from home, if possible. We have the camps of individuals that are saying absolutely not. You are not going to infringe on my liberties. I will not wear a mask. I don't believe this virus is so bad. Look at our community. We're doing great. Let's reopen. And then you have the people that are in the middle, who are the individuals that are saying, we want to go forth, but we want to do so with caution. And when you look at the graphs — I'm part of the Bloomberg Harvard City Leadership Program and we were just looking at the charts from Johns Hopkins today. The United States by far outpaces in regards to active cases, and we're starting to come down, and I think Brazil is starting to come up and trend with us. But the keyword was something that you just said. It's liberty. We in our country talk about our liberty. So, when you have government or officials that are health officials telling you that you must stay home and you don't trust government in itself because you are so attached to your liberties, what ends up happening is this clash of values, of wanting to remain safe at the same time that you have the incidents of wanting to also have your liberties. What I try to tell people is that yes, we have liberty, but that liberty should never be forgotten at the fact that we are responsible as well not only for ourselves, but for our fellow citizens. And as we are exercising those liberties, we have to have the facts so that we are able to protect each other   Clemons: One of the things I know you're doing, which I'm charmed by and I wanna listen in, is you are helping out Topeka’s parents with their kids. Tell us what you're doing.   De La Isla: So, every Sunday around eight o'clock, I enjoy very much reading to our community children. And it's interesting because now that I have a following even in Puerto Rico because I read the books both in English and in Spanish. I used to love reading to my kids. It was one of my favorite things to do with them in a rocking chair. But now, understanding all the challenges that our parents are going through, it gives our kids something different to do and something to see. And it's my way of helping parents tell kids. “OK, we heard the stories. Time to go to bed.”   Clemons: Well, you know the other thing I want to put on the table if I'm not — hopefully I'm not revealing too much. But, I happen to know that you have a complex past. You are a complex, complex person and before you were mayor at one point, you were homeless. And I think one of the things we've been getting at, too, multiple times today is, you know, what do you do with the people that are not connected? What do you do with the people that are the most vulnerable? How do we get to communities there? Director [Robert] Redfield of the CDC said to me the other day, “Steve, we've got to go out and test the homeless and if they are infected, we've got to find a place for them to stay.” So, there's concern. I don't know if there's a plan, but given your insights into that world and experience, what do you think, not only in Topeka, but just what do you think we should be doing? Because I don't see everyone getting the aid and support right now they should be getting.  De La Isla: The first thing that we need to do is get enough testing. I think that we talk about the amount of testing that each community is receiving, and we just don't have enough. In Shawnee County, for example, our hospitals now have the privilege that they're working on the reagents so that they can do testing for individuals that are about to have a procedure. But we don't have that yet widely cast out into our community. With regards to the homeless population, yes, I am extremely attached to our homeless population. I love them and I interact regularly with Barry Feaker, who is the person that runs the rescue mission. And even before we had cases in our community, we were talking with regards to what were the needs that our rescue mission had and how were we gonna best mitigate that? We even talked about even getting a hotel if that was a possibility, which we almost achieved. But the problem was making sure that the residents of the mission and our guests had the ability to have the safety networks that they needed in order for them to be successful: the food, the supportive services. But also, in addition to that, how are we gonna get them to have the testing that they needed in case we started to have incidents in regards to that population, which is already immune compromised. So, we have been working very closely with them developing structures and protocols for them so that the rescue mission knows that they have the support that they need in case something were to happen.   Clemons: Do you think there are things that the federal government should be doing, you know, as it's designing these programs and multitrillion-dollar packages, You know, I just don't know, are those communities on the map? Are they not on the map?  De La Isla: Right now, I want to congratulate and thank our Congress and the Senate for the work that they've been doing at creating these packages that are phenomenal. There's been a really big bipartisan effort happening in D.C. However, I do feel like there is not enough testing and support and resources specifically for this population. In addition to that, a lot of the resources that are needed are — there’s families that are going by the wayside, because they feel like they are not able to receive that support. I'll give you an example. We recently started a free clinic that you could drive through at one of our local hospitals for people to receive free testing. But the tests are still not enough in order for us to do broad testing like we need in the African American, the Hispanic population, and in the homeless population that are in such need because we know that there's 40 percent of individuals that are walking around without any symptoms, that once they end up in a location where there is a population that is already predisposed to having this virus impact them much strongly, then would be in a worse situation. So, we need additional testing and we need to figure out ways of supporting our rescue missions in our communities that are in such need.   Clemons: Mayor, you started something called the Rumor Control Group. Tell us about that.   De La Isla: Well, I don't want to take credit for that one. We started the incident command team under Dusty Nichols, who is our emergency management incident commander. We were figuring out ways that we could use our volunteers and immediately came up with this Rumor Control Task Force, which is volunteers that have a Facebook page so that whenever we hear that there is a rumor, we have a group of PIO’s from all of our community that help us come up with graphics and put it out there and just demystify any of that. Those volunteers are priceless to our community. And, for example, Brenda Blackman, she is a teacher that should have been working and she spends all day in the incident command center sitting down, getting those calls in and passing them onto a team so that we could have good information out for the public. Our community is very fortunate to have amazing people that are willing to give up their time to make our community safe.   Clemons: Let me just, in the last minute — it's been a great day — tell me, just who are some of your other health heroes? De La Isla: Some of my who?   Clemons: Health heroes in your community.  De La Isla: You know, I think that this is a great time in our country for us to talk about not just the nurses and the doctors, but our CNAs. Our CNAs are phenomenal. The clerks at the pharmacy desk that are not the certified pharmacist, but they are the ones that are having that face-to-face contact with you. Those individuals that are delivering food, the people that are helping meals on wheels, the people that are working that cash register, the people that are helping you get your food and your nourishment, these are individuals that are being paid more than likely $7.25 or $7.50, and these are heroes. These are the individuals that are keeping our economy going, and I think that we have to take a broader look at how we sustain these individuals that may not be able to have a cost of living that puts them in a position to be a little bit more susceptible to this virus. It helps us have a broader conversation of our values in this country. They are my heroes. View the discussion thread.

More than 100,000 Americans have died from the coronavirus, a staggering wave of death that has brought the world's largest economy to its knees as the federal government struggles even now to mount a concerted nationwide response. As of Wednesday evening, the U.S. had recorded 1,695,776 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 100,047 deaths, according to a Johns Hopkins University tracker. The crisis shows few signs of easing. And as states begin loosening restrictions on business closures and social distancing requirements, many fear the country could be headed for a second wave of infections even before the first has been fully contained. The two months of lockdowns meant to buy time to build the necessary testing and tracing capacity to bring COVID-19 under control have passed with only modest improvements, epidemiologists and public health experts said, at the cost of millions of American jobs and trillions in lost economic activity.  At the same time, the U.S. has made only the barest progress in stemming the spread of the virus. The country has averaged nearly 23,000 new cases a day over the first three weeks of May, down from an April peak of 29,000 cases per day. In April, an average of 1,800 people died from the virus every day; so far this month, that has eased to 1,360 a day, a still-shocking number that has made the United States the epicenter of a pandemic that other countries have brought to heel far faster. "We're making progress too slowly, and we're making progress much more slowly than most of the rest of the developed world," said Jeremy Konyndyk, a senior fellow at the Center for Global Development who headed the U.S. Agency for International Development's Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance in the Obama administration. "American exceptionalism is killing us. Our tendency to do things our own way and not learn from other countries is directly contributing to how poorly we're managing this." The virus has spread beyond its early urban epicenters in New York and Seattle, and new cases are now growing both in smaller cities and outside metropolitan areas. The number of cases reported in nonmetropolitan areas grew by 12 percent last week and by 10 percent in cities with more than 500,000 residents, according to data compiled by Brookings Institution demographer William Frey. Like so many other elements of American life, the coronavirus response has become mired in the bog of partisanship. President TrumpDonald John TrumpDonald Trump and Joe Biden create different narratives for the election The hollowing out of the CDC Poll: Biden widens lead over Trump to 10 points MORE has lobbed insults at his political rivals and Democratic governors even as he declares victory; armed protestors have rallied at state Capitols in North Carolina, Michigan, Montana and Washington; and leaders in some states have faced allegations that they are manipulating or hiding data about the true scope of the outbreak. In interviews, epidemiologists and public health experts said they saw only modest indications that the United States is using its brief window of opportunity to make changes.  The number of coronavirus tests the country is conducting on a daily basis has risen by about half over the last month, a positive indicator that still leaves most states well short of what they will need to safely monitor the virus's spread over the long term. Laboratories across the country have processed around 400,000 tests most days this week, up from about 250,000 a day at the beginning of the month and about 150,000 a day in the middle of April. The number of contact tracers employed by state and local governments has grown substantially. And the number of promising vaccine candidates in some form of early testing has given hope even if introduction, production and distribution remain months away. "The United States has a health care system that's much better prepared than it was two months ago. The number of tests has increased substantially. We've gotten a bit of a start on contact tracing. Positivity rates are going down. The virus activity is going down in much of the country," said Tom Frieden, the former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention who now runs Resolve to Save Lives, a global health nonprofit. "The physical distancing that we did was effective at reducing the spread. Now the challenge is the balancing act. How do we reopen without rekindling?" Other nations have made far more rapid progress. Eighty days after Spain ordered nationwide lockdowns, the number of new cases reported on any given day had declined by 93 percent from their peaks. After an equal number of days in lockdown in Italy, daily case counts were 80 percent off their highs. In the United States, 80 days after our own lockdowns began, daily case counts have fallen only 28 percent. "Unfortunately, we did not implement social distancing measures early enough and aggressively enough in most of the country. The result of that is we haven't suppressed cases and transmission fast enough," said Celine Gounder, a physician and global health expert at New York University's Grossman School of Medicine. "Had everyone across the country implemented social distancing measures promptly and aggressively until transmission was suppressed, frankly I think it would have been a shorter lockdown period with less damage to the economy and fewer deaths." The future looks bleak even as Americans tell pollsters they are not willing to return to their daily lives for fear of contracting the virus. A study by the University of Washington's Comparative Health Outcomes, Policy and Economics Institute projects the number of deaths across the country could more than triple by year's end even if social distancing practices continue. But instead of continuing lockdowns in hopes of starving the virus of new victims, all 50 states have taken initial steps toward resuming economic activity. Tourists flocked to the boardwalk in Ocean City, Md., and to a raucous pool party in Missouri's Lake of the Ozarks over Memorial Day weekend, alarming epidemiologists. Stay-at-home orders have been lifted everywhere except Washington, D.C., which is set to do so on Friday, and cellphone data shows more Americans are leaving their homes on a daily basis. The number of confirmed cases will rise, possibly substantially, as testing capacity improves and those tests identify more people who show few or no symptoms of COVID-19. But the number of cases is also likely to rise as more people venture out in public even before the first wave subsides. "I'm very concerned that we're going to see a second peak, wave, layered on top of what's already an ongoing first wave," Gounder said. As the country loosens its restrictions, governors and local leaders have a new opportunity, this time to learn from other countries that have gone before. France, Australia and New Zealand have reopened schools and traced some new hot spots as they have emerged. In South Korea, a nightclub and a gym have both been catalysts for new outbreaks. "Everywhere that's been hit that responded had a sort of slightly difference response and outcome is a data point. That's a useful learning tool. Retrospectively, when we go through what happened here, we shouldn't be dismissing any of it," said Nita Bharti, a biologist at the Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics at Penn State University. "A lot of those things are just going to be different. Some of them just have to be new. We have to be innovative and creative about building from the ground up for some things." As Trump runs a reelection campaign that has suddenly become more about his pandemic response than his handling of the economy, he has repeatedly declared victory over a virus that still rages and pushed governors in swing states to allow businesses to reopen. On Friday, Trump designated houses of worship as “essential” services. But epidemiologists and economists alike warn that the public health crisis and the economic crisis go hand in hand and that activity will not return to whatever the new normal is until people feel safe venturing out and opening their wallets. They warn of the potential damage that could come when a second wave of the virus hits, damage that could amplify that which has already been done. "The desire for a rapid economic recovery will in fact make the economic recovery much slower and much weaker than if there were just some discipline in controlling the outbreak," Konyndyk said. "It's like a nationwide marshmallow test," he added. "We're eating the marshmallow." View the discussion thread.

WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Trump and Twitter: conspiracy theories and fact-check labels > Fauci: no evidence showing hydroxychloroquine is effective in treating virus > DC to lift stay-at-home order Friday  >  Nearly half of Americans say they would get COVID-19 vaccine if available  > Coronavirus at the border: California hospitals overwhelmed by patients from Mexico > EU unveils 750 billion euro economic recovery response to pandemic  > Boeing to begin first round of voluntary layoffs, will likely shed 2,500 workers  > Companies tracking your movements: what contact tracing could look like in the US  > National Portrait Gallery’s Kim Sajet says COVID-19 era rewiring people’s relationship with culture and art, adds that new art will focus on frontline heroes  Trump’s brewing war with Twitter is getting worse. With the pandemic showing no end in sight, the 2020 presidential campaign will be the biggest digital project for the respective campaigns in a generation. Social media, virtual townhalls — and perhaps mail-in voting, which is facing a heated debate on Capitol Hill — are the latest items added to the list of our “new normal” in the age of coronavirus. On Tuesday evening, Twitter took the step of slapping a fact-check label on President TrumpDonald John TrumpDonald Trump and Joe Biden create different narratives for the election The hollowing out of the CDC Poll: Biden widens lead over Trump to 10 points MORE’s tweets. for the first time. The move, which escalates tensions between Washington and Silicon Valley in an election year, was made in response to two Trump tweets over the past 24 hours. The tweets falsely claimed that mail-in ballots are fraudulent.    To no one’s surprise, the president took to social media this morning and blasted Twitter’s move, writing that the social media giant is “interfering in the 2020 presidential election” and working behind the scenes to “silence conservative voices.” Twitter spokeswoman Katie Rosborough said Tuesday that the fact-check lebel was added to the president’s tweets because they “contain potentially misleading information about voting processes and have been labeled to provide additional context around mail-in ballots.” The sparring between the White House and social media giants is bound to heat up as an unprecedented virtual campaign for the highest office in the land continues to play out in the lead-up to November’s election.  AND the president is continuing to peddle a highly controversial conspiracy theory surrounding the death of a former aide to Joe ScarboroughCharles (Joe) Joseph ScarboroughThe Memo: Trump ratchets up Twitter turmoil Hillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues Khanna calls for internet 'fairness doctrine' in response to controversial Trump tweets MORE when the “Morning Joe” host represented Florida in Congress. Trump tweeted about Scarborough minutes before today's airing of MSNBC's "Morning Joe" concluded, underscoring how the topic is on his mind, and on his refusal to back down on the subject in the face of criticism. A couple of Republican members of Congress, including House Republican Conference Chairwoman Liz CheneyElizabeth (Liz) Lynn CheneyHillicon Valley: House FISA bill in jeopardy | Democrats drop controversial surveillance measure | GOP working on legislation to strip Twitter of federal liability protections The Hill's Campaign Report: Trump ramps up attacks against Twitter The Hill's Coronavirus Report: National Portrait Gallery's Kim Sajet says this era rewiring people's relationship with culture, art; Trump's war with Twitter heats up  MORE (Wyo.) and Rep. Adam KinzingerAdam  Daniel KinzingerThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: National Portrait Gallery's Kim Sajet says this era rewiring people's relationship with culture, art; Trump's war with Twitter heats up  Cheney says Trump should stop tweeting Scarborough conspiracy Trump again tweets about Scarborough conspiracy, despite heavy criticism MORE (Ill.), are urging the president to stop.     THE INTERVIEW Kim Sajet, Director, Smithsonian's National Portrait Gallery  National Portrait Gallery Director Kim Sajet to The Hill’s Steve Clemons:   “Listen, I always say there's no moral test to be in the portrait gallery. No one is perfect, right? We're not a hall of heroes. We all make mistakes, and we will do good things. What gets you into the portrait galleries is the summation of a life. When the ledger is actually tallied up at the end of it, have you really changed America? …. I would say, look at the long game. But as you journey along the way, you know, reach out to others and have empathy and have open communication”   “I think there's already a lot coming up, but I think what I'm really impressed with is this focus on families, the people around us, maybe less about celebrity in some way and more about those who we’ve spent a lot of time with. But also the people on the frontlines, right? The doctors, the nurses, the cleaners, the people stocking our shelves. I mean, they're the heroes really of this whole situation. And I think we're going to see more of their portraits, certainly in the next portrait competition when that comes out.”         Watch the full video here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Wednesday, May 27.  Editors’ Note.    I find this quote from Pablo Picasso relevant to our times: “To me there is no past or future in art. If a work of art cannot live always in the present it must not be considered at all. The art of the Greeks, of the Egyptians, of the great painters who lived in other times, is not an art of the past; perhaps it is more alive today than it ever was.” I asked Kim Sajet, director of the National Portrait Gallery in Washington, D.C., what she thought would characterize art during the COVID-19 age, and she said it would be “less celebrity,” and more about those we’ve spent a lot of time with like “the doctors, the nurses, the cleaners, the people stocking our shelves … the heroes of this whole situation.”    What I find fascinating is that “artists” as a term, or art as an obsession emanating from “stay at home/safer at home” enthusiasms has a very broad aperture in this time. When we look back on it, we may value both this moment and the art we are creating differently than now – maybe more precious as we flex our wings and fly, or travel, again and are permitted to physically hug and shake hands again.   I’m not an artist, like I’m not a foodie -– but I love great cuisine, chefs and restaurants, and I love museums, particularly the National Portrait Gallery, which I discuss a bit in my daily interview. But if you haven’t noticed there is an explosion of arts and culture bursting out in digital land as we reach beyond the rooms we pace in. Check out Joseph Gordon-Levitt’s moving online confabs paying tribute to today’s heroes but also creating these great multi-artist jams at Hit Record. And who can’t love and be amazed by people imitating the great masters' works and then posting online for their friends and interested lurkers around the world. Most museums are engaging their fans with online time with today’s artists and also offering virtual tours, like the Votes for Women tour at the National Portrait Gallery.    Deborah Fallows captures some of this creative sizzle in a great Atlantic article as part of her and James Fallows’s Our Town series profiling artists like Richelle Gribble, who once was an artist-in-residence in Eastport, Maine, but is now in Los Angeles at home working on a project she calls Quarantine Life. Deborah Fallows also writes that Gribble is part of a “global crowd-sourced project that includes not only artists, but others who are journalists, physicians, ecologists, songwriters, CEOs, astronauts, and more. It’s called the Great Pause Project.”    Some artists and art lovers may scoff at my observation that more seems to be going on now than usual. But so be it. As Sajet shared, parents are having to be their children’s art teachers and are reaching out to online resources like museums to assist. And our human desire to strut a bit and show off, online if not in person, is producing whole new tracks of artistic expression. I am fascinated by the eruption of culture in times of stress -– and like Picasso intimated, I am pretty sure that what we are producing today will mean different things in the future. But it will still say something about us now.   – Steve Clemons   Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE  ICYMI: catch up on last week's programs        On Thursday, The Hill hosted “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy anchored by Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinHillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues On The Money: Senate Dems pump brakes on new stimulus checks | Trump officials sued over tax refunds | Fed to soon open small-business lending program Schumer slams Trump's Rose Garden briefing on China as 'pathetic' MORE.   Watch the full program video here.    On Wednesday, The Hill hosted “The Vir[Tech]tual World of Tomorrow.”    Watch the full program video here.  We want to hear from you! Follow us @TheHillEvents and keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive     CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE  There are 5,635,943 reported cases of COVID-19 and 352,235 global deaths from the virus as of the time of this newsletter.    The U.S. is reporting 1,685,955 cases and 99,264 deaths. Brazil’s cases continue to skyrocket and the country is now reporting 391,222 cases. Russia is close behind with 370,680 reported cases of the virus. 268,615 in the U.K. 236,259 in Spain. 231,139 in Italy. 182,847 in France. 181,524 in Germany. 158,762 in Turkey. 157,484 in India. 141,591 in Iran. 45,970 in the Netherlands. 38,292 in Bangladesh. 37,355 in Ecuador. 24,264 in South Africa. 23,851 in Indonesia. 18,756 in Egypt. 21,905 in Ukraine. 16,623 in Japan. 13,228 in Argentina. 12,456 in Afghanistan. 9,633 in Bahrain. 9,069 in Czechia. 7,584 in Morocco. 7,117 in Ghana.    New York is reporting 363,836 cases. New Jersey 155,764. Illinois 113,195. California 99,874. Massachusetts 93,693. Pennsylvania 73,320. Texas 57,288. Maryland 48,423. Georgia 44,279. Connecticut 41,303. Ohio 33,006. North Carolina 24,804. Iowa 18,256. Arizona 16,864. Utah 8,620. District of Columbia 8,406. Maine 2,109.    14,907,041 COVID-19 test results have been recorded and 384,902 have reported full recoveries from the virus in the U.S.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Fauci: Hyrdroxycholoroquine not effective against coronavirus. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciOvernight Defense: Trump extends deployment of National Guard troops to aid with coronavirus response | Pentagon considers reducing quarantine to 10 days | Lawmakers push for removal of Nazi headstones from VA cemeteries Don't move the COVID-19 goalpost Overnight Health Care: Sewage testing gives clues of coronavirus | White House says Trump would take hydroxychloroquine again | Trump marks 'very sad milestone' of 100K virus deaths MORE on Wednesday said there's no evidence that shows the anti-malaria drug hydroxychloroquine is effective at treating COVID-19. "Clearly the scientific data is really quite evident now about the lack of efficacy for it," Fauci, the nation's top infectious disease doctor, said during a CNN interview. (The Hill)  How lawmaker ties helped shape Fed chairman's COVID-19 response. Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell's deep ties with lawmakers are paying off as the central bank deploys trillions of dollars in financial support for the economy with the blessing of Congress. With the coronavirus crisis, Powell has drawn from years of experience negotiating with lawmakers, nudging them toward his preferred policy outcomes while showing deference to their treasured oversight responsibilities. (The Hill)  LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. John BoozmanJohn Nichols BoozmanThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: National Portrait Gallery's Kim Sajet says this era rewiring people's relationship with culture, art; Trump's war with Twitter heats up  Congress headed toward unemployment showdown We can't afford to let local news die MORE (R-Ark.)  @JohnBoozman The phased approach to reopening businesses in Arkansas is essential, and I support the establishing of protocols to keep us all safe as their doors reopen to customers. READ my latest column about how we all have a part to play in a successful recovery.   Sen. Jack ReedJohn (Jack) Francis ReedBipartisan Senate panel leaders back fund to deter China The Hill's Coronavirus Report: National Portrait Gallery's Kim Sajet says this era rewiring people's relationship with culture, art; Trump's war with Twitter heats up  Overnight Defense: Trump to withdraw US from Open Skies Treaty | Pentagon drops ban on recruits who had virus | FBI says Corpus Christi shooting terror-related MORE (D-R.I.)  @SenJackReed Even before #COVID19 outbreak, the Trump Admin shortchanged seniors citizens & put #OlderAmericans health at risk w/ misplaced budget priorities. Ex: Trump’s FY 2021 budget called for $750 billion in cuts to #Medicare & $844 billion in cuts to #Medicaid over next decade.   Sen. Joni ErnstJoni Kay ErnstThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: National Portrait Gallery's Kim Sajet says this era rewiring people's relationship with culture, art; Trump's war with Twitter heats up  The Hill's 12:30 Report - Presented by Facebook - Cuomo rings the first opening bell since March House Democrats make initial ad buys in battleground states MORE (R-Iowa)  @SenJonErnst As more of the economy gets reopened, the need for hand sanitizer will continue to grow. I'm calling on @US_FDA to clarify its policy for the manufacture of alcohol-based hand sanitizer products so Iowa’s biofuel producers can continue to help meet the needs of our communities.  ACROSS THE NATION  Washington to lift stay-at-home order on Friday. Washington, D.C., Mayor Muriel Bowser (D) announced Wednesday that the city will lift its stay-at-home order on Friday and enter phase one of reopening. Bowser said that the virus is still circulating but said the city had met its metrics of a 14-day decline in community spread of the virus as well as adequate testing and hospital capacity. (The Hill)    North Carolina requests “written plan” from GOP on coronavirus safety for convention. North Carolina’s top health official requested that the Republican National Convention provide a “written plan” on safety regulations it intends to enact at its confab scheduled for August in Charlotte. “As we work together, it is important to have a written plan from you and your team as soon as possible for how you plan to approach the COVID-19 safety aspects of the convention,” North Carolina Health and Human Services Secretary Mandy Cohen wrote to convention President and CEO Marcia Lee Kelly. (The Hill)    California governor says the virus’s first wave there is not over. California Gov. Gavin NewsomGavin NewsomSupreme Court denies California church's challenge to state restrictions Supreme Court denies Illinois churches' request for action after state eases restrictions Coronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Rep. Ro Khanna MORE (D) said the first wave of novel coronavirus infections in his state has not yet passed as the country moves toward resuming normal life. “I’ve been overwhelmed by 40 million Americans who live in the state of California, the vast majority doing the right thing, recognizing that this pandemic is not behind us,” he said in an interview on NBC’s “Today” show that aired Wednesday. “We’re not into a second wave. We still haven’t gotten through the first wave.” (Washington Post)   WORLD VIEW   Coronavirus at the border. California hospitals overwhelmed by patients from Mexico. As Mexico’s health care system has strained under the coronavirus, small community hospitals in Southern California, some of the poorest in the state, have been flooded with Americans who have fallen ill and crossed the border. (Washington Post)  Lack of COVID-19 testing undermines Africa's “success.” The relatively low numbers of coronavirus cases in Africa so far "have raised hopes that African countries may be spared the worst of the pandemic", in the words of the United Nations. But at the same time it urges caution. There is a general consensus among those in charge of health policy on the continent that testing rates are woefully low, and this could be distorting our understanding of how far the virus has spread. (BBC)  SCIENCE  Half of Americans in new poll say they would get COVID-19 vaccine. Roughly half of the Americans surveyed in a poll released Wednesday said they would get a vaccine to prevent COVID-19. (The Hill)   France bans hydroxychloroquine as COVID-19 treatment. France has banned hydroxychloroquine as a treatment for COVID-19, its government announced Wednesday. (The Hill)  BUSINESS  Boeing to shed 2,500 workers in initial phase of voluntary layoffs. Boeing will announce this week that it will shed about 2,500 workers in its first phase of voluntary layoffs due to the economic downturn caused by the coronavirus pandemic, union officials told The Wall Street Journal. Union officials told the newspaper that the first round of layoffs will focus on the Seattle-area commercial airplanes population and could be announced as early as Friday. (The Hill)   Hertz paid out $16 million in bonuses, days before bankruptcy. Hertz Global Holdings Inc. paid more than $16 million in retention bonuses to senior managers, including its new chief executive, just days before it filed for bankruptcy Friday night. The car-rental company said it agreed to pay a $700,000 bonus to Chief Executive Paul Stone, who was named to the post this month. (Wall Street Journal)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS  Pelosi's COVID-19 aid bill emphasizes an illegal immigration agenda. For everyone else, Nancy PelosiNancy Pelosi Sunday shows preview: Leaders weigh in as country erupts in protest over George Floyd death 5 things to know about US-China tensions over Hong Kong Pelosi calls Trump's decision to withdraw US from WHO 'an act of extraordinary senselessness' MORE erased all remaining doubt by holding up desperately needed aid for American citizens with her poison-pill demand to send taxpayer-funded checks to illegal immigrants. Support for open borders is not a byproduct of Democratic principles or policies. It is the principle; it is the policy. They’ve now made it official. (Donald Trump Jr. for The Hill)   The lost generation of Americans face uncertain future in the crisis. The media has labeled the Class of 2020 as the Lost Generation. They lost their final college semester, their graduation ceremonies, their summer internships, their job offers. Three million of them now enter a spiraling job market. Officially, the unemployment rate is 17.2 percent for recent college graduates. But with nearly 40 million Americans unemployed and most job seekers trapped in their homes (meaning not considered as “actively seeking work”) some economists think the real rate is significantly higher. (Former Congressman Steve IsraelSteven (Steve) J. IsraelThe Hill's Campaign Report: Trump ramps up attacks against Twitter The Hill's Coronavirus Report: National Portrait Gallery's Kim Sajet says this era rewiring people's relationship with culture, art; Trump's war with Twitter heats up  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mastercard CEO Ajay Banga says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now; Teva's Brendan O'Grady says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like Strategic Oil Reserve MORE for The Hill)    Contact tracing for COVID-19 will be the most complex health investigation ever. Around the globe, health workers in many countries already have spent months painstakingly calling people to let them know they may have come in contact with someone carrying the virus. This army of tracers urges those who’ve been exposed to isolate themselves rather than risk sickening others. From South Korea to Singapore contact tracing has slowed, though not stopped, the spread of COVID-19, the disease caused by the virus. (National Geographic)  GENEROUS SPIRITS       Britain’s George Gilbert and his wife, both infected with COVID-19, hold hands during a brief visit together. The couple is being treated at different locations and both people are part of a Cambridge trial that scientists hope could prevent organ failure and death in COVID-19 patients.    For hockey fans, some good news: the NHL has approved a 24-team playoff tournament if the season resumes. The National Hockey League moved one step closer to resuming its season that was suspended due to the COVID-19 pandemic. NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman announced Tuesday the league officially ended its regular season and will skip to a playoff tournament to determine its 2019-20 Stanley Cup champion. Bettman also said the league will select two hub cities where games will resume. (CNBC)    Chad “Ochocinco” Johnson leaves massive tip at Florida restaurant after reopening. Former Cincinnati Bengals player Chad Johnson was more than happy to dine in at Havana’s Cuban Cuisine on Monday, with restaurants allowed to reopen in Broward County and Miami-Dade County. Johnson, a former NFL star, left a $1,000 tip on a bill for $37.40, writing on the check “Congrats on re-opening, sorry about the pandemic, hope this helps. I LOVE YOU.” (WPEC)  ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  > Steve interviews Mastercard CEO AJAY BANGA  > Steve interviews Teva USA President and CEO BRENDAN O’GRADY  > Steve interviews US Surgeon General JEROME ADAMS  > Steve interviews former NIC Director GREG TREVERTON    Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.  Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report.  Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus      VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVE  View the discussion thread.

The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews the director of the National Portrait Gallery, Kim Sajet Steve Clemons: Kim, great to see you and thanks very much for joining us. You know, I just revealed, that I like to go hang out in the Kogod Court and write some of my articles for The Hill there. But just give me a quick picture of how it is to go from being the director of one of the world's great museum and clearly one of America's greatest museums, with tons of folks coming in, to now having that big piece of real estate and you’re mostly online. Kim Sajet: Right. The world is our oyster, right. We’re the only National Portrait Gallery of America, but now I've considered everybody who could get online as part of our audience. And you're right, we've created all these fantastic ways to still connect with us. So, you can go through eight different exhibitions online, and we started creating sort of special bespoke programs such as the story time for children that are 11 o’clock on Wednesday mornings, Eastern Standard Time. On Fridays, you can meet a real artist who teaches you how to make portraits; that’s also at 11 o'clock, and then all sorts of different ways of connecting with us from coloring books around portraits and educational materials. Because, as you know, there are a lot of people at home becoming teachers and teaching kids at home and setting up classrooms in their kitchens and living rooms.   Clemons: Well, that's something I hadn't thought about before because I do know a lot of people with their children have all of a sudden either online education or in-home schooling and all of that going on. How are you interacting with these desperate parents trying to get resources for their children? Sajet: Look, honestly, the best way to start is to get on to the website. So, that's npg.si.edu. But also, as we’re part of the Smithsonian, you can get on to the Smithsonian website, and there's all sorts of materials there for stay-at-home teacher parents. And so, as I said there are lessons in history but also in math, in natural history, in science. In our case, of course, it's about biography, and the people who have made a difference, like the America’s presidents. So, there's a lot of information, and increasingly we have a lot of information up in Spanish as well. And we have programs up there in sign language for people who are also needing different ways to communicate.   Clemons: One of the things I love about the portrait gallery is that I love the Gallery of the Presidents that we have all been seeing since we were kids, and the latest with the Obamas and others that have been there. But there are portraits of all different dimensions of American society, leaders, every racial group in society, those that have been neglected historically for various reasons that you’ve brought back into the mainstream. And sometimes appearing in that gallery is also an important political statement on inclusion and where we're going. I’d just like to get in your mind a little bit and understand that when we look back on this time of portraits of people who made a difference, you know, heroes in the country. How is that likely to take shape? You know, how is a Tony Fauci going to be depicted? How in this digital age are you going to depict digitally? Where does that go? Sajet: Yeah, right. I mean, part of the challenge is to live up to the motto on the great seal of America, right ,“E Pluribus Unum,” out of many, one. But we know traditionally that not everyone got to have their portrait taken because it was a very elite art form. And of course, not everyone got to become a president or a governor or, you know, a major entity in American history. So, the criteria that men and women who have made an impact on America's history and culture and if we looked at today I mean, we do have Dr. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciOvernight Defense: Trump extends deployment of National Guard troops to aid with coronavirus response | Pentagon considers reducing quarantine to 10 days | Lawmakers push for removal of Nazi headstones from VA cemeteries Don't move the COVID-19 goalpost Overnight Health Care: Sewage testing gives clues of coronavirus | White House says Trump would take hydroxychloroquine again | Trump marks 'very sad milestone' of 100K virus deaths MORE in the collection as part of a group portrait that was done a couple of years ago. It’s a video piece, actually. But we're looking for a better one now of him alone. But then, of course, you know, people like José Andrés and we have the Gateses — who, as we know, have been very big supporters right now trying to find a vaccine for COVID-19 — have been in the collection for a while. But, also adding scientists and then saying, do we have women scientists? So, recently we brought in Frances Arnold, who won the Nobel last year for biochemical engineering.   Clemons: You know, one of the other things I've done, and this may not be within the realm of the Portrait Gallery per se, but I just read a book called “The 10 Caesars” or “10 Caesars” by Barry Strauss. And in it he tells a little bit about one of the debilitating issues for Rome, in that time, the Roman Empire, was a virus that hit in the third century and it took 15 years to sort of burn out. When you go back and look at the history of viruses — and, of course, there's a lot of reference to the one that happened about 100 years ago in this country in 1918. How did those moments of pandemics affect the way people think about world? And how has it affected art? Sajet: I think particularly, if I could take the portraits, so I think we do look to people who have made a change. We also look to people who have passed as remembrances. One of things I think is a fascinating period is actually the Civil War, which is the first time you actually get readily available photographs that you could carry around. They were called carte de visite. You could have a camera that would take 4 or 8 or 12 pictures, and many of the men who died on the battlefield were found with those little photographs in their coat pockets, and their families knew that they had actually died with them being thought of. So, I think pandemics and any major disasters we also think about the people who made a difference in our lives. And we realized at the end of the day we're more alike than we are different, and that what matters is communication, empathy, community, sharing, being part of the solution, not the problem.   Clemons: And one of the other things I was thinking about the Portrait Gallery is how political art is, and you are at the middle of a lot of knots, a lot of tug of wars, and I want to say drag you through them again. But you are in a sense a manifestation of the moment, a manifestation of the tensions of the moment, and I'd like you to take your curator’s hat off for a moment and say, what advice do you have for governors? And for those who are sitting in their own political tug of war between contending sides? How do you hear both sides? How do you get it right and get to an equilibrium that is — that may not be the very best, but is the best you can get? Sajet: Listen, I always say there's no moral test to be in the Portrait Gallery. No one is perfect, right? We're not a hall of heroes. We all make mistakes, and we will do good things. What gets you into the portrait galleries is the summation of a life. When the ledger is actually tallied up at the end of it, have you really changed America? And ideally, for the better. I mean, we also have people who weren't so great, like John Wilkes Booth who killed Lincoln. And so, I would say, look at the long game. But as you journey along the way, you know, reach out to others and have empathy and have open communication because they're the people that we can see who have been in the Portrait Gallery, who really were able to take the resources that they had and make them work for them even in the most difficult circumstances.   Clemons: Can you give us a quick glimpse, Kim, of some of your — I mean, I don’t call them best because I know you love all your children, but some of the virtual tours that you have, what you've designed for the great, broad global public to experience at your museum? Sajet: Well, you can certainly go through the America’s presidents. But I think one of my most favorite exhibitions right now is our portrait competition, which happens every three years, and it is a call for entries around the country. So, this time we had 2,700 entrants, we picked 46 artists, and I guess maybe it was fortuitous, but the winning entry is a video piece by an artist called Hugo Crosthwaite that you can actually watch I would argue just as well, if not better, at home, because you don't have all the background noise of visitors in the galleries. If you have a good computer and a pretty good audio system, it's a really great portrait of a woman who is on a bus crossing the border from Mexico into the United States.   Clemons: One of the other things, and I'm sorry to get so practical, you know, and into the grit of all of this, you know, just in reference, I had José Andrés on The Coronavirus Report recently and also interviewed Tom Colicchio, and both of them were putting out playbooks on how to reopen, how to think about it, what are the health guardrails to getting back to something like we used to have? It's going to be different, but getting back. Are you thinking at all about putting health guardrails together or a playbook together for returning to something that's a hybrid of a virtual experience and an in-person experience at the Portrait Gallery? Sajet: You know, we are part of the Smithsonian. So, we're working with all our siblings to work out what that looks like. You know, there are 19 museums and a National Zoo and then all the research centers. So, whatever we do, we're going to do in coordination, and likely it will be a phase project as we sort of think about how we open. But, to your point about, you know, I do think that we’ve added a couple of tools to the toolbox now. For example, we've done one fabulous program with some of our donors where we did a little sort of walk through an exhibition that we're planning with the curator and people were fascinated. They loved it. We have another one actually coming up tomorrow night. And we realized that we should be doing this more often because we are the National Portrait Gallery, and not everyone can come from around the country. And they can still have a relationship with us and learn something and be engaged. So, I do think that we're going to be going into this hybrid model and even more, you know — one of my biggest dreams, actually, is to set up what I call portrait productions. I would love to have a full-time videographer and you know a person who does audio and do lot smaller sort of communications, much as I think, like the BBC has done in the past. I think the way they've changed their model is really kind of fascinating. As you know, I have a podcast. We’re in the second season. We're now doubling our listenership to that. And I want more of that. So, we need to be thinking about the on-site experience, but we more and more need to be thinking about the online experience. Now, the online experience has to be different, and it has to be additive, you know. You can't replace what it's like to look at a real work of art, but you can do it in a very different and engaging way.   Clemons: I think in our last minute, Kim, I'm gonna be unfair to you. I'm gonna ask to put you on the spot again. I remember just a wonderful set of events that you had at the Portrait Gallery where you’d bring in well-known entertainers, or film directors, or talk show hosts, and they would take a piece of art from the gallery — I remember one subject was once a Cy Twombly painting that was there — and then basically give a public talk and even a show, if you will, around that piece of art. So, I want to ask you to pick your favorite piece of art, your most meaningful piece of art during this time of coronavirus. What moves Kim Sajet? Sajet: We have a podcast that's coming up of Sojourner Truth, and it's a photograph of her. What I had not realized until we had talked to our senior historian, Gwendolyn DuBois Shaw, is that in her lap she's holding knitting, but she's actually made the yarn look like the map of the United States. So, here was a woman who was once enslaved, who couldn't read or write, but she controlled her own image and she loved America dearly. And I think that, to me, is, it’s a portrait of resilience and hope and ingenuity, and it's just sort of a fascinating story. So, that's the one I'm in love with right now. But ask me in two hours and I'll have a different portrait.   Clemons: I'm gonna tag onto my last question with one last question: How do you think COVID is going to be depicted in the arts?  Sajet: I think there's already a lot coming up, but I think what I'm really impressed with is just sort of this focus on families, the people around us, maybe less about celebrity in some way and more about those who we’ve spent a lot of time with. But also the people on the front lines, right? The doctors, the nurses, the cleaners, the people stocking our shelves. I mean, they're the heroes really of this whole situation. And I think we're going to see more of their portraits, certainly in the next portrait competition when that comes out. View the discussion thread.

North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper (D) lifted the state's stay-at-home order on Friday but has felt increasing pressure from President TrumpDonald John TrumpDonald Trump and Joe Biden create different narratives for the election The hollowing out of the CDC Poll: Biden widens lead over Trump to 10 points MORE to guarantee that all coronavirus restrictions will be lifted by the end of August when the Republican Party is set to have its national convention in Charlotte. Trump on Monday threatened to move the convention out of Charlotte, accusing Cooper of still being in "Shutdown mood." "I love the Great State of North Carolina, so much so that I insisted on having the Republican National Convention in Charlotte at the end of August. Unfortunately, Democrat Governor, @RoyCooperNC is still in Shutdown mood & unable to guarantee that by August we will be allowed full attendance in the Arena," the president said in a series of tweets. "In other words, we would be spending millions of dollars building the Arena to a very high standard without even knowing if the Democrat Governor would allow the Republican Party to fully occupy the space," he added. North Carolina has entered the safer-at-home phase of Cooper's plan, which allows previously shuttered businesses such as restaurants and barbershops to operate at 50 percent capacity. Gatherings are limited to 10 people indoors and 25 people are allowed for outdoor events. Cooper was again pressured on Tuesday, this time by RNC chairwoman Ronna Romney McDaniel, who claimed “a lot of states” had offered to host the convention — scheduled for Aug. 24-27 at Charlotte's Spectrum Center — following the president's tweets. “The president is right to say to the governor, you need to assure us before we lock in all these hotel rooms and we bring all of this revenue to your state that you’re going to let us have this convention,” McDaniel said in an appearance on "Fox & Friends." “There’s a lot of states that are calling the president right now saying, hey, why don’t you bring that revenue to our state?” she added.  Florida Gov. Ron DeSantisRonald Dion DeSantis Sunday shows preview: Leaders weigh in as country erupts in protest over George Floyd death The battle of two Cubas Disney World plans to reopen in July MORE (R) piled on as well, saying that he'd "love" to host the convention in his state. Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp (R) made a similar offer, citing the Peach State's "world-class facilities." North Carolina did not implement phase two of Cooper's plan as hoped over Memorial Day weekend, reporting Saturday that a record 1,107 people tested positive for COVID-19 on Friday. The News & Observer reported Monday that 627 new people had been hospitalized due to the virus, a new one-day high for the state. North Carolina's average number of tests returning positive in the past seven days is around 8 percent, according to state health data. That's above the current national average, which is roughly 5.5 percent. Cooper has yet to make the guarantee that Trump is asking for and his safer-at-home phase will run until at least June 26. View the discussion thread.

WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > WHO warns of ‘immediate second peak’ if countries reopen too soon  > A masked Cuomo rings opening bell at NYSE after two month closure; markets open to surge of optimism on promising vaccine candidate > Brazil leads world in daily number of coronavirus deaths; White House travel ban from country to take effect today > Fears of meat shortages rise as coronavirus spreads through packing plants  > Novavax begins clinical trial of COVID-19 vaccine; results expected in July  > Former NIC Director Greg Treverton says US response to COVID-19 worst since founding of republic   The weekend that was. Americans’ abilities to conform with stay-at-home orders and social distancing guidelines faced perhaps the toughest challenge yet as thousands across the country celebrated Memorial Day — traditionally, a long-awaited entree into summer and the good times to follow. But this year, things were different. Officials continued to stress the need for Americans to maintain social distance wherever possible and wear masks to help prevent  further community spread of the virus. To be sure, many did comply and spent their weekend in close quarters with loved ones, sneaking in a bit of “normal” fun along the way.  But many Americans weren’t so careful. At Missouri’s Lake of the Ozarks, scores of revelers flocked to crowded restaurants and pool resorts. Social media erupted with photos and videos of folks packed like sardines into bars and pools, with no attention being paid to social distancing measures. Masks were nowhere to be seen. In fact, you wouldn’t have even known there was a pandemic from watching the footage. The scene at the Ozarks could easily be a microcosm of folks throughout the country doing much the same — rushing to public places in a desperate attempt to regain a sense of the normalcy.   But, for so many other Americans, these scenes are troubling. If we are all being implored to social distance and to wear masks — not just to protect ourselves, but to protect others, particularly the most vulnerable groups — it seems like a stab in the back from our fellow Americans. Are we “all in this together” or will a greater divide emerge between Americans who view attending a crowded bar as their “constitutional right” and the large swaths of Americans who are perhaps more health-conscious and more eager to take the recommended measures to protect the public health? We’re heading toward our new normal. But, as we learned over the weekend, how people are approaching this new phase of reopening will differ drastically across the country.   THE INTERVIEW Greg Treverton, professor at the University of Southern California and former director of the National Intelligence Council        Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Tuesday, May 26.        Editor’s Note.     This weekend, I saw smaller examples of the now widely reported human jam at the Lake of the Ozarks on the eastern shore of Maryland. The throngs of folks I saw were mostly young — but not all. There were a good number of 50+ people wanting to blend in and perhaps round down their age. That’s understandable, and intergenerational projects and fun are something I applaud.   I posted the above picture with no comment on Facebook this weekend other than that I wrote “Coronavirus weekend.” The comments that followed were intense, on all sides of the community debate about what responsible social activity looks like while we all struggle past this vicious and paralyzing pandemic. One good friend said that it’s completely understandable and predictable that these kinds of scenes would happen because people can’t be locked up for weeks on end without contact. He actually said it’s like giving up sex, which he said was impossible. The response was quick and vigorous for those who talked about how irresponsible such gatherings were for the safety of others, how these folks “deserved to die” (I decided to fade that comment from the list), how their calculations of life and death were different than that particular Facebook friend. My friend’s original comment didn’t last the day, and he took it down — which I find regrettable as there was a truth in his comments that deserve their place in the storm we are in.     Another friend asked if my intention in posting the pic was to shame these folks and get my Facebook community to shame them. Her perspective: What these folks had decided to do was nowhere near as bad as some of what she had seen on the beaches or around the country and that this could be seen in part as an exhibition of relatively good behavior rather than of bad behaviors. I responded that my view was neutral. I posted to see what folks thought — and got a variation of responses which I think is consistent with the competing views out there on what lines we cross and don’t cross in these times. I told her I agreed with her that this was not hundreds of people together — and there was no way to know what calculations or communications went on between these folks who wanted to enjoy a nice day out on the eastern side of Maryland’s Chesapeake Bay region.     But the debate was intense and the views, in some cases, strident. I think we all need to find ways to accept that such scenes like the above are going to happen, and that some of these people will interact with us in other parts of our lives — at the grocery store or the bakery, or the gas station, or even as we increasingly go back to some sort of work environment. The key is probably not to demonize others for letting off steam, but rather to continue to assure that one’s own precautions are high. You control what you yourself do, but it gets messy and complicated when trying to change the behavior of others as rules are being relaxed. I would have loved to be at that boat tie-up, but the time isn’t right for me. I get that some others calculate differently. What I saw was “not” Lake of the Ozarks, though it wasn’t in the comfort zone of many. Until we get a vaccine and real protection, this is what learning to live with the virus is going to be like.   – Steve Clemons  Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik.    Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report.  Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE  ICYMI: catch up on last week's programs        On Thursday, The Hill hosted “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy anchored by Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinHillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues On The Money: Senate Dems pump brakes on new stimulus checks | Trump officials sued over tax refunds | Fed to soon open small-business lending program Schumer slams Trump's Rose Garden briefing on China as 'pathetic' MORE.   Watch the full program video here.    On Wednesday, The Hill hosted “The Vir[Tech]tual World of Tomorrow.”    Watch the full program video here.  We want to hear from you! Follow us @TheHillEvents and keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive     CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE  There are 5,543,439 reported cases of COVID-19 and 347,836 global deaths as of the time of this newsletter.    The U.S., where all states are beginning some sort of reopening, is reporting 1,669,040 cases and 98,426 deaths. Brazil’s cases continue to skyrocket and now stand at 374,898. For the first time Monday, Brazil surpassed the U.S. Monday for the first time with the most reported coronavirus fatalities over a 24-hour period. Russia is reporting 362,342 cases. 266,590 in the U.K. Spain 236,259. Italy 230,555. France 183,067. 180,802 in Germany. 157,814 in Turkey, 150,600 in India. 139,511 in Iran. 123,979 in Peru. 87,122 in Canada. 84,102 in China. 47,202 in Qatar. 45,780 in the Netherlands. 34,440 in Sweden. 31,086 in the UAE. 23,165 in Indonesia. 11,225 in South Korea. 11,183 in Panama. 8,697 in Algeria.    New York is reporting 362,764 cases of the coronavirus. New Jersey 155,764. 112,017 in Illinois. 96,595 in California. 93,271 in Massachusetts. 72,682 in Pennsylvania. 56,409 in Texas. 54,881 in Michigan. 52,255 in Florida. 47,687 in Maryland. 43,592 in Georgia. 39,342 in Virginia. 20,535 in Tennessee. 20,065 in Washington. 16,784 in Arizona. 15,584 in Wisconsin. 7,026 in New Mexico. 6,138 in Oklahoma.    Now that every state has begun to reopen in some form, U.S. hospitalizations are on a gradual upswing and cases are expected to rise, according to Scott Gottlieb, President TrumpDonald John TrumpDonald Trump and Joe Biden create different narratives for the election The hollowing out of the CDC Poll: Biden widens lead over Trump to 10 points MORE’s former commissioner of Food and Drugs. “We now see a trend in an uptick in hospitalizations. It’s a small uptick, but it is an uptick and it’s unmistakable and it is probably a result of reopening,” Gottlieb said on CNBC’s “Squawk Box.” “We are going to have to watch it.”   Some observations of the U.S. data from The Hill’s national correspondent Reid Wilson:    The statistics show the outbreak is still a Northeastern phenomenon, but it’s moving more to the Midwest. The 12 Midwestern states make up about 21 percent of the nation’s population, but they accounted for 27 percent of the new cases last week. The nine Northeastern states make up 17 percent of the country’s population, and almost 24 percent of the new cases last week — still high, but a number that has come down substantially as case counts in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and Massachusetts fall from their daunting peaks.   Southern states confirmed 42,554 new cases last week, and case counts are growing week-over-week in Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina and Tennessee. But the 13 Southern states make up 35 percent of the nation’s population and 27 percent of new cases.   The Mid-Atlantic continues to be troubling: Maryland and West Virginia showed week-over-week case increases, and Virginia has lagged far behind in testing capacity, raising questions about just how many cases the Commonwealth is missing. Those three states plus Washington, D.C., and Delaware account for just 3 percent of the population, but 6.6 percent of the new cases.   Western states are doing best, despite a spike in California. States that touch the Pacific have 16 percent of the population, and just 10 percent of new cases.   Some good news: Alaska has gone 19 days without recording a single COVID-19 related death. Hawaii’s streak is at 22 days, and Montana’s is at 26 days. Vermont has gone a little more than a week without a single death.   New York is still experiencing more new cases than any other state, 11,309 last week. But that’s a really positive trajectory, sitting at about one-sixth the number of weekly new cases the state was confirming at its peak in early April.   WASHINGTON WATCH  McConnell: Talking about fifth coronavirus bill 'in the next month or so.' Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellFor city parks: Pass the Great American Outdoors Act now US ill-prepared for coronavirus-fueled mental health crisis Schumer to GOP: Cancel 'conspiracy hearings' on origins of Russia probe MORE (R-Ky.) said on Tuesday that there would "likely" be a fifth coronavirus relief bill "in the next month or so." "Many of you are asking, what next? I think there's likely to be another bill. It will not be the $3 trillion bill the House passed the other day. But there's still a likelihood that more will be needed," McConnell said during an event at a hospital in Louisville, Ky. (The Hill)    Administration’s travel ban on Brazil to take effect today. The White House's ban on travelers arriving from Brazil, aimed at helping prevent the spread of the coronavirus, will take effect late Tuesday — two days earlier than previously planned.  (USA Today)    GOP faces internal conflicts on fifth coronavirus bill. Republicans are increasingly saying they expect to pass a fifth coronavirus bill — just don’t ask them to agree, yet, on what should be in it. (The Hill) Trump threatens to pull Republican convention out of North Carolina. President Trump began a solemn Memorial Day railing against North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper, a Democrat, ahead of the 2020 Republican National Convention, threatening to pull it out of Charlotte, where the convention is expected to be held Aug. 24 to 27. (CNN)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. Susan CollinsSusan Margaret CollinsDemocrats gear up to hit GOP senators on DACA OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump administration gives renewables more time to take advantage of tax credits | House Republicans introduce bill to speed mining projects for critical minerals | Watchdog faults EPA communications in contamination of NC river The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Unemployment claims now at 41 million with 2.1 million more added to rolls; Topeka mayor says cities don't have enough tests for minorities and homeless communities MORE (R-Maine)  @SenatorCollins Farmers can begin applying for direct relief payments TODAY through the Coronavirus Food Assistance Program created by the CARES Act. I encourage all Maine farmers who have been harmed financially due to COVID-19 to apply for this federal assistance.    Rep. Donna ShalalaDonna Edna ShalalaThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Former NIC Director Greg Treverton rips US response; WHO warns of 'immediate second peak' if countries reopen too quickly  Treasury has not disbursed B in airline support: oversight panel We can't afford to let local news die MORE (D-Fla.)  @RepShalala This #OlderAmericansMonth we celebrate the contributions seniors have made in our families and communities. As we continue to confront the #COVID19 pandemic, we must ensure they have the support they need.   Sen. Marco RubioMarco Antonio RubioSchumer to GOP: Cancel 'conspiracy hearings' on origins of Russia probe Trump administration designates B of PPP funds for community lenders The Memo: Trump's Scarborough tweets unsettle his allies MORE (R-Fla.)  @marcorubio Community bank First National Bank of Moose Lake in #Minnesota funded 69 #PPPloans valued over $8.1 million, saving 948 local jobs. #PPPworks  ACROSS THE NATION  Meat shortages could worsen as infections multiply at U.S. processing plants. For many Americans, Memorial Day marks the start of barbecue season. But the ripple effects of the coronavirus pandemic are likely to cause meat shortages to worsen as the virus spreads through America’s meatpacking plants. (Washington Post)  California church going to Supreme Court over in-person restrictions. A church in California is petitioning the Supreme Court to block California Gov. Gavin NewsomGavin NewsomSupreme Court denies California church's challenge to state restrictions Supreme Court denies Illinois churches' request for action after state eases restrictions Coronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Rep. Ro Khanna MORE's (D) order restricting in-person services amid the coronavirus pandemic. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW   WHO warns of “immediate second peak” if countries reopen too soon. The World Health Organization is warning that countries with declining coronavirus cases could face a second wave of the outbreak if they lift restrictions too soon. (The Hill)   Brazil records world's highest daily coronavirus death toll for first time. Brazil for the first time has surpassed the U.S. with the most reported coronavirus fatalities over a 24-hour period Monday, Reuters reported. Brazil confirmed 807 deaths, while the U.S. reported 620, according to the news service. (The Hill)  SCIENCE  Novavax is beginning clinical trials of its coronavirus vaccine. Novavax, a biotech company focused on developing vaccines against infectious diseases, announced Monday that it is beginning a phase one clinical trial of its COVID-19 vaccine candidate in Australia. Results of the trial are expected in July. (Forbes)  Merck in collaboration to develop coronavirus vaccine. U.S. drugmaker Merck on Tuesday said it plans to work alongside nonprofit scientific research organization IAVI to develop a potential vaccine against the coronavirus. The news helped send Merck shares up about 3 percent during the premarket. (CNBC)   BUSINESS        Cuomo rings bell as NYSE reopens to big gains. A masked Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo calls Brooklyn clashes 'disturbing,' asks attorney general to review Overnight Health Care: Trump says US 'terminating' relationship with WHO | Cuomo: NYC on track to start reopening week of June 8 | COVID-19 workplace complaints surge 10 things to know today about coronavirus MORE (D) rang the opening bell Tuesday as the New York Stock Exchange trading floor opened for the first time in two months. The markets opened to a surge of optimism following Memorial Day weekend as the country began to reopen and news of additional potential vaccine candidates has surfaced. (The Hill)    Women suffering steeper job losses in COVID-19 economy. The economic devastation caused by the coronavirus has hit women particularly hard, a contrast to the 2009 downturn that was known as "the men's recession." The latest employment figures show that women, by a 10-point margin, have seen the majority of the job losses as large parts of the economy have shut down. (The Hill)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS  Craig Fugate: Emergency communications will be the next challenge of COVID-19. During my time as President Obama's administrator at the Federal Emergency Management Agency, we coordinated the response to multiple record-breaking disasters. But the COVID-19 crisis is challenging the United States' emergency response resources in a much more profound way. Never have our federal and state agencies faced a national crisis of this scale, affecting all 50 states simultaneously for a period of several months. (Craig Fugate for The Hill)    No “dole” for America: How to recover from COVID-19. Getting America to full employment again won’t be easy. As a recent study by the University of Chicago’s Becker-Friedman Institute shows, the COVID-19 lockdown has changed the dynamic of working. Some workers are now collecting more dollars under the CARES Act, the law that funds payroll protection, than they did when they worked. Those workers may not be eager to return to jobs. (Thomas D. Lehrman and Amity Shlaes for The Hill)  Frustrated and struggling, New Yorkers contemplate abandoning the city they love. New York City is a shadow of its pre-pandemic normal. Many residents are out of work, out of money, out of patience and out of sorts. Reassessments are happening throughout the country, but nowhere else are they as sharply focused as here, in the nation’s most populated, most dense, most diverse metropolis — where more than 21,000 have died. (Washington Post)   GENEROUS SPIRITS Facebook is giving $20 million to women, minority, veteran-owned businesses. Sheryl Sandberg, the chief operating officer at Facebook, announced Wednesday that the social networking giant is giving $20 million to small businesses owned by women, minorities and veterans across the U.S. (The Hill)  651 vehicles show up for surprise birthday of 8-year-old fighting cancer. A surprise birthday parade for an 8-year-old boy had a massive, 651-vehicle turnout on Saturday. Leesport, Pa., resident Riley Rejniak, who is battling neuroblastoma a second time, waved as hundreds of cars, motorcycles and first responders arrived in waves."He waved to every single car and had the biggest smile face," mom Ashley Rejniak told "Good Morning America." "For me, I got emotional multiple times. We know he's loved by our community but the amount of gifts, balloons ... it was amazing." (Good Morning America)   ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  > Steve interviews Mastercard CEO AJAY BANGA  > Steve interviews Teva USA President and CEO BRENDAN O’GRADY  > Steve interviews US Surgeon General JEROME ADAMS   Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.  Click here to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report.  Click here to subscribe to our Overnight Healthcare Newsletter to stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus       VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVE View the discussion thread.

The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Gregory Treverton.   Read excerpts from the interview below.   Clemons: When you were basically the CIA's chief organizer of threats, where was pandemics on your list of possible problems for us? Treverton: It's been on the list for a very long time, I think. And, you know, I remember before I was in the government, when I was out of government, running a center at the Rand Corporation, and this was early 2000s, we ranked threats to the United States as nuisance, serious or existential. And the only threat in the existential category was pandemics. My predecessors of the National Intelligence Council in their 2004 report, Global Trends, they painted almost exactly the scenario we are in, unfortunately, with globalization reversing, global travel stopping, huge economic hits, so strategically, in terms of strategic warning, this has been on our list for a very long time. The problem is it hasn't always been as salient as it should have been. We have an episode, and then we kind of forget it. We've gone back to business as usual several times, even after SARS, even after 12,000 people died in 2001 from H1N1.   Clemons: The leadership of both political parties saw something like this coming. Why did we fail? What was the real reason for the breakdown in preparing for this? Treverton: It goes way back I think and as always there are so many causes that are intertwined. Plainly, we haven't been investing in public health in general. Budgets of CDC and FDA have been going down, not up. But we've had these previous episodes, and then we tended to say, “Well, now we're through that," and we'll go back to business as usual, not recognizing that this is something that's gonna be continually there and that we have to be prepared for. So, the infrastructure wasn't really there. And then we got this combination of the Chinese ... hiding. So, we lost time there. But even when we got warning in mid-January. In mid-January, we should have known that if there was something going on in China, it was gonna be here, right? We knew globalization was gonna bring it here. And at that point, we really should have done what the Germans did, begun stockpiling tests and preparing. But we didn’t. And that I think a lot of that probably does lie at Mr. Trump's door, since he continued to say, "nothing much here, no big deal, it will be over quickly." But there was also, it seems to me, challenges from bureaucracy. The CDC and FDA look a little bit to me like the FBI and the CIA before 9/11, not really cooperating as closely as they needed to and maybe a little bit overconfident thinking, “Well, we can handle this.” Well, it turns out they couldn't.   Clemons: I think the big question is, what do we do for the future? And how do we look at that decisionmaking and action behavior that we saw from various parts and move forward and in the pages of The Hill you made a suggestion. So, what did you suggest? Treverton: Well, it seems to me that first we need to have a thorough investigation I think, and really lay out all the facts, something like the 9/11 panel. That seems to be inevitable and a good thing to do. The big questions for me there are do you want to try and do the usual bureaucratic solution. As after 9/11 we created the Department of Homeland Security. Do you want to create a Department of Health Security? Not sure that's the best idea, but that is certainly gonna be on the agenda I would think. At least I hope it's on the agenda because this is in terms of needless loss of American lives, this, I think, is going to rank as the biggest government failure in the history of the republic. You can talk about 1918. But in 1918 we really didn't know what to do. This time around we knew what to do. We just didn't do it. So, I think the first instinct will be do we need to create some special government agency? The real challenge is making the interface between public and private work better. What didn't happen here was early enough the, I suppose being cautious when your commander in chief is saying no big deal, then people at CDC and FDA are not gonna take risks. They're not going to circumvent procedures. They're not going to say OK labs, go ahead and start making these tests without prior permission. That just wasn't gonna happen. So, that's to me the critical challenge is working better across that public-private interface since really all the capacity, much of the capacity, once the labs are turned loose, they could do a lot, but they weren't turned loose until way late, way late in the game.    Clemons: Were you surprised at the reports from states that they were having to compete against one another sort of a law of the jungle and trying to secure PPE equipment and testing equipment, and that there just seemed to be an absence of direction and an absence of organizing platform?  Treverton: I mean, it was a terrible spectacle to behold, right? Here's a time when you really want national leadership, right? This is the nation's problem. It's not individual states. And we have not basically, we had this kind of free for all, as you describe, just amazing. Some of the state leaders, like my governor, like Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo calls Brooklyn clashes 'disturbing,' asks attorney general to review Overnight Health Care: Trump says US 'terminating' relationship with WHO | Cuomo: NYC on track to start reopening week of June 8 | COVID-19 workplace complaints surge 10 things to know today about coronavirus MORE came through looking like real leaders. But they had to be. But what we really needed was a concerted, organized, national plan. The problem there is who exactly should lead it. You know in that case, FEMA is not the strongest of government agencies. This is not something you can easily put the Pentagon on, but there needed really be an organizing principle and a strategy, we didn't really have a strategy, as you say, that resulted in this incredible free-for-all with states competing for masks and PPE. And then, as you say, having FEMA hijack some of them for purposes we are not quite clear about. It was exactly a sort of textbook in how not to manage a crisis.   Clemons: How do you achieve bipartisan approval in setting up the kind of commission you talked about? And do you have confidence that such a commission could be pursued given what you see in the Senate and the House today?  Treverton: I'm not sure. I mean, it is a terrible time, and so far the pandemic seems to if anything, sharpened, intensified our gridlock, not diluted it. So, I am not optimistic. Not the simple passage of time, who knows what's gonna happen in November, but with the simple passage of time, I hope that some of the shots that the intelligence community has taken will go down, will not persist and that they will continue to be looked at. This is an awkward one because pandemics are obviously something of interest to intelligence, but they are primarily a medical matter. And so part of the problem here may have been that we had a little bit of a gap between what the medical pieces of the government are doing and what the intelligence community was doing. We now know that the intelligence community was giving warnings, but those ... weren't necessarily connected to anything operational.   Clemons: Is it long overdue that we begin looking at the fact that no matter where this virus came from, and I should say most every legitimate person I know believes that it evolved naturally, but it raises the question of is this now something where people begin to try to look at copycat possibilities? And what will this do to our intelligence establishment? Treverton: Biological threats have been high on everybody's list. They haven't gotten as much attention as other things, like nuclear or terrorism, but I think they've been high on the intelligence community’s list for a long, long time. We'd written in the past that one of the challenges is if something like this happened, you wouldn't immediately know whether it was naturally occurring, or accident, or somebody doing it on purpose, and that will continue to be true. It does seem to me that as we re-think what to do after [COVID-19], we really need to rethink what we mean by national security. We are spending lots of money on the military, lots and lots of money on the military, and not very much on public health. But now we find that the biggest threat we’ve faced, probably in a very long time is this, a pandemic, not an aggressive foe.   Clemons: Are there any other blind spots to our national conversation or thinking about our security today that you think should be on the table?  Treverton: I don't think there are great blind spots. We've been for so long, so mesmerized by terrorism. I used to make audiences angry after 9/11 by saying that their chances of being killed by a terrorist were slightly less than being killed by lightning. But we did spend an awful lot of time and effort and money on terrorism. I think one of the things that was a blind spot was this, has been a blind spot, is biological issues and particularly, naturally occurring. This wasn’t exactly naturally, may have been an accident, but certainly was a bad thing happening. ... But that was a major, major blind spot in our continuing thinking. We kept raising it, but we didn't really do anything to act on it. We actually drew down the reserves of PPE, protective equipment, not built them up. So, it really did catch us by surprise when it shouldn't have. View the discussion thread.

Alabama has reported more than 4,900 confirmed cases of the COVID-19 disease in the past two weeks as it has gradually allowed businesses to reopen.  The majority of the new cases have come from Alabama's two most populated counties: Jefferson and Mobile. Jefferson County — home to Birmingham, the state's most populous city — has reported 1,638 cases, while Mobile has confirmed 2,044. Montgomery County, the third most populous county in Alabama, also has more than 1,000 cases.  Alabama overall has reported more than 15,300 confirmed cases of COVID-19 during the pandemic. At least 573 people in the state have died from the virus. Montgomery Mayor Steve Reed (D) pushed back against the state's reopening strategy in an interview Monday with CNN, saying that the state has moved away from following social distancing guidelines. “I think certainly people have decided that the pandemic is over, that there's not a risk out there," Reed said on the network's "New Day." "They are ready to get back to their normal way of doing things, and that’s a mistake that we’ve been making over the last few weeks, is we have kind of eased restrictions in this community and across the state. We’re still in the middle of a crisis. We’re still battling this pandemic,” Reed said. Montgomery, Alabama, Mayor Steve Reed says he isn't comfortable with the governor’s plan for reopening the state.https://t.co/7wgm0B3Arw pic.twitter.com/cBFUEXjHBC Alabama's rate of positive tests, another important statistic used to determine how a community is handling the pandemic, has been slowly rising. According to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University, at the beginning of the month, Alabama's average positivity rate was hovering around 5 percent. Now, the average is roughly 8 percent. Alabama's stay-at-home order expired on April 30. It is now under a "safer-at-home" order issued by Gov. Kay Ivey, a Republican.  At first, retail stores were allowed to reopen at 50 percent capacity, with beaches, restaurants and bars being allowed to resume dine-in operations, as long as they kept to social distancing guidelines. Ivey amended her order last week, allowing for even more of Alabama to resume business. Now, entertainment venues — bowling alleys, arcades, theaters — can be open as long as safety guidelines are followed. Child care facilities and summer camps were also green-lighted, and athletic practices resumed Saturday. Moreover, educational institutions are slated to reopen June 1. This safer-at-home phase of Ivey's reopening strategy is set to go until July 3, when the situation in the state will be reevaluated again. View the discussion thread.

The prison advocacy group founded by rappers Meek Mill and Jay-Z is partnering with the National Sheriffs’ Association to deliver protective gear to every jail in the country in an effort to curb the spread of coronavirus among incarcerated people. The Reform Alliance, which recently received a $10 million donation from Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey, will partner with the sheriffs’ association to distribute masks and other equipment to prison staff. “America’s sheriffs are grateful to the REFORM Alliance for providing the scarcely available life-saving equipment that are vital to the maintaining their jails during the pandemic,” said incoming National Sheriffs’ Association President Dave Mahoney. “These masks will ensure sheriffs are able to keep their jails as safe and healthy as possible. We look forward to partnering with REFORM on areas as we move forward.” The Reform Alliance, which is run by Van Jones, has already sent more than 100,000 surgical masks to Rikers Island and other prison facilities. The group has been warning about the spread of coronavirus through the prison system; there have been hundreds of cases at Rikers Island alone. The Reform Alliance has urged federal and state lawmakers to reduce incarcerations during the outbreak by sending elderly and nonviolent criminals to home confinement or by suspending jail sentences for technical violations. “Law enforcement officers put their lives on the line every day to keep our communities safe," said Reform Alliance chief advocacy officer Jessica Jackson. "We’re proud to partner with the National Sheriffs Association to help protect them and vulnerable populations in our jails from the coronavirus. We’ve seen how rapidly the virus can spread through jails and how failure to stop the spread behind bars puts local communities at risk. We've also seen sheriffs throughout the country adopt evidence-based solutions to get incarcerated people out of harm's way and remain in contact with loved ones. We hope this is one of many opportunities to work with sheriffs across the nation.” View the discussion thread.

WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Hydroxychloroquine linked to increased death, heart conditions in COVID-19 patients  > Fauci says it is ‘conceivable’ that US could deploy vaccine by December  > Biden says he would make coronavirus vaccine free for everyone in US  > COVID toe? The virus’s weirdest symptoms are only emerging now  > On Memorial Day weekend, beach towns tell New Yorkers to stay away > The pandemic may forever change cities > Surgeon General Jerome Adams says we must invest much more in public health infrastructure in underserved communities, during and after Covid  THE INTERVIEW  Vice Adm. Jerome Adams, U.S. Surgeon General  Jerome Adams stresses surveillance, separation, cleaning and coverage in fight against coronavirus; adds investing in public health infrastructure in underserved communities will be better for everyone, before and after Covid          Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT   Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Friday, May 22.  Editor’s Note.    One of the courses I had in school long ago was titled “Freedom and Responsibility” that focused on how to balance liberty with responsibilities to one’s community and to other citizens. All civilized democracies have some kind of compact, usually a constitution but often a much more complex array of arrangements that define where freedoms become burdens on others, and become abuses, infractions or crimes. In the U.S. we don’t force people to vote in a democracy though most of us — sadly not all — “hope” people do. We do require driver’s licenses before people can get behind the wheel. We do have a minimum age for drinking alcohol and for the purchase of cigarettes. But vaccines are optional; and in fact, there are a lot of folks out there who actively campaign against vaccines. We have seen measles – once essentially eradicated for the most part from the United States – pop again in communities where children were not vaccinated.   In my conversion with Surgeon General of the United States Vice Admiral Jerome Adams (see the link here), he outlined how vital it is for the health of the nation to get the level of “vaccine confidence” higher in the nation — or in my bottom line terms, how to get more folks vaccinated. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Robert Redfield mentioned to me just days ago that less than 50 percent of Americans are getting flu shots in a season. He said this low level of participation in vaccine programs, combined with a predicted and likely resurgence of COVID-19 in the fall, could lead to new waves of tragedy and shock in the nation as the two simultaneous attacks could once again overwhelm our public health system.   Vaccines are optional. Some years I’ve had the shots — and others not. I admit to free-riding on others in the past, knowing that in my circles for the most part, there was a higher chance of so-called herd immunity, or protection. But that is not a responsible stance. And I hope that folks understand that in the battle with the disease we have today, that spreads so easily between people, that we safeguard our freedoms while not embarking simultaneously on courses that harm others. That means getting vaccinated, that means not going to large scale events without masks where one could be infected or infect others casually, that means not turning hygiene into an issue that divides Americans but rather one we can approach constructively and together.   We are having a struggle throughout the country today on how to balance freedoms and responsibilities. This debate won’t be solved easily or quickly. But one can hope for constructive and magnanimous approaches. When it comes to vaccines, seriously — there is only one responsible answer for the flu. And when we finally get a COVID-19 vaccine, everyone who is eligible should want it.    – Steve Clemons Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE   ICYMI: catch up on this week's programs        On Thursday, The Hill hosted “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy anchored by Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinHillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues On The Money: Senate Dems pump brakes on new stimulus checks | Trump officials sued over tax refunds | Fed to soon open small-business lending program Schumer slams Trump's Rose Garden briefing on China as 'pathetic' MORE.  Watch the full program video here.   On Wednesday, The Hill hosted “The Vir[Tech]tual World of Tomorrow.”    Watch the full program video here.  We want to hear from you! Follow us @TheHillEvents and keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE  There are 5,159,674 reported cases of COVID-19 around the world and 335,418 recorded deaths as of the time of this newsletter.    The U.S. is reporting 1,588,322 cases and 95,276 deaths. Russia’s 326,448 cases are the second most in the world. Brazil is reporting 310,087 cases. 255,533 in the U.K. 234,824 in Spain. 228,658 in Italy. 181,951 in France. 179,278 in Germany. 153,548 in Turkey. 131,652 in Iran. India is reporting 124,073 cases. China 84,081. Canada 82,798. Saudi Arabia 67,719. Mexico 59,567. Belgium 56,511. Pakistan 50,694. Sweden 32,809 Singapore 30,426. South Korea 11,142. Czechia 8,757. Azerbaijan 3,855. Sudan 3,138. Bulgaria 2,372.    New York is reporting 358,154 cases. New Jersey 152,581. Illinois 102,688. Massachusetts 90,084. California 88,480. Pennsylvania is reporting 69,902 cases. 53,510 in Michigan. 53,061 in Texas. 44,424 in Maryland. 30,411 in Indiana. 30,167 in Ohio. 23,191 in Colorado. 19,117 in Washington. 19,019 in Minnesota. 18,961 in Tennessee. 13,885 in Wisconsin. 12,625 in Mississippi. 11,697 in Missouri. 7,893 in the District of Columbia. 7,874 in Utah.  The U.S. has conducted 13,056,206 COVID-19 tests – yes, the most in the world but whether that’s “a badge of honor” as the president said is up for debate. 298,418 full recoveries from the coronavirus have been reported in the U.S.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Trump lashes out at scientists whose findings contradict him. “A Trump enemy statement,” he said of one study. “A political hit job,” he said of another. As President TrumpDonald John TrumpDonald Trump and Joe Biden create different narratives for the election The hollowing out of the CDC Poll: Biden widens lead over Trump to 10 points MORE pushes to reopen the country despite warnings from doctors about the consequences of moving too quickly during the coronavirus crisis, he has been lashing out at scientists whose conclusions he doesn’t like. Twice this week, Trump has not only dismissed the findings of studies but suggested — without evidence — that their authors were motivated by politics and out to undermine his efforts to roll back coronavirus restrictions. (Associated Press)    Fauci says media will be “seeing more” of him, coronavirus task force after press hiatus. Anthony FauciAnthony FauciOvernight Defense: Trump extends deployment of National Guard troops to aid with coronavirus response | Pentagon considers reducing quarantine to 10 days | Lawmakers push for removal of Nazi headstones from VA cemeteries Don't move the COVID-19 goalpost Overnight Health Care: Sewage testing gives clues of coronavirus | White House says Trump would take hydroxychloroquine again | Trump marks 'very sad milestone' of 100K virus deaths MORE, the nation's top infectious disease expert, said the public will begin “seeing more” of him and other public health officials after weeks without making official press appearances. During a CNN global town hall, network anchor Anderson Cooper said that many Americans want to hear from Fauci, Deborah Birx and others on the White House coronavirus task force every day. The last time Fauci was at the podium at the White House was April 22. (The Hill)    Congress headed toward unemployment showdown. With the national unemployment rate expected to creep toward 20 percent in the months ahead, the fight over whether to boost benefits for Americans who lose their jobs or to keep benefits lean to motivate laid-off employees to rejoin the workforce is set to become a defining issue ahead of the election. (The Hill)    Biden says he would make COVID-19 vaccine free for everyone in U.S. Presumptive 2020 Democratic presidential nominee Joe BidenJoe BidenDonald Trump and Joe Biden create different narratives for the election Poll: Biden widens lead over Trump to 10 points Biden: 'We are a nation in pain, but we must not allow this pain to destroy us' MORE said on CNBC that if he were president, a coronavirus vaccine would be free for everyone in the United States. “I tell you what, if one is found, I would make sure that every single person in America is able to get a vaccine, period, without any cost,” Biden told “Squawk Box.” (CNBC)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Senate Minority Leader Charles SchumerCharles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerFederal judges should be allowed to be Federalist Society members Warren condemns 'horrific' Trump tweet on Minneapolis protests, other senators chime in VA hospitals mostly drop hydroxychloroquine as coronavirus treatment  MORE (D-N.Y.)  @SenSchumer It’s May 22nd, and President Trump still doesn’t have an adequate national testing strategy.    Sen. Susan CollinsSusan Margaret CollinsDemocrats gear up to hit GOP senators on DACA OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump administration gives renewables more time to take advantage of tax credits | House Republicans introduce bill to speed mining projects for critical minerals | Watchdog faults EPA communications in contamination of NC river The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Unemployment claims now at 41 million with 2.1 million more added to rolls; Topeka mayor says cities don't have enough tests for minorities and homeless communities MORE (R-Maine)  @SenatorCollins The announcement of another COVID-19 outbreak at a long-term care facility in Maine is a tragic reminder that the residents & staff at nursing homes are at the highest risk to this virus. It is imperative that we implement universal COVID-19 testing at nursing homes.   Sen. Joe ManchinJoseph (Joe) ManchinDemocratic unity starts to crack in coronavirus liability reform fight Stakes high for Collins in coronavirus relief standoff The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Surgeon General stresses need to invest much more in public health infrastructure, during and after COVID-19; Fauci hopeful vaccine could be deployed in December  MORE (D-W.Va.)  @Sen_JoeManchin I again urge the state to distribute a portion of the $1.25B it has received from Congress through the CARES Act to cover these eligible expenses for West Virginians before it is too late, and to do this without burdening local governments with additional bureaucratic hurdles.  ACROSS THE NATION        My colleagues Alicia Cohn and Justine Coleman have a great piece in The Hill breaking down where every state falls in the reopening process. See where your state stands here.   The pandemic may forever change the world’s cities. In most cities, life is a shadow of what it once was, with streets empty, arenas abandoned, businesses shuttered. Well-heeled residents have skipped town to country abodes and seaside getaways. Most of those who remain have slipped into an atomized existence — their movements curtailed, their social circles exponentially shrunk — that’s anathema to the whole point of living in a bustling, vibrant city. (Washington Post)    Beach towns have a message for New York City residents: go away. Since the coronavirus pandemic began, tensions have repeatedly flared over whether too many New York City residents have decamped to outlying vacation areas, potentially taking the virus with them. But now the region appears on the brink of a full-fledged (and nasty) battle over beaches, touched off by the city’s decision to keep its shoreline closed. (New York Times)  States, companies set up their own COVID-19 legal shields. States and some companies aren’t waiting for Congress and the White House to work out a possible liability shield and are instead taking steps to insulate businesses on their own from lawsuits in the coronavirus era. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW         Battered by coronavirus, China maps out an economic reality check for a new era. The calamitous economic impact of the virus was laid bare Friday when the party declined to set a growth target for 2020, for the first time since it began setting such a goal in 1994. “I would like to point out that we have not set a specific target for economic growth this year,” Premier Li Keqiang when delivering his “work report” at the grandiose opening of the National People’s Congress in Beijing. “This is because our country will face some factors that are difficult to predict in its development due to the great uncertainty regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and the world economic and trade environment.” (Washington Post)   Madrid and Barcelona shops and outdoor restaurants to open Monday. After 2½ months of strict lockdown to stem the spread of the coronavirus, Madrid and Barcelona will be allowed to take the first steps to loosen restrictions next week, Spain’s government announced Friday, authorizing the cities to move to phase one of an official deconfinement plan. (Washington Post)   SCIENCE  Anti-malaria drug touted by President Trump has high death risk in COVID-19 patients, new study shows. Hospitalized COVID-19 patients who were treated with hydroxychloroquine, an anti-malaria drug touted by President Trump, had a much higher risk of death than those who were not, according to a new study of 96,000 patients. The study, published Friday in the medical journal The Lancet, found that patients who were treated with hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine also faced a much higher risk of abnormal heartbeats, called arrhythmias, which could result in cardiac arrest. (The Hill)    Fauci is confident U.S. could have coronavirus vaccine by December. It is “conceivable” that the U.S. could begin to roll out a coronavirus vaccine by December, the White House’s top infectious disease expert said Friday. “I think it is conceivable, if we don’t run into things that are, as they say, unanticipated setbacks, that we could have a vaccine that we could be beginning to deploy at the end of this calendar year,” Anthony Fauci said. (CNBC)    Inflamed brains, toe rashes, strokes: Why COVID-19’s weirdest symptoms are only emerging. As the pandemic continues to ravage the world, case reports have emerged of more unusual damage ranging from hundreds of tiny blood clots to strokes in young people, and even mysterious inflammatory responses, such as full-body rashes in children and the red lesions that have come to be known unofficially as COVID toe. (National Geographic)   BUSINESS  Stimulus checks worked, many retailers say, but the bump may be short lived. During Walmart’s earnings call on Tuesday, CEO Doug McMillon said the big-box retailer has seen different phases of shopping during the coronavirus pandemic. In the final weeks of April, another trend emerged: Customers were buying more TVs, clothing, sporting goods and toys with money they got in stimulus checks from the U.S. government. (CNBC)  Royal Carribean aims for tentative Aug. 1 set-sail date. Royal Caribbean has further suspended most cruises through July, with voyages set to begin on Aug. 1 as the travel company plans for business after the novel coronavirus pandemic, the company announced. Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd, which earlier in the week announced a loss of $1.4 billion in the first quarter after the virus forced its entire fleet to port, will extend the suspension of all fleets, except ships traveling from China, the company said in a Wednesday press release. (Fox Business)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS  Digital contact tracing: The Trojan horse in the battle over data. Both in the U.S. and in the global context, the patchy data governance landscape — diverging political priorities and technical issues such interoperability to guarantee systems can work across borders — means interstate and international cooperation is paramount to ensure efficiency and gain trust. (Sophia Ignatidou for The Hill)  The age of handshakes may be over — so how to seal the deal now? Maintain eye contact, smile warmly, and use your voice tone to politely and enthusiastically greet them along with a slight nod of your head. As you do this, you have some options: Keep your arms firmly down by your side, or keep your hands clasped behind your back; hold your right hand over your heart and add a slight bow; or hold something in your right hand like a clutch, briefcase, iPad or even your other hand, so it is otherwise preoccupied and less apt to automatically pop out for that handshake. (Catherine C. Wallace for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS Tooth Fairy thanks “considerate” girl who gifted her mask to protect from COVID-19. After losing a tooth, one Michigan girl wanted to make sure the Tooth Fairy was following proper coronavirus safety measures. The girl, Evolette, didn't want to leave the tooth under her pillow unless she knew the Tooth Fairy would be properly protected with a mask of her own. With help from her mom, Evolette sewed a tiny mask for the tooth fairy and left it on her nightstand with a note to the tooth fairy. (Good Morning America)  Melania TrumpMelania TrumpMelania Trump: 'No reason for violence' in George Floyd protests CNN coronavirus town hall to feature science author David Quammen, 'Empire' actress Taraji Henson The Hill's 12:30 Report - Presented by Facebook - Trump teases social media executive order as a 'big day' for 'fairness' MORE thanks students in video message during CNN town hall. First lady Melania Trump in a video message Thursday evening recognized the changes America’s students have had to make in their lives during the coronavirus pandemic and commended them for their “determination." “We will only get through this with patience, compassion and care,” the first lady said. “Tonight, please know that the president and I are with you during these challenging times and we continue to do everything we can to support you.” (The Hill)   ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. LEE ZELDIN (R-N.Y.)  > Steve interviews former Maryland Lt. Gov. and ex-RNC Chairman MICHAEL STEELE  > Steve interviews former U.S. Energy Secretary ERNEST MONIZ  > Steve interviews Sen. JOE MANCHIN (D-W.Va.)  > Steve interviews Mylan CEO HEATHER BRESCH  > Steve interviews Wilson Center President and CEO JANE HARMAN  > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  > Steve interviews Mastercard CEO AJAY BANGA  > Steve interviews Teva USA President and CEO BRENDAN O’GRADY  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.    VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVE View the discussion thread.

 The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Surgeon General Jerome Adams. Read excerpts from the interview below  Adams: We need to make sure we're reopening in a way that is can data driven. That takes into account the assets and the deficits and challenges that take place in different communities. And I think that's one of the things that's hard for people to really wrap their heads around is just how big and how different the United States is. What you're going to do in Idaho is going to be very different than what you're going to do in New York. But I tell people, just as we have an epidemic of virus, we also have an epidemic of misinformation. So the most important thing for people to take away is to go to coronavirus.gov. Go to whitehouse.gov/openingamerica. ... Now to get more specific: From my perspective, I try to make things easily digestible. I talked about the two "S"s and the two "C"s. The two "S"s are surveillance and separation and the two "C"s are cleaning and coverage. It's important to know from a surveillance perspective what is going on in your community. And we’re working with states to make sure they have dashboards that show hospitalizations and show case counts and show who's dying and where, so people understand what the burden is in their communities because we know humans are more vigilant when the threat level is higher. ... Separation: We know the disease travels and lives by going person to person. So, the most important thing we can do it maintained 6 feet of physical distance between ourselves and others. From a cleaning point of view, we've got to be better than we've ever been about frequent and thorough hygiene and hand-washing, soap and water for 20 seconds. And then from a coverage perspective: If you go out in public, please, please wear a face covering to protect other people from the virus, who might be unknowingly spreading. And please cover your cough or sneeze with a tissue.   Clemons: How confident are you that we're getting all of the elements in place, including personal protective equipment, contact tracing and testing? That we're going to be able to reopen the economy responsibly? Adams: We've learned a lot about this virus in the last several weeks. We've also increased capacity on a federal on a state and on a local level. Thank you to America for really doing your part and helping us flatten the curve. Remember, flattening the curve wasn't about saying we're going to get rid of the virus. The virus is going to be here for a while. Flattening the curve wasn't about saying that the virus is not going to be as contagious or as deadly. It was really about making sure we didn't overwhelm our health care capacity and that we continue to build up our health care capacity to respond. And most places across the country have successfully done that. But we still have to figure out how we live with the virus. And, so, we know now, again, more about spread and we have take precautions. ... We also know that hospitals have better personal protective equipment, have more ventilators, have more capability to be able to respond. And so, while we're not saying it is without risk to reopen — we certainly feel like we have more tools available at the local and at the state levels and at the federal level when you look at the national stockpile to be able to respond quickly if we see a resurgence and to not have as high of a peak as we had previously.   Clemons: What are those rosters of things that you think we need to stop looking at as boutique, silly things that other people do, that we're all going to have to become much more comfortable with, that we have to begin building in to our social interactions. Adams: Well, everyone asks: "When are we going to get back to normal?" I think it's important for people to start wrapping their heads around the fact that we aren't going to go back to the way things were. And we really, quite frankly, shouldn't go back to the way things were. There are some silver linings to this and things that we've learned that will help us move forward in the future. For instance, things that protect you from COVID-19 also protect you from flu. And people forget that two years ago, we had a flu season that killed 80,000 people. And so, if we continue to practice good hygiene that will help us on help us prevent flu deaths in the future, even if we are able to overcome COVID-19. We also know that we saw a big decrease in many communities in vaccine confidence over the past several years. And that really concerns me. If we get a vaccine for COVID-19, it is still not going to help out if we don't get people to embrace it. I’m hopeful that as more people are talking about vaccinations that we're going to improve vaccine confidence. Telehealth — we've rapidly expanded access to telehealth services across the nation. ... And even little things, like staying in touch with people, virtually. There are family and friends that I haven't seeing in person in years and who I otherwise wouldn't talk to because culturally, we just think, wait until you see them in person. But that said, we've been in touch with them virtually now because COVID-19 has really increased people's utilization of Zoom of Skype of FaceTime with some of these technologies out there that can promote connectedness and togetherness and that ultimately has an impact on our mental health.    Clemons: How do we even out disparities with vulnerable communities and tell me about your community health and economic prosperity initiative? Adams: My Community Health and Economic Prosperity initiative is all about making the case that we can't be successful as businesses, as communities, economically if we don't pay attention to poor health. We know that the number two expense for most companies out there is health care. And we know that the United States have some of the highest health care costs in the world, but we aren't getting value on our investment. We still see infant mortality rates, maternal mortality rates, obesity rates, hypertension rates that are well above the average in a bad way, despite spending more per capita on health care than anyone else in the world. And so my initiative is really ... about helping businesses and communities understand that when you ... invest in clean air laws and when you invest in things that we know give people the opportunity and the environment where they could more easily make healthy choices, that it benefits not just them individually, but it creates a healthier workforce. ... Unemployment numbers coming out today, showing again that when you have a health issue, it ultimately turns into an economic issue. ... We know that when we don't pay attention to these things, that the vulnerable communities, particularly communities of color, suffer disproportionately. And that's not just COVID-19 that has to do with flu, it has to do with cancer, with diabetes with heart disease. And my hope, my true hope from all this is that as we shine a light on these disparities, we can start to dig into some of these underlying causes of disease and really help people not just survive COVID, but help them survive in the long run from chronic diseases, from noncommunicable diseases like high blood pressure, like diabetes and like cancer.   Clemons: One of the issues that's begun to percolate out there is will that vaccine be able to reach those people who can't afford it? Are you confident that we're going to solve the cost problem and access problem once a vaccine is achieved? Adams: Well, I can only speak for me, but to answer your question, yes. Based on my conversations with the task force and throughout HHS and with the secretary, I personally feel confident we will be able to solve the cost and price problem. This is an issue where again people have seen it is far too important — and I've worked for most of my life trying to help people understand why it's important to make the flu vaccine available to people at low or no cost. Because if a person gets the flu, it impacts not just them, but their family and their entire community. We see the same thing with COVID-19. We will not be able to reopen, even if we have a vaccine, if we don't have vaccine uptake. And I know there's a commitment on the part of the federal government and on the part of the business community to making sure vaccines are available for COVID-19 when they become developed at no cost or at extremely low cost. Now, reimbursement and cost is not the same of access. Access still has to be built on a foundation of trust. And so it's important that we make sure we're bringing in vulnerable communities, communities of color and involving them in these studies and also doing outreach to those communities right now to make sure if we do have a vaccine and even if it is free, that they'll come in and get it, or that they will actually take the vaccine.    Clemons: What do you want Americans to hear right now on what they can do on the mental health front? Adams: These problems existed well before the virus came to our doorsteps. They just have been really amplified because of the virus. And what I say to people is that social distancing and physical distancing does not have to mean social disengagement. Again, there's new technologies, new opportunities for people to communicate in ways they never have before. There's really a focus on mental health and a destigmatization of mental health. I'm actually working with the NBA. And with the Prevents task force on veteran suicide prevention to really help people who have traditionally held a lot of stigma in regards to mental health. When you talk about athletes, when you talk about people in the military and to really help them understand that mental health is just as important and should be held in just as high regard as your physical health. And we're really seeing that start to gain some traction now with COVID. One of the things I’d say to people is if you find yourself struggling or just want someone to talk to, remember, you're not alone. There is a help line. Call (800)-273-8255 for free and for support.   Adams: And parents get your kids vaccinated. Critically important. We know that vaccination rates and in recent MMWR are trending down, but it's important to reach out to your physician. ... This time last year, we were fighting outbreaks of measles and we’re set up for them again after COVID-19. We want to make sure we're protecting our most vulnerable, particularly from diseases, for which there is a vaccine. Measles, whooping cough. Please, talk to your provider make an appointment. Figure out how to get your child vaccinated today. View the discussion thread.

WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > 2.4M more Americans jobless, 38.6M unemployed since lockdown began > Lay off the Lysol? CDC now says virus ‘does not spread easily’ via infected surfaces  > Several GOP senators push for more stimulus payments  > Michigan AG: Trump has ‘legal’ and ‘moral responsibility’ to wear mask in Ford plant  > DC could begin phased reopening on May 29, if data continues to show improvements > Sound familiar? 30 years ago today, Fauci took heat from AIDS protesters > Mnuchin tells The Hill’s Bob CusackRobert (Bob) CusackThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Mnuchin: More COVID-19 congressional action ahead On The Money: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | 2.4 million more Americans file new jobless claims | Top bank regulator abruptly announces resignation Overnight Health Care: Trump says US won't close over second COVID-19 wave | Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | Why the US has the most reported coronavirus cases in the world MORE he sees ‘strong likelihood’ of another COVID-19 relief package        THE INTERVIEW U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinHillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues On The Money: Senate Dems pump brakes on new stimulus checks | Trump officials sued over tax refunds | Fed to soon open small-business lending program Schumer slams Trump's Rose Garden briefing on China as 'pathetic' MORE anchors The Hill’s Advancing America’s Economy summit  Mnuchin sees “strong likelihood” of needing another COVID-19 relief bill; adds Congress must act to make key PPP change.            Watch this space for the full program video following the conclusion of the summit and watch the full interview with Secretary Mnuchin here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Thursday, May 21.  Editor’s Note.   If you live in Wyoming or San Antonio, Texas, and you are going back to work as a gym attendant or grocery store clerk, a beautician or a lawyer, you are lucky. These places seem to have a surplus of tests for the antibodies if you were previously infected — and are welcoming the public to come in and be tested. But in most of the rest of the nation, testing is not where it needs to be. It shouldn’t require a doctor’s referral, and it shouldn’t require the manifestation of symptoms. We are all hopefully past the point of thinking that one must be coughing or sneezing to infect others with the coronavirus.   While progress is being made, we really are at a sort of standstill when it comes to opening the economy nationwide. Many states are proceeding with opening and doing so according to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines and their own health task force advisers on how to do phased reopenings of public places and business. Stay-at-home orders are shifting, as they have in Maryland, to “safer-at-home” guidance.    We are all in a sort of wait and see period. Will infections spike with reopening? That’s already happening in some places — but not in all. The state of Georgia seems to be faring far better than many expected. We are all feeling our way forward on this. Today I’m interviewing quite a few folks that have perspectives on this knot between assuring public health and getting our economic health moving off life support. The program will be mostly finished by the time you read this note, but it will be available on The Hill’s website and posted on the Coronavirus Report on Friday. Among those I’ll be connecting with are Surgeon General Jerome Adams on what are the vital best practices we all must make mainstream. I’ll be talking to Topeka, Kan., Mayor Michelle De La Isla who has fewer cases than many cities. But we saw what one patient zero in Wuhan a few months ago was able to unleash. I’ll have some time with AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka on how to think about the safety of workers in the workplace, and Sen. Mark WarnerMark Robert WarnerExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support Senate Democrats pump brakes on new stimulus checks Trump signs order targeting social media firms' legal protections MORE (D-Va.) on rebalancing the economy and his efforts to put in place paycheck protection guarantees for the next six months. There are going to be private sector CEOs from Mozilla, Siemens North America, Wells Fargo, Citizen, GoDaddy and others. And also the tireless chef Tom Colicchio who has been moving heaven and earth to support struggling restaurants and their workers.   I hope you’ll check in on some of these. No one has all of the answers. We are all experimenting, trying to figure out how to survive and live with the virus — until we can kill it or contain it. Time for all of us to pause, including myself, and learn what we can from smart folks thinking about how to move forward again.   – Steve Clemons Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE  ICYMI: catch up on this week's programs        On Thursday, The Hill hosted “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy anchored by Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin.   Watch this space for the full program video following the conclusion of the summit.    On Wednesday, The Hill hosted “The Vir[Tech]tual World of Tomorrow.”    Watch the full program video here.  We want to hear from you! Follow us @TheHillEvents and keep the conversation going using #TheHillVirtuallyLive   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE  There are 5,047,377 reported cases of COVID-19 and 329,816 reported deaths across the globe as of the time of this newsletter.    The U.S. is reporting 1,562,714 cases and 93,863 deaths. Congressional democratic leaders are asking President TrumpDonald John TrumpDonald Trump and Joe Biden create different narratives for the election The hollowing out of the CDC Poll: Biden widens lead over Trump to 10 points MORE to fly flags at half-staff once the country reaches 100,000 confirmed deaths, another grim milestone we are likely to surpass within the next few days. Russia is reporting 317,554 cases. Brazil 291,579. 252,234 in the U.K. Spain 233,037. Italy 228,006. France 181,700. Germany 178,748. Turkey 153,548. Iran 129,341. India 115,572. 104,020 reported cases in Peru. 84,063 in China (although that number has met with a great deal of skepticism). 81,617 cases in Canada. 65,077 in Saudi Arabia. 56,594 in Mexico. 38,651 in Qatar. 32,172 in Sweden. 30,694 in Switzerland. 24,315 in Ireland. 20,162 in Indonesia. 19,706 in Ukraine. 19,137 in South Africa. 11,122 in South Korea. 8,743 in Czechia. 1,908 in Cuba. 1,573 in Somalia.    New York is reporting 356,458 cases. New Jersey 150,776. Illinois 100,418. Massachusetts 88,970. Pennsylvania reported 68,911. Michigan, where President Trump will visit a Ford plant Thursday, is reporting 53,009 cases. Texas 51,974. Maryland 43,531. Georgia 40,164. Virginia 34,143. Indiana 29,936. Ohio 29,436. Missouri 11,595. South Carolina 9,175. 8,539 in Kansas. 7,788 in Washington, D.C.    The U.S. has recorded 12,647,791 COVID-19 test results and 294,312 have reported full recoveries from the coronavirus.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Several GOP senators press for more stimulus payments during coronavirus crisis. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellFor city parks: Pass the Great American Outdoors Act now US ill-prepared for coronavirus-fueled mental health crisis Schumer to GOP: Cancel 'conspiracy hearings' on origins of Russia probe MORE (R-Ky.) has sought to hit pause on the government’s massive spending for coronavirus-related relief packages, but several of his Republican colleagues are pushing for additional stimulus measures during the economic crisis. GOP Sens. Susan CollinsSusan Margaret CollinsDemocrats gear up to hit GOP senators on DACA OVERNIGHT ENERGY: Trump administration gives renewables more time to take advantage of tax credits | House Republicans introduce bill to speed mining projects for critical minerals | Watchdog faults EPA communications in contamination of NC river The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Unemployment claims now at 41 million with 2.1 million more added to rolls; Topeka mayor says cities don't have enough tests for minorities and homeless communities MORE (Maine), Cory GardnerCory Scott GardnerThe Hill's Campaign Report: Minneapolis protests rock the nation McConnell: Next coronavirus bill will be final COVID-19 package Democrats gear up to hit GOP senators on DACA MORE (Colo) and Josh HawleyJoshua (Josh) David HawleyExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support GOP deeply divided over Trump's social media crackdown Trump's social media executive order is a huge opportunity MORE (Mo.) are all pushing for the Senate to stay in session and take more action to help offset the collapse of the nation’s economy. (Fox News)    Pelosi, Schumer ask Trump to fly flags at half-staff when U.S. reaches 100,000 coronavirus deaths. The top Democrats in Congress are calling on President Trump to order that flags be flown at half-staff at all public buildings on the day the U.S. reaches 100,000 deaths caused by the novel coronavirus. In a letter sent to the president Thursday, Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy Pelosi Sunday shows preview: Leaders weigh in as country erupts in protest over George Floyd death 5 things to know about US-China tensions over Hong Kong Pelosi calls Trump's decision to withdraw US from WHO 'an act of extraordinary senselessness' MORE (D-Calif.) and Senate Minority Leader Charles SchumerCharles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerFederal judges should be allowed to be Federalist Society members Warren condemns 'horrific' Trump tweet on Minneapolis protests, other senators chime in VA hospitals mostly drop hydroxychloroquine as coronavirus treatment  MORE (D-N.Y.) wrote that the tribute would serve as a "national expression of grief so needed by everyone." (The Hill)  Trump takes pandemic fight to Michigan. President Trump on Thursday is visiting 2020 battleground state Michigan as he seeks to contrast his handling of the pandemic with that of the state’s Democratic leaders. Trump’s visit to a Ford plant manufacturing ventilators in Ypsilanti will mark his third trip to a critical swing state in as many weeks. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. John KennedyJohn Neely KennedyMORE (R-La.)  @SenJohnkennedy The #PaycheckProtectionProgram wasn’t made to funnel taxpayer money to Planned Parenthood, but its affiliates asked for about $80M in PPP dollars—and reportedly got the money. How did this happen, and how can it be made right? We’re asking AG Barr to investigate.   Sen. Jacky RosenJacklyn (Jacky) Sheryl RosenThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of another relief package; Warner says some businesses 'may not come back' at The Hill's Advancing America's Economy summit  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: CDC Director Redfield responds to Navarro criticism; Mnuchin and Powell brief Senate panel Hillicon Valley: Experts raise security concerns about online voting | Musk finds supporter in Trump | Officials warn that Chinese hackers targeting COVID-19 research groups MORE (D-Nev.)  @SenJackyRosen Latino communities have been disproportionately affected by lack of health care, affordable housing, & employment for generations. #COVID19 is showing us how life-threatening these disparities can be.    Rep. Andy Biggs (R-Ariz.)  @RepAndyBiggsAz .@realDonaldTrump has expressed a desire to restore our economic greatness and the positives that come w/ it — including better public health — by opening up our communities. We must forge ahead even as Fauci tries to brush away the optimism.  ACROSS THE NATION  Why does the U.S have the most coronavirus cases in the world? President said Tuesday the fact that the United States has the most coronavirus cases in the world is a “badge of honor” because it shows how much testing the country is doing. While there are many factors at play when comparing how countries have fared in the coronavirus pandemic, public health experts say Trump’s explanation left out a key factor: The U.S. has so many cases because it was initially slow to respond to the outbreak and ramp up testing and other containment tools. (The Hill)    D.C. could begin phased reopening as early as May 29, mayor says. D.C. Mayor Muriel Bowser says the district could begin a phased reopening May 29 if data continues to show improvements. “We are going to monitor throughout the weekend the trends that we see,” Bowser said. “And if those trends hold next week, by the end of next week, we will be able to communicate the start of our phased reopening.” (WTOP)  Michigan barbers cut hair on Capitol lawn to protest coronavirus shutdown. A protest in Lansing, Mich., against stay-at-home orders focused on what has become a rallying cry for such demonstrations — haircuts. The Capitol lawn was turned into a barber shop. At least a dozen barbers and stylists, highlighting the damage to their shuttered businesses, set up card tables and generators to power the clippers, and people lined up. (NPR)    Michigan AG: If Trump “fails to wear a mask, he’s going to be asked not to return to any enclosed facility inside our state.” Michigan will ask President Trump to stay out of “enclosed facilities” in the state if he refuses to wear a mask during his Thursday visit to a Ford plant in Ypsilanti, says state Attorney General Dana Nessel. “Obviously here in Michigan we’ve been particularly hard-hit by the COVID-19," Nessel said Thursday on CNN’s “New Day,” noting that auto manufacturing facilities have only recently reopened amid the coronavirus pandemic. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW   Living through a pandemic when your access to water is difficult. The most basic ingredient for mankind’s survival is also a critical weapon against the novel coronavirus. Wash your hands with soap and water for 30 seconds, scientists say. Drink eight glasses of water a day. Stay hydrated and hygienic. But access to clean water is dramatically uneven across the world. About a third of Nigeria’s population — 60 million people — must leave home to find it, according to aid groups and government statistics. (Washington Post)     ‘We’re expendable’: Russian doctors face hostility, mistrust. There are no daily public displays of gratitude for Russian doctors and nurses during the coronavirus crisis like there are in the West. Instead of applause, they face mistrust, low pay and even open hostility. (Associated Press)      Juncker: EU internal border closures “nonsense.” Former European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker voiced his opposition to internal border closures across the EU, branding them as “nonsense” in an interview with German broadcaster Deutsche Welle. (Politico)   SCIENCE  Lay off the Lysol? CDC says coronavirus primarily spreads through person-to-person contact and “does not spread easily on contaminated surfaces.” While touching infected surfaces has always been part of the messaging on how the virus spreads, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recently shifted its stance online. The CDC now says that COVID-19 spreads from person-to-person contact, and then lists touching infected surfaces under a section titled, "The virus does not spread easily in other ways."    Read the full CDC report on the spread of the virus here.   BUSINESS  2.4 million more Americans file new jobless claims. 2.4 million Americans filed new claims for unemployment insurance last week as the U.S. suffers through the highest level of joblessness since the Great Depression, according to data released Thursday by the Labor Department. The new wave of applications brings the total number of initial unemployment claims since the week ending March 22 to 38.6 million. (The Hill)  Home sales dropped nearly 18 percent in April, while decline in inventory pushed prices to a record high. The economic fallout from the coronavirus hit the housing market hard in April. Sales of existing homes fell 17.8 percent month-to-month, and were 17.2 percent lower than April 2019, seasonally adjusted, according to the National Association of Realtors. That puts the annualized pace at 4.33 million units, the slowest sales pace since September 2011. (CNBC)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS  What Congress needs to include for the next economic relief legislation. Policymakers have rightly focused on public health needs and minimizing the economic blow of this crisis by sending Americans stimulus payments and starting the new Paycheck Protection Program. These need to be the priorities for the government. (Director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Kathy Kraninger for The Hill)    Hydroxychloroquine-gate and Trump’s war on medical science. Trump has turned the pandemic into a zero-sum game. If he wins his battle against medical science, the coronavirus will win its battle against us. (Gregory J. Wallance for The Hill)  Three decades before coronavirus, Fauci took heat from AIDS protesters. “Act Up, Fight Back, Fight AIDS!” The angry chanting grew louder as hundreds of protesters wove through the usually placid campus of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., on May 21, 1990. For months, the AIDS Coalition Unleash Power (ACT UP), had been urging Anthony FauciAnthony FauciOvernight Defense: Trump extends deployment of National Guard troops to aid with coronavirus response | Pentagon considers reducing quarantine to 10 days | Lawmakers push for removal of Nazi headstones from VA cemeteries Don't move the COVID-19 goalpost Overnight Health Care: Sewage testing gives clues of coronavirus | White House says Trump would take hydroxychloroquine again | Trump marks 'very sad milestone' of 100K virus deaths MORE formally to include their members in the government’s development process for AIDS drugs. Fauci, now under attack by some Trump supporters for his response to the coronavirus pandemic, was in favor of the group’s participation. But he met increasing resistance from the scientific community, who were put off by ACT UP’s tactics. (Washington Post)   GENEROUS SPIRITS Twitter’s Jack Dorsey to donate $5 million to Andrew YangAndrew YangAndrew Yang discusses his universal basic income pilot program Andrew Yang on the George Floyd protests in Minneapolis McConnell challenger on how Yang endorsement could help him MORE’s foundation. Twitter founder and CEO Jack Dorsey is donating $5 million to businessman and former Democratic presidential candidate Andrew Yang’s group Humanity Forward as a foundation to build a universal basic income (UBI). Rolling Stone reports that Dorsey plans to give $1 billion of his wealth through a fund called Start Small. The official announcement was reportedly made on Yang’s podcast, “Yang Speaks.” (The Hill)   ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. LEE ZELDIN (R-N.Y.)  > Steve interviews former Maryland Lt. Gov. and ex-RNC Chairman MICHAEL STEELE  > Steve interviews former U.S. Energy Secretary ERNEST MONIZ  > Steve interviews Sen. JOE MANCHIN (D-W.Va.)  > Steve interviews Mylan CEO HEATHER BRESCH  > Steve interviews Wilson Center President and CEO JANE HARMAN  > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  > Steve interviews Mastercard CEO AJAY BANGA  > Steve interviews Teva USA President and CEO BRENDAN O’GRADY  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.   VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVE View the discussion thread.

The Hill's Bob CusackRobert (Bob) CusackThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Mnuchin: More COVID-19 congressional action ahead On The Money: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | 2.4 million more Americans file new jobless claims | Top bank regulator abruptly announces resignation Overnight Health Care: Trump says US won't close over second COVID-19 wave | Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | Why the US has the most reported coronavirus cases in the world MORE interviews Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinHillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues On The Money: Senate Dems pump brakes on new stimulus checks | Trump officials sued over tax refunds | Fed to soon open small-business lending program Schumer slams Trump's Rose Garden briefing on China as 'pathetic' MORE. Read excerpts from the interview below. Cusack: Several Senate Republicans said yesterday they want to see some action now on the next relief package. Is another package necessary? And if so, when?    Cusack: When is the last time you've communicated with the Speaker about a possible next package? Mnuchin: Well, I spoke to the Speaker last week. Our conversation was really more about the execution of the current CARES Act and was not focused on the next steps. What I would say is, I'm very pleased that the last two bills that were passed were 96-0 and 100-0 in the Senate. They had overwhelming bipartisan support. I mean, this is really extraordinary times. The whole Senate came together and I would hope that the next bill we do has overwhelming bipartisan support and the Speaker's bill obviously is a partisan bill, so that's not something we're focusing on at the moment.   Cusack: A lot of Americans are angry, and they're angry at China. Is China going to be held accountable in any way? Mnuchin: Well, I understand why Americans are angry, and I think they have the right to be angry. And it's not just Americans, it's the rest of the world. And I would start with people, want information. People want to know what went on with the virus. And I think that China should be held accountable first by at least giving information and understanding what went on and how to combat this.   Cusack: President TrumpDonald John TrumpDonald Trump and Joe Biden create different narratives for the election The hollowing out of the CDC Poll: Biden widens lead over Trump to 10 points MORE has talked about a transportation bill, the possibility of it being a stimulus down the road. Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellFor city parks: Pass the Great American Outdoors Act now US ill-prepared for coronavirus-fueled mental health crisis Schumer to GOP: Cancel 'conspiracy hearings' on origins of Russia probe MORE, the Senate majority leader, is not a big fan of that approach. Should Congress, at some point this year, for another stimulus, pass some type of transportation bill? Mnuchin: Well, I think as you know, the president's been very focused on infrastructure, going back to the campaign, and that was part of the president's platform: to rebuild our roads, our bridges, our dams and the nation's infrastructure, as well as cutting-edge infrastructure such as rural broadband. So, I think that's something that Congress is going to need to look at. I'd say whether we do it is part of the coronavirus bill or whether we do it separately. That's something that is on the president's agenda.   Cusack: How many jobs has the PPP program saved to this date? Mnuchin: I think it's about 50 million jobs, and I think by the time we get through this it will be 60 million jobs and it's, you know, it wasn't perfect getting up and running. But what was important was we developed a program from scratch. We knew that if it took four months to get up and running, it wasn't going to help it all. It was unprecedented. We got this up in a few weeks, we got money out the door and this is a major part of the U.S. economy — is small and medium sized businesses. And we wanted to protect the workers and, just as important, we wanted to keep those workers attached to the business so that when the businesses could safely open, they had the workers attached to them.   Cusack: As you know, Congress has replenished the PPP. When will the PPP need to be replenished again? How much time do we have? Mnuchin: Well, right now we have over $100 billion left in it. One of the things we are working with Congress on — and there is bipartisan support — is lengthening the eight-week period. One of the things that companies are having an issue with is because they have been closed and they're rehiring workers. I know there's bipartisan support to extend that to 10 or 12 weeks. I know the restaurants had asked for 24 weeks, but that's something we definitely want to fix. Doesn't cost us any more money. And there is bipartisan support.   Cusack: As far as that eight-week provision, as you mentioned Congress is talking about that. There are some that say that you could do that administratively. Can you do that administratively as well as a 75-25 provision or does that have to be done by Congress — both of them? Mnuchin: Well, the eight weeks I wish I could do administratively, if I could, we’d already do it. Now let me just comment on the 75-25, because I think there's been a little bit of confusion on this issue. So, when the program was designed and again, let me just remind people it’s called the Paycheck Protection Program, it's not called the overhead protection program. It was designed that you got eight weeks of payroll plus 25 percent for overhead, which we thought was a reasonable amount. But the real purpose here was to get people back to work. When we came up with the 75 percent test, it was just a belt and suspender test — as we thought is how the program was designed, which again, was the eight weeks plus the 25 percent. We did not think the intent to the program was to have 50 percent spent on workers and 50 percent spent on overhead, and obviously we're somewhat concerned. I mean, we realized people do have more overhead. They can go out and take an idle loan, which is a 30-year SBA loan, to pay back. But we want most of this money to go to workers and we believe that the 75 percent was exactly consistent with the way the program was designed.   Cusack: There are roughly around 30 companies — public companies — that say they won't return the money that they received in this loan-grant program. They say that the goal posts have been changed. Will you go after these companies? And why, if it is saving jobs after all? Mnuchin: Well, let me just comment that there was a certification that was in the application, that the funds were necessary. And, as I've said before, there were a few companies that kind of became the poster child for the public being upset. I've said this before. I'm a big fan of the Los Angeles Lakers. They're one of my favorite teams. We did not envision this was a program for the Los Angeles Lakers. They obviously have the financial means to pay their players and pay their support staff. Also, as you look at Shake Shack, which was a large public company. Again, they have the financial means. Whether they want to pay their people or not is completely up to them. But I don't think those were the types of companies that we thought could make the certification. So, I came out early in defending the program, and again it was a small number of companies in, you know, what's over 4 1/2 million loans. This is a small number of companies that jeopardize the program, and we did say that we would review and hold accountable anybody who has a loan over $2 million. Now, I think some legitimate companies got very concerned about the liability, so we toned that down and we said, "OK, well, if you go through your review and you pay back the money, the SBA will not refer you to any other further enforcement actions." But yes, the bigger loans will be reviewed — they’ll be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. Companies can make their arguments, no different than you go through any review.   Cusack: There's a lawsuit pending about the nonpublic companies. Media organizations have said they deserve the right to see who is getting this taxpayer money. Do you agree with that? That the public deserves to know who's getting the money, whether they're public or not public? Mnuchin: Well, let me just comment. I very much support oversight and transparency. And when we negotiate this bipartisan bill, we added in unprecedented oversight and transparency. We created a new inspector general or various parts of this. We created an oversight committee that is bipartisan. And in the Fed programs, we specifically agreed within fourteen days to release the names of companies. And that was something there was interest in. I think in the PPP, it does not require disclosure. And I think the concern was that there is proprietary information because it's tied off of payroll, that that should not be in the public domain. But again, that's something that will be discussed.   Cusack: The House has set up a special panel that congressional Republicans oppose. They say it's not necessary to oversee this specific committee because there's a lot of other oversight built into the law. If you were asked to testify before this House panel, would you? Mnuchin: I can't comment on that. I haven't really reviewed it one way or another with my internal legal team and others. What I would say is I testified this week at the Senate Banking Committee with [Federal Reserve] Chairman Jay Powell that is required on a quarterly basis. We absolutely plan on doing that. And again, I would just emphasize there's a specific oversight committee that was set up that consists of Republicans and Democrats. I'm not exactly sure why the House needs to set up another committee. And again, there are other committees that that the House does have jurisdiction that Chair Powell and I will testify before.   Cusack: CBO recently has predicted that unemployment will be 10 percent-plus this year into next. Do you agree with that prediction? Mnuchin: Well, let me just comment, and this is nothing against CBO, and this is nothing against the rest of the economic models. We're in an unprecedented situation. This unemployment was not a result of bad economic issues. This is result of medical issues. So, I think it's very hard to predict. A lot of it depends on the reopening of the economy. A lot of it depends on as we make advances in virals, vaccines and testing, and people feel comfortable. So I think the economic models, quite frankly, follow the medical models, and I think it's too premature to predict those things. What I do think is the second quarter is obviously going to be a dreadful quarter because literally, it's like we took the water faucet and we turned it off, so nothing came through. And now we're slowly reopening the economy. So I think we will bottom out in the second quarter. I think the third and fourth quarter will be better. And as the president has said and I have said, with the great advancement in medical progress in killing this virus, we expect our economy will be great again next year.   Cusack: You said this spring that the fourth quarter would be gigantic. Are you tempering expectations? Mnuchin: Again, I'm not tempering. What I'm saying is, when you come off of a low number of closing down the economy, you're going to have very, very big increases. So, yes, I think you're going to see a very large — call it a gigantic increase — in the fourth quarter.   Cusack: Regarding production, some have called the administration to use more of the Defense Production Act, which the administration has employed, but does the administration plan to do more of that as far as manufacturing? Mnuchin: Well, it's a very important tool. It should be used carefully. I know the president is very much willing to use it if we need to use it. I got an update on vaccines yesterday in the investments that BARDA is making, which I think is really terrific. And in many cases, they have commitments to take over large amounts of the vaccines. But the Defense Protection Act is a very important tool to protect the American workers, and if the president needs to use it, he will.   Cusack: The president has said the Postal Service should charge more for carriers like Amazon and others. Do you think that should be looked at? And maybe the Postal Service should charge Amazon more? Mnuchin: Well, we've already looked at this, so let me just give you the history here. I chaired the federal financing bank. The post office is the largest creditor of the federal financing bank. So last year, I asked my team to give me a financial update. I was shocked at how bad it was. I updated the president on that. As a result of that, he asked me to chair a task force, and we've put together a complete plan to fix the post office. Let me also just say, when we came into office, there were no governors. Again, this is just outrageous. This is kind of corporate 101. There was no oversight on the post office. So the postal board of governors didn't have anybody. We now have a fully functioning governance board. People appointed by Congress, both sides of the aisle. I think that's extremely important. They ran a search. They've just hired a new postmaster general, someone with terrific business experience. And during the last bill, people thought the post office was going to run out of money, so they wanted to throw the post office $10 billion. I said, "that's not fair. Let's give them a loan if they need more money." The good news is, as of now, the package deliveries are up over 50 percent to offset the mail. As of now, they don't need to use the loan. So, I absolutely think the president is right. We want transparency on these agreements. ... Right now, the post office is doing amazing job delivering things to people as they're at home. An amazing job. We just want to make sure that the post office is paid fairly and isn't subsidizing that business. The first-class mail business is a business that should be subsidized. The package business, and again, what I'm talking about is the overnight package business. I'm not talking about if you take your package to the post office and send it cross-country, what I'm talking about is overnight business that services Amazon, eBay and others — that shouldn't be subsidized by taxpayers.   Cusack: An unusual program has come out of the State Department. It's been reported — it’s called the Eagle Plan, where Social Security recipients could get a $5,000 or $10,000 payment in exchange for reducing their retirement benefits down the road. It's very odd this is coming out of the State Department. Is this something that's going to come out from the administration? Mnuchin: No, it's not something that we're considering at this point. It did come out of the economics group. And we look at lots of things. I think, as you know, Social Security is very important to the president, and, we’ll look at other options if people need money.   Cusack: The president and vice president have been tested regularly. Have you been tested, and will you continue to be tested in the weeks ahead? Mnuchin: I am also tested on a regular basis because I am in pretty much daily contact with the president, the vice president and others. The White House has thought it prudent. And [with] these Abbott machines, it’s a very easy process. I hope we can get more and more of these Abbott machines into the workforce. I think in many places, if people could go into work and could get tested, they'd be much more confident in going to work. But yes, just as a precaution. Because I'm around the president on a regular basis, I do get tested. I’m happy to report I don’t have it. View the discussion thread.

WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > ‘We’ve been muzzled’: CDC sources say White House putting politics ahead of science > CDC quietly released more detailed guidelines for reopening   > Navajo Nation, under strict lockdown, surpasses New York for highest infection rate per capita in US  > Coca-Cola CEO: Economic impact of pandemic ‘just starting to begin’  > Prototype vaccine protects monkeys from COVID-19, a promising sign that a human vaccine is possible  > Scientists propose a 50 days on, 30 days off lockdown strategy to combat virus          The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is dominating headlines today. In my interview with CDC Director Robert Redfield yesterday, he said that the U.S. is ready to reopen and predicted hiring tens of thousands more contact tracers.     See my colleague Brett Samuels’ write-up of the interview here. And watch the full video here.    CNN is reporting that CDC officials say they have been “muzzled” and the White House is putting politics ahead of science. In interviews with the network, CDC officials say their agency's efforts to mount a coordinated response to the COVID-19 pandemic have been hamstrung by a White House whose decisions are driven by politics rather than science. The result has worsened the effects of the crisis, sources inside the CDC say, relegating the 73-year-old agency that has traditionally led the nation's response to infectious disease to a supporting role. In other news, the CDC quietly released more detailed guidance for reopening schools, businesses, transit systems and other industries after fears that the White House had shelved the guidelines. The 60-page document, which a CDC spokesman said was uploaded over the weekend, but which received little notice, adds great detail to six charts that the CDC released last week. (New York Times)   THE INTERVIEW Double Header!  Ajay Banga, President and CEO of Mastercard, says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now, adds Digital I.D. distributed system is way to enhance security and move economy forward post-COVID, says we need ethical innovation framework that puts citizen and customer first.        Watch the full interview here.      Brendan O’Grady, President and CEO, Teva USA says globalized drug supply chain a strength, says repatriation of production would require price stability commitments, says US produces almost no drug active ingredients (API), says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like it does with the Strategic Oil Reserve.        Watch the full interview here.     THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Wednesday, May 20.  Editor’s Note.  What will the future look like? And will you and I fit in it or not? That is what I discussed today in a meeting organized by The Hill titled “The Vir-tech-ual World,” underwritten by Nokia, with Rep. Suzan DelBeneSuzan Kay DelBeneExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support House Democrats press Treasury on debit cards used for coronavirus relief payments Hillicon Valley: Trump threatens Michigan, Nevada over mail-in voting | Officials call for broadband expansion during pandemic | Democrats call for investigation into Uber-Grubhub deal MORE (D-Wash.) as well as Federal Communications Commission Commissioner Michael O’Rielly and others. We are barreling head first into an internet of things world, gadgets connected to people, which are in turn sending data to other sensors, which are connected to other gadgets. Trillions of “things” — animate and inanimate — are about to become tied together. That requires some degree of trust, but it also requires competence and literacy.    But trust and literacy take time — and the coronavirus has robbed us all of that. We may have talked about the shift from analog to digital these past many years — but the analog world is now like the Oklahoma Dust Bowl of the 1930s with everyone rushing to California’s orange groves for their future and jobs. Like John Steinbeck painted in “The Grapes of Wrath,” there are going to be major problems in this new digital ecosystem that COVID-19 has shoved both the willing and unwilling into. And there are many that won’t be connected, and haven’t been connected even before we got to an IoT and 5G world.     The COVID-19 crisis has laid bare many of the inequities in our society as my panelists Francella Ochillo of Next Century Cities, Superintendent Michael Hinojosa of the Dallas Independent School District, and Jason Oxman of the Information Technology Industry Council made clear and which Nokia’s Brian Hendricks pondered as we race to modernize and add more technology and connectivity into the mix. What was clear in a world ravaged by COVID-19, there is an ever greater urgency to solve these problems of the past that haunt society — and to just fix them. Some are doing that, but it takes money — and lots of money is churning out of Washington. But it takes political will and steady focus. That may be the toughest part.   Watch the full program here.    – Steve Clemons   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.  THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE  Thursday, 11 a.m. EDT | Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinHillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues On The Money: Senate Dems pump brakes on new stimulus checks | Trump officials sued over tax refunds | Fed to soon open small-business lending program Schumer slams Trump's Rose Garden briefing on China as 'pathetic' MORE to join The Hill’s Editor in Chief Bob CusackRobert (Bob) CusackThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Mnuchin: More COVID-19 congressional action ahead On The Money: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | 2.4 million more Americans file new jobless claims | Top bank regulator abruptly announces resignation Overnight Health Care: Trump says US won't close over second COVID-19 wave | Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | Why the US has the most reported coronavirus cases in the world MORE        On Thursday, The Hill will host “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy. The summit will feature three one-hour segments, beginning at 11 a.m. EDT.    Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin joins The Hill’s Editor in Chief Bob Cusack for a keynote interview followed by an afternoon of discussion with leading CEOs and national health experts including:    > U.S. Surgeon General Jerome Adams  > Sen. Mark WarnerMark Robert WarnerExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support Senate Democrats pump brakes on new stimulus checks Trump signs order targeting social media firms' legal protections MORE (D-Va.) > Sen. Ben CardinBenjamin (Ben) Louis CardinSchumer to GOP: Cancel 'conspiracy hearings' on origins of Russia probe On The Money: Senate Dems pump brakes on new stimulus checks | Trump officials sued over tax refunds | Fed to soon open small-business lending program Senate Democrats pump brakes on new stimulus checks MORE (D-Md.)  > Rep. Will HurdWilliam Ballard HurdJulián Castro launches PAC to support progressive candidates The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump visits a ventilator plant in a battleground state The Hill to interview Mnuchin today and many other speakers  MORE (R-Texas) > Rep. Rodney DavisRodney Lee DavisThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump visits a ventilator plant in a battleground state The Hill to interview Mnuchin today and many other speakers  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mastercard CEO Ajay Banga says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now; Teva's Brendan O'Grady says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like Strategic Oil Reserve MORE (R-Ill.)  > Topeka, Kan., Mayor Michelle De La Isla > AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka  > Mozilla CEO Mitchell Baker  > GoDaddy CEO Aman Bhutani  > Teva USA President and CEO Brendan O’Grady > Citizen Founder and CEO Andrew Frame  > Chef and Crafted Hospitality owner Tom Colicchio   > AOL Founder and Revolution Chairman Steve Case > Chester River and Cheese Co. co-proprietor Jennifer Laucik Baker  > Siemens USA President & CEO Barbara Humpton > Wells Fargo CEO and President Charles W. Scharf REGISTER HERE! And join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE  There are 4,947,929 reported cases of COVID-19 in the world and 324,776 deaths have been recorded as of the time of this newsletter.    The U.S. is reporting 1,537,584 cases and 92,149 coronavirus deaths. Russia’s cases continue to rise dramatically and now stand at a reported 308,705. Brazil, with its 271,628 cases recorded its largest single-day spike in cases Tuesday. 250,141 in the U.K. 232,555 in Spain 227,364 in Italy. 180,934 in France. 178,170 in Germany. 152,587 in Turkey. 126,949 in Iran. 111,602 in India. 99,438 in Peru. Sweden’s lax lockdown measures and hopes of building herd immunity have resulted in 31,523 reported cases. Switzerland 30,658. Singapore 29,364. Bangladesh 26,738. United Arab Emirates 25,063. 17,200 in South Africa. 3,034 cases in Thailand. 2,927 in Uzbekistan. 1,503 in New Zealand.    New York’s 354,370 reported cases are still higher than any other country in the world. New Jersey is reporting 149,356 cases. Illinois 98,030. Massachusetts 87,925. California 83,865. Pennsylvania 67,311. Michigan 52,350. Texas 50,579. 29,276 cases in Indiana. 17,670 in Minnesota. 14,906 in Arizona. 9,056 in South Carolina. 8,364 in Kansas. 8,069 in Kentucky. 1,545 in West Virginia.    12,233,987 COVID-19 test results have been recorded and 289,392 full recoveries from the virus are being reported in the U.S.  WASHINGTON WATCH  Pelosi, Trump slide further into the muck. While tensions between the two have been heightened for months, the relationship took an especially nasty turn Monday after the Democratic leader characterized the famously image-conscious president as “morbidly obese” while panning his decision to take an unproven treatment for the coronavirus. President TrumpDonald John TrumpDonald Trump and Joe Biden create different narratives for the election The hollowing out of the CDC Poll: Biden widens lead over Trump to 10 points MORE at first dismissed Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy Pelosi Sunday shows preview: Leaders weigh in as country erupts in protest over George Floyd death 5 things to know about US-China tensions over Hong Kong Pelosi calls Trump's decision to withdraw US from WHO 'an act of extraordinary senselessness' MORE’s (D-Calif.) comments about his weight, telling reporters Tuesday after a lunch on Capitol Hill with GOP senators, “I don’t respond to her. I think she’s a waste of time.” (The Hill)    Trump threatens to withhold Michigan, Nevada funding over mail-in voting. President Trump on Wednesday threatened to withhold federal funding to Michigan after its secretary of state, Jocelyn Benson (D), announced all of the state’s registered voters would receive applications for absentee ballots in the mail this year. Trump charged that the step was done “illegally” and threatened to withhold funding if the state did not reverse course, suggesting the move would encourage voter fraud. (The Hill)    House GOP to launch China probes beyond COVID-19. Members of a new House GOP task force on China are vowing their investigation will go beyond COVID-19 and include probes into a host of issues creating tensions between Washington and Beijing. The fledgling task force — led by Rep. Michael McCaulMichael Thomas McCaulHouse passes bill that would sanction Chinese officials over Xinjiang camps The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mastercard CEO Ajay Banga says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now; Teva's Brendan O'Grady says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like Strategic Oil Reserve House GOP to launch China probes beyond COVID-19 MORE (R-Texas), the ranking member of the Foreign Affairs Committee — will look into topics ranging from supply chain and national security concerns to human rights violations and China’s growing influence on the world stage. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Senate Minority Whip Dick DurbinRichard (Dick)  Joseph DurbinFrustration builds in key committee ahead of Graham subpoena vote  Senate Democrat introduces bill to protect food supply Democratic unity starts to crack in coronavirus liability reform fight MORE (D-Ill.)  @SenatorDurbin Our next @USNavy Secretary must prioritize the well-being of our sailors, including those at @navstaglakes, & take steps toward mitigating health risks brought on by #COVID19. Spoke with Amb. Kenneth Braithwaite, @USNavy Secretary nominee, about his thoughts on these issues.   Rep. Elise StefanikElise Marie StefanikBipartisan House bill seeks to improve pandemic preparedness The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mastercard CEO Ajay Banga says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now; Teva's Brendan O'Grady says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like Strategic Oil Reserve House GOP to launch China probes beyond COVID-19 MORE (R-N.Y.)  @EliseStefanik #NY21 is so eager to get back to work safely. Thank you for everyone’s team effort to get all three of our regions in #NY21 to phase one of NY’s reopening process. There are brighter days ahead!     Sen. Martin HeinrichMartin Trevor HeinrichThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mastercard CEO Ajay Banga says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now; Teva's Brendan O'Grady says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like Strategic Oil Reserve Senate votes to reauthorize intel programs with added legal protections Bottom line MORE (D-N.M.)  @MartinHeinrich Tribal communities are being disproportionately impacted by the pandemic. At the same time, the need for internet access in these communities now could not be more apparent. That's why I am calling on the @FCC to ensure rural Tribal communities have equal access to internet.  ACROSS THE NATION  Navajo Nation under strict lockdown with highest coronavirus infection rate in the country. With only a fraction of the population, the Navajo Nation is now reporting more coronavirus cases per capita than New York, one of the initial epicenters of the outbreak in the United States. The 27,000-square-mile territory spans three states and had a population of 173,667 people as of the last census. As of May 18, there were 4,071 positive cases of COVID-19 and 142 deaths in the region stretching across northeastern Arizona, northwestern New Mexico and southeastern Utah. (The Hill)    California is finally winning coronavirus battle, even as deaths keep rising. Three months into California’s battle with the coronavirus, there are growing signs that the outbreak is ebbing even as the state death toll continues to climb, passing 3,400. While deaths remain a stubborn challenge, other metrics analyzed by the Los Angeles Times show significant progress — enough that even some of the most cautious local health officials have agreed to begin reopening the economy. (Los Angeles Times)   DOJ warns Newsom that order discriminates against California churches. The Department of Justice warned California Gov. Gavin NewsomGavin NewsomSupreme Court denies California church's challenge to state restrictions Supreme Court denies Illinois churches' request for action after state eases restrictions Coronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Rep. Ro Khanna MORE (D) in a Tuesday letter that his reopening plan for the state discriminates against churches. Eric S. Dreiband, the head of the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division, said in the letter that the governor should permit in-person worship gatherings in the second phase of his four-part reopening. Currently, Newsom’s plan indicates churches can reopen in the third phase. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW   Why Cape Town has 10 percent of Africa’s confirmed coronavirus cases. This city at Africa's southwestern-most tip stands out for a number of reasons — its extreme economic inequality and remarkable scenery among them — but burgeoning hot spots of coronavirus cases have distinguished it anew. (Washington Post)     UAE minister of state: Coronavirus crisis “could help ease Gulf tensions.” Countries in the Gulf region — Iran and the six Gulf Arab states — will emerge "weaker, poorer and damaged" from the coronavirus pandemic, according to UAE Minister of State Anwar Gargash. Speaking to the BBC from Abu Dhabi, he said the answer was for the whole region to try to de-escalate its tensions. (BBC)   SCIENCE  A prototype vaccine has protected monkeys from the coronavirus. A prototype vaccine has protected monkeys from the coronavirus, researchers reported Wednesday, a finding that offers new hope for effective human vaccines. “To me, this is convincing that a vaccine is possible,” said Nelson Michael, the director of the Center for Infectious Diseases Research at Walter Reed Army Institute of Research. (New York Times)  Cycle of 50 days of shutdown followed by 30 days relaxation is best way to tackle pandemic, study finds. As countries start to reopen their economies, public health experts are putting the situation in context by warning that more waves of the coronavirus are likely. A European Union-backed study released Wednesday outlines what a response to that reality could look like: Fifty days of shutdown followed by 30 days of relative relaxation. Repeat until pandemic-free. (Washington Post)   BUSINESS  Weekly mortgage applications point to a remarkable recovery in homebuying. If mortgage demand is an indicator, buyers are coming back to the housing market far faster than anticipated, despite coronavirus shutdowns and job losses. Mortgage applications to purchase a home rose 6 percent last week from the previous week, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association’s seasonally adjusted index. (CNBC)  Coca-Cola CEO says economic impact of lockdown is “just starting to begin.” Coca-Cola CEO James Quincey delivered a grim forecast Wednesday for the global economy’s recovery from the impact of the coronavirus pandemic. “The economic impact of the lockdown is just starting to begin,” Quincey said on CNBC’s “Squawk Box.” (CNBC)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS  Why I have to break up with Florida. Dear Florida, breaking up is hard to do, but another man has come between us. It was going so well with that overpowering desire to see you when that first flake of snow wafted in a stiff December wind, those moonlit jogs on the Miami Beach boardwalk, the butterflies in our stomachs when we committed to spend the rest of our lives with you in retirement homes in Boca and Naples. But now, your United States senator, Rick Scott, is opposing federal aid to New York and other states impacted by the coronavirus. (Former Rep. Steve IsraelSteven (Steve) J. IsraelThe Hill's Campaign Report: Trump ramps up attacks against Twitter The Hill's Coronavirus Report: National Portrait Gallery's Kim Sajet says this era rewiring people's relationship with culture, art; Trump's war with Twitter heats up  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mastercard CEO Ajay Banga says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now; Teva's Brendan O'Grady says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like Strategic Oil Reserve MORE for The Hill) Will government mandate COVID-19 vaccinations? When a COVID-19 vaccine becomes available, I will be one of the first in line. But the fact is U.S. adults tend to have low vaccination rates. If the government determines that vaccinations are essential to stemming the spread of the disease, would it — could it — mandate vaccination compliance? Apparently, it can — and it might. (Merrill Matthews for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS Florida girl adopted by family over Zoom after 700 days in foster care. One Florida family is celebrating the adoption of the 2-year-old girl who has lived with them in foster care since she was 7 days old. As the local county courthouse remains closed during the coronavirus pandemic, the toddler’s adoption hearing commenced over Zoom and was followed by a sweet car parade by members of their foster care community. (Fox News)   ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. LEE ZELDIN (R-N.Y.)  > Steve interviews former Maryland Lt. Gov. and ex-RNC Chairman MICHAEL STEELE  > Steve interviews former U.S. Energy Secretary ERNEST MONIZ  > Steve interviews Sen. JOE MANCHIN (D-W.Va.)  > Steve interviews Mylan CEO HEATHER BRESCH  > Steve interviews Wilson Center President and CEO JANE HARMAN  > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  > Steve interviews CDC Director ROBERT REDFIELD  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.     VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVE View the discussion thread.

The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Brendan O'Grady, president and CEO of Teva Pharmaceuticals USA. Read excerpts from the interview below. Clemons: How do you look at the issue of supply chains right now? O’Grady: I think before this started nobody really cared about supply chains. Nobody even really thought much about it. But Teva is the largest generic producer of medications for the world. We serve almost 200 million patients on a daily basis. We have the largest, most complex supply chain in the world. But to some degree, that's an asset force. You know, we have 60 manufacturing sites scattered, really, throughout the world. The vast majority of our supply chain for the U.S. relies on Europe. We have quite a significant presence here in the United States — about a third of the medicines we supply from the United States are actually manufactured here. And then we rely on a third — a mix between India, Israel and just a small portion from China. No finished goods from manufacturing in China, at all, just some API. So, we're much more diverse than other manufacturers, and as a result, we've been able to keep the supply chain going and we haven't had any shortages, we continue to provide needed medications, but it is a concern as to where our medicines come from and how we continue to supply the US market, not just Teva, but the industry as a whole.   Clemons: How do you get a system to better prepare for something that it doesn't know is coming? O’Grady: We forecast demand months out ahead of time for different seasonal events, whether it be flu, whether it be allergy season — even asthma exacerbates during allergy season. So all of these things go into our regular forecasting process, and we've actually ramped up production of products like azithromycin, albuterol — products that are in high demand — propofol, other things that are in high demand as a result of COVID, and are now trying to build a strategic stockpile our ourselves. But I think one of the things that government could also do is build their own strategic stockpile of critical medicines, not only that are needed for COVID, but other things that get impacted, such as insulin and heart medications and other things. So I think there's things that manufacturers are doing. I know there's things that we’re certainly doing, and certainly talking to the government about how we can help again as the largest manufacturer of generic medicines in the world — and, you know, a 10 percent share here in the United States, one out of every 10 medications distributed or received by a patient here in the U.S. is a Teva medication. So, we feel a huge responsibility to make sure that our supply chain keeps going.   Clemons: What do you think the United States can do that it's not doing now to strengthen the supply chain? O’Grady: Well, I think to some degree, having a diversified global supply chain like we have is a benefit. I mean, if you think about things like geopolitical events, natural disasters, regional or local labor disruptions, having a supply chain located in different parts of the world can actually be a strategic advantage. It was odd about several weeks ago, we had an earthquake in Salt Lake City [Utah] and we had an earthquake in in Croatia, both big plants for the United States. Fortunately, neither one of those plants had disruptions. But having a supply system or supply chain that’s located around the world allows you to kind of minimize the impact of those type of events. But, if I were a politician and not the head of Teva North America, I think I would be thinking about the most critical medicines that we need, and I don't know if it's a list of 100 or 150, but whatever that list of critical medicines is, I would look at working with manufacturers to make sure that we had stability in supply. So it could be strategic agreements or treaties like we have with other nations as far as defense or other critical materials and products. It could be building a strategic stockpile. We keep a strategic reserve of oil. There's no reason why we shouldn't keep a strategic reserve of medication. So long term, if the goal is to repatriate some manufacturing back to the United States, I think there's ways to do that with current manufacturers with incentives and so forth, because at the end of the day you have to be competitive. You have to be market competitive with products that you're making. And part of that is long term price stability, which we don't have here in the United States. As you know, generic medications — the price tends to erode between the high single digits, 6 percent in a good year. And it could be upward in the high teens. So pricing stability, long term manufacturing commitments are all things that could be done to stabilize the supply and assure of the security supply here in the United States.   Clemons: Teva does not produce vaccines, but when you look at the manufacturing capacity that will be needed, what role do you see Teva playing when we come to either antivirals or vaccines? O’Grady: Again, as the largest generic manufacturer, one of the things that we’re proud of and one of things that we really focus on is making medicines affordable and accessible in the United States and across the world. So you're right, we’re not a vaccine producer, and, we're not sure how long the vaccine will take. I'm sure and confident that a vaccine will come, but it could take months. It could take years before we get one. So I think the important thing is finding what other treatments may alleviate symptoms or even help knock the virus out. And, of course, you mentioned hydroxychloroquine — that’s one. Azithromycin has been used and is being studied in a trial that we that we supported with the NIH in a combination, if that helps. Remdesivir is another product. So there's multiple products that are that are out there. So we're supporting the clinical research of the existing products that are there. And of course, we have numerous manufacturing capabilities. So if we need to partner with somebody to help manufacture a treatment to make it broadly available we’re certainly open to that as well.   Clemons: What sorts of elements would you like to see on the back end of this of this crisis that we could improve the way we think about both how drugs are provisioned and think about health costs in America? O’Grady: I have a personal example. So, the first thing I'll say is that I think the U.S. health care system is extremely complex. It is very difficult to understand and there are times — and I've been in the pharmaceutical industry, in the health care industry for nearly 30 years — and there's times when even I have challenges understanding it. So it's extremely complex, but it's also a very high quality system. And if you look at it, people from other parts of the world, they actually come to the United States many times to seek treatment because they know the quality that we have here. And I had an opportunity to live in Europe for part of my career and participated in the European health care systems which are much more government run than ours. And I'm not going to say that they're low quality, but there is certainly a difference in the access to the treatments that that you have, and the access to the drugs that you have and when you have those. So I think those are tenets that we want to preserve in the U.S. health care system. But I do think, and we largely don't have a problem with drug pricing in this country, and I know that the narrative has been prices are too expensive. I think part of the problem is people don't have visibility to what they're paying and we have benefit designs that have been created, whether they're high deductible or Medicare doughnut hole, where people pay $25 in December and then January they go to get their medication and it's $200 or $300, and they don't understand why. So I think we have benefit design reform. I think we have an opportunity to really simplify the system as it works today, and I think we need to find a way that health care, including medicines, is accessible to all. I don't believe that a government run system, a single-payer system, is the answer. I think private industry is the answer. And I think that we can tweak the system to make it more transparent, simplified, and not as complex for for people to access.   Clemons: How do you look at how you're investing in restoring trust in this time? O’Grady: I think you know one of the things that I find personally frustrating is that there's probably not an industry, in the history of humans on the planet, that has had a greater impact to the longevity and human health than the pharmaceutical industry. And so it always perplexes me as to why it has such a low perception out there with the public. And I think some of that, the industry has done to itself, but I think that one of the things that I hope in this pandemic — one of the outcomes of this pandemic — is that people will realize that the pharmaceutical industry is essential to national security. It's essential to our public health, and that we need to work together to make sure it's sustainable. But we also have to build trust. And I think one of the things that we're focused on at Teva is really building trust with the public is making sure that we continue our supply chain. And we've done a great job of making sure that people can come to work, in our manufacturing and our R&D sites, making sure that it's a safe environment to deliver medications at an affordable price and do it in a very responsible way. And I think if we do that long term and continue to do that, then we'll build trust with the public. And hopefully, we’ll be seen as an asset as we go forward in the future and really something essential to the health of the American public. View the discussion thread.

The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Ajay Banga, Mastercard president and CEO. Read excerpts from the interview below. Clemons: How does what's happening globally like from your perspective? Banga: I would say that this is truly a public health crisis and I think there's a lot of work going on that front, but don't forget that the authorities have moved really well on fiscal and monetary policy in most countries around the world. I think we’ve all learned our lesson from prior financial crises and have applied at least a good lexicon out of those. Now how well all that gets implemented and executed over a period of time will determine how well we come out of this over the next period. But the fact is the playbook is operating. Now the way we've defined the stages of this crisis for the company and for our investors and every employee. It is said that there are four stages. The first stage is containment. That's kind of borders getting shut, schools getting shut, restaurants shutting, everything shutting, people, getting locked into their homes. Obviously, consumer spending falls off a cliff during that period. The second phase is stabilization, and stabilization is basically the bottoming out of the prior phase. It's almost like we're turning the corner and the curve of new cases and hospitalizations, and ICU admissions are beginning to bend down, and people are beginning to buy not just everyday groceries, but also adding on a few things like home improvement and the like. And so, I would say that a couple to three weeks ago, the United States and Europe are more or less operating through that bottom, that stabilization phase. China, on the other hand, which entered containment before all of us — was coming into the third phase which, for want of a better word, we call normalization. It's not really normal in the sense that not everything will go back to pre-COVID kind of level. It's actually lower than pre-COVID-19, but it's coming off the bottom, and you probably won't get the same recovery in long-distance travel or in mass entertainment. But you will in pent up demand for certain things. And it could be something as simple as hair and beauty pigments or gym memberships. Or like I said, home improvement. And maybe intraregional travel or domestic travel. Or as I say recently, "rural is the new urban" for tourism, in the U.S. as well. People will drive to nearby hotels to give themselves that weekend treat that they have wanted. So you'll see that now in the U.S. and Europe we feel like for the last few weeks we're entering into that normalization phase. And then the fourth phase, called growth, which will come pre-COVID kind of levels. I think that's going to need a vaccine, things that build back consumer confidence and business confidence to what it felt like prior to COVID-19. I would say nobody's back at that phase. Obviously and it's not linear. Some countries have moved from containment to normalization and have gone backwards. That has happened for a little while for Japan and Singapore, when there was a resurgence of the virus in those countries. That's kind of how we're looking at it.   Clemons: How can a financial instrument help contribute to returning to high trust environments? Banga: I would say, let’s break that down into two portions. Let's first break it down into trust, per se. Then let's talk about how do you manage trust in this digital-first kind of environment? So let's talk trust first. Trust, let’s discuss economic, different economies around the world and the trust they had with each other. The fact is, even before the crisis, multilateral institutions that had been created in the last century were created to enable economies to operate on a platform that generated trust by the outside interpretation of those rules by third parties who were meant to be impartial. Now we’ve seen those very multilateral institutions over the last decade or two slowly begin to break down from their level of operation prior to that. So I would argue that they’ve already worn down the trust environment of big economies on a number of the issues. I think this thing has just exacerbated that. And so to me, at the end of the day, coming out of this, you look at the United States, what’s our strength? Our strength is human capital and our strength is our innovation and ingenuity and economies of scale, which allow us to benefit from an open trading environment. If you don’t manage and nurture our human capital, if you don’t manage and nurture an open trading environment. Level playing field — not an open trading environment where we operate with both hands tied behind our back, but a level playing field, open trading environment, then I think we can be leaders in the space of helping to rebuild this trust across the quality of nations to make sure that we can keep an open trading system going. The fact is, the last 20, 30 years, the growth in the world's economies would not have happened. The reduction in poverty would not have happened without an open trading environment. And so the United States is vested in that and in leadership in human capital. That's the point I'm trying to make here. I think we shouldn’t back off that completely. Now in the digital space, trust is a very much more interesting conversation. I think it starts with being careful about your identity, about individual consumers feeling safe about their identity online. And that leads to the whole conversation about digital identities that are secure with distributed platforms, cybersecurity efforts, that whole space. But I think way beyond that is the whole issue of ethical innovation. If you're going to use artificial intelligence, if you're going to use data for the right purposes of giving consumers and businesses better service, it is really important that we put the consumer and the business first. It's really important that you say to a consumer: "This is your data. You deserve to benefit from it. You have the right to be forgotten. You have the right to have it deleted, and you must be able to feel safe when your data has been used by others."   I think that kind of principle, simple principles on data, something we call our "data responsibility principles," our data imperative, that we issued a short little while ago — I think we really need to embrace all that when we go forward in this world of 5G and IoT and interconnected devices to rebuild the trust that's going to be important in this coming decade.   Clemons: I've been fascinated by digital IDs and that question of how to get there for a long time. And how to make it safe and also make it something that can’t be exploited. What do you need to have to make that happen? Banga: The fact is that if you have a digital ID where the government controls every aspect of that identity, most economies like ours will feel uncomfortable with that situation. Citizens in a country like ours and parts of Europe and a number of other countries around the world are uncomfortable having the government be the be-all and the end-all of everything to do with you. Yet, the government gives your driving license. They give you a passport. Your banks have information about you when you open an account with them. Or "know your customer" for anti-money laundering. Your cellphone companies have information of where you are because of me having a GPS tracker. So, the best form of digital identity to me is a distributive platform where companies do not keep all that information with them. Neither does the government. Instead, you the consumer empower this trusted identity system to say, "Hey, can you prove to so and so I am Steve; or I am above the age of 18; or I am male," or whatever it is you wish to prove. And that trusted player can go into those distributed identity records and only bring back that information, which is necessary to answer the limited question that you wanted to have answered. So, let me expand on that with an example. Let's say you're buying alcohol on the web. And today a lot of people are doing that in coronavirus times, right? Home purchases of alcohol are much higher than they used to be. When they get delivered to your house, they have to make sure that you're adult and you are the person who ordered the alcohol. You either got to sign for something, give them proof of identity. In some countries, you have to give them a driving license. And this young kid from a delivery company, take’s the photograph of your driving license. Now, on their phone, is your photograph, your full name, your exact date of birth, of course, your address. They knew that. But sometimes also the vehicle you're allowed to drive. And, of course, your driving license number. In a number of countries, that is enough information to open a bank account in your name. I'm saying don't do that. You only needed proof you’re above the legal age of drinking. You could do that by going into the driving license authority and bringing back the fact that Steve’s above 21. Going to the bank and having a second place to check it from. And then going to your cellphone operator and bringing back the fact that you are physically where you claim to be. Put those three points together and you can tell the delivery company, "Go ahead and deliver the booze, this is the guy who bought it." In fact, I give you back your privacy. I give you back your identity. But I proved to everybody in the ecosystem that you are who you are. That, to me, is the form of digital identity — distributed databases, not centralized, no honey pot which people are going to break into. And create a cooperative system where nobody owns everything, but you kind of go in and work on this together. We've actually built this and launched this in Australia already.   Clemons: What are you seeing in sort of the cash flow in the commerce side of small businesses and what your sense is. Banga: I think first of all, small business is the engine of growth of economies around the world, including in the U.S. I think supporting them and finding ways to make them come out of this the right way is the single best thing we can all do for the economic vitality and, frankly, the social vitality of our economy. So, I'm all-in for that one. I would say they are also suffering. There is no doubt that a number of them have struggled and are struggling right now through this period. But there are those who are being innovative and creative, and they will come out in the natural process, they will probably come out stronger. And it ranges from restaurants in Brooklyn who, being unable to be open, have now repositioned themselves. They are selling everything from wine out of their cellars to actually their own menus prepackaged and sold to people. They have changed who they are. There are others who are trying to find "omni channel" experiences and they were only physical earlier and they've learned very quickly to go online and become digital as well. And people like us are helping them. Not just us. There are many companies helping them in the space. I think the whole idea of small business, being alive and innovative is definitely correct. But there are those who was being very challenged. And there are those who are managing better through this process. We shouldn't forget either of them as we come out of this. And, you know, Steve we set up a $250 million fund to help small businesses globally over these next few years. And part of that is by giving them free tools for cyber securities scanning, through education and how to use credit — to different kinds of aspects. And others are philanthropic donations to them, to help them manage through this period. And a lot of companies are doing good things for small businesses, for all the reasons we just talked about.  View the discussion thread.

The head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said Tuesday that he believes the U.S. is ready to begin reopening, even as he acknowledged the need to invest further in the nation's public health infrastructure and expand contact tracing to avoid sustained outbreaks. "I want to clarify that the community-based transmission, the community-to-community transmission that overwhelmed the public health departments in late February, March, April, that's really coming down," Redfield said in an interview with Steve Clemons, author of The Hill's daily Coronavirus Report. Redfield told The Hill that the CDC is working with state public health agencies to contain outbreaks in nursing homes, among homeless populations, in meatpacking facilities and in other areas. He signaled states will have sufficient testing and contact tracing to follow the White House's guidelines for reopening. The challenge, he said, will be ensuring the country has enough testing and contact tracing for a potential second wave of the virus in the fall and winter months, which would coincide with the annual influenza season. Redfield said the CDC is looking to expand the contact tracing workforce by between 30,000 and 100,000 people. Experts have said hundreds of thousands of contact tracers will be needed nationwide to identify those who have been infected with the coronavirus and those with whom the infected person has come into contact. "Ultimately, that number [of contact tracers] is going to be decided by the efforts that we have with the local health departments," Redfield said. "But that's ongoing now, and it needs to be in place, operationally ready by October of this year." The Trump administration announced in late April that it would be deploying roughly a dozen contact tracers from the CDC to each state, but many states have been ramping up their own recruiting efforts in the weeks since. The number of volunteers in each state varies. For example, 400 people have volunteered in Kansas, while 1,200 have come forward to help in Utah. Redfield cited financial investments in state and local health departments, an increase in flu vaccinations among the American public, and an overhaul of public health data systems as key to ensuring the country is prepared to combat the pandemic in the months ahead. He acknowledged those investments will come with a hefty price tag — he estimated it could end up costing between $3 trillion and $6 trillion — but said preparations should be made sooner rather than later. "It's a small price to pay finally, once and for all, to stop talking about building the public health infrastructure this nation needs and, more importantly, deserves," he said. The CDC has come under criticism for its antiquated data collection and reporting system. Redfield earlier this month went back and forth with Deborah Birx, the coordinator of the White House coronavirus response, about the flaws in the system. A CDC spokesperson said the two were in agreement on the need to improve the system, but the episode reflects the frustrations of some at the White House with the agency’s approach. The CDC has faced criticism for its limited public visibility as states move to lift restrictions intended to slow the spread of the coronavirus. The agency last week released broad recommendations for businesses to use when reopening after the White House reportedly buried more detailed guidance. By the time the scaled-down version was released, dozens of states had already allowed or were close to allowing businesses to reopen. Redfield denied on Tuesday that politics influenced the final guidelines. "This outbreak has gone from a CDC to an all-of-government response," he said, saying the guidelines went through an inter-agency review process. "One of the things that became clear at the task force when we put up our initial guidelines is a number of people criticized, and I think appropriately, that a lot of our guidelines are written in what they called CDC-eze, meaning that they're not easy for the American public to actually get through," he said. "And so the decision was, why don't you guys do some decision trees that are simple one-pagers. You've probably seen them targeting the American public. And we released those six decision trees last week." View the discussion thread.

WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Treasury Secretary Mnuchin and Fed Chair Powell testify before Senate Banking Committee on pandemic response programs  > President TrumpDonald John TrumpDonald Trump and Joe Biden create different narratives for the election The hollowing out of the CDC Poll: Biden widens lead over Trump to 10 points MORE says he has been taking hydroxychloroquine despite risks > In scathing letter, Trump threatens to leave WHO if changes aren’t made within 30 days  > Children’s hospitals are experiencing ‘catastrophic losses’  > Greenhouse gas emissions have plunged an unprecedented 17 percent  > CDC Director Redfield says CDC agency took first action on COVID-19 in late December and notified White House Jan. 1         These days, it may take a lot for news from Washington to shock anyone. In just the past 3½ years, the American public has witnessed one of the nastiest presidential campaigns in history, a sexual assault allegation against a Supreme Court justice nominee and now a Democratic presidential nominee, the impeachment of President Trump and — to top it all off — a once in a generation global pandemic that has locked down the world and pushed economies to the brink of collapse.    Nevertheless, at an informal press event at the White House, President Trump shocked reporters when he said he’s been dosing up on hydroxychloroquine for more than a week in hopes it will prevent him from contracting the coronavirus. Let’s keep in mind that the drug is highly controversial and there is no body of empirical evidence to suggest the drug wards off the virus or is even safe to take at all. In April, the Food and Drug Administration issued a safety warning on the anti-malaria drug. But the president said he did consult with the White House physician about taking the drug and — to quell concerns that the president was either lying or feeding the press a distraction — the White House released a memo last night detailing the commander in chief’s decision to preventively take hydroxychloroquine. It is rather ironic that Trump has continued to downplay the severity of COVID-19 and relentlessly push for the country to reopen, but he seems concerned enough to take his own preventive measures against the virus.    Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy Pelosi Sunday shows preview: Leaders weigh in as country erupts in protest over George Floyd death 5 things to know about US-China tensions over Hong Kong Pelosi calls Trump's decision to withdraw US from WHO 'an act of extraordinary senselessness' MORE (D-Calif.) responded, telling CNN’s Anderson Cooper "I would rather he not be taking something that has not been approved by the scientists, especially in his age group and in his, shall we say, weight group, morbidly obese, they say. So, I think that it’s not a good idea.” (The Hill)    Trump has not yet responded to Pelosi, but a fiery response is likely. Today, more than 90,000 are dead in America. More than 36 million are unemployed since the virus took hold. The daily lives of us all have been turned on their heads. And the leader of the free world is taking a risky drug with no proof of effectiveness. And the most powerful woman in American politics responds by calling him fat. Welcome to 2020.   THE INTERVIEW Robert Redfield, Director, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  CDC Director Robert Redfield says agency has been underinvested for decades and must up public health infrastructure before Covid/flu combo hits in the fall, says CDC took first action on COVID-19 in late December and notified White House Jan. 1, and adds he doesn’t know why Trump administration official Peter Navarro said what he did when the facts are otherwise.         * Interview transcript and full footage will be available shortly. Watch this space for updates.  THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Tuesday, May 19.  Editor’s Note.    One of the TV shows I used to watch when no one was looking was “The Weakest Link.” It was a BBC production that celebrated sharp-edged wit and general knowledge, praising those who knew all the answers, and publicly, somewhat viciously shaming those who didn’t succeed and couldn’t keep up. It was a terrible show, but it portrayed what many think is possible — that the strong or like-minded or most intellectual can become a tribe by casting out inferiors, or those who are different, or bring a different set of talents to the scene that don’t quite align with others.   Amid the global devastation of this virus, we can’t look at lesser developed nations as “weak links” that can be expelled or walled off. In a global pandemic with a virus that doesn’t pay attention to borders and nationalism, the weak links — whether inside our own society or abroad — must be cared for and made strong and resilient. Today, in my discussion with Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Robert Redfield, he said that we may need to greatly widen our contact tracing in America, and we need to find ways to care for and quarantine people who have no homes and are infected. He also said, very slowly and forcefully, that the CDC had global assets to work with and that America needed to invest much more in global health infrastructure, not walk away from it.   From the sheer number of cases and deaths, COVID-19 is hitting America harder than any other nation in the world. But it is virtually everywhere in the world. Not containing it abroad increases the chances that this virus becomes not just a one wave or two waves crisis, but the kind of threat to mankind that continues to work around the world in a wave, always coming back to harm and kill inside the United States as well. And that’s a challenge even if a virus is discovered. Redfield said that even with a virulent flu — about which Americans are educated and know can be lethal — the vaccination rate is only 15 percent. He said we need more Americans to lean in on flu vaccinations so that society is less vulnerable to so-called weak links.   – Steve Clemons   Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.     THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE  Thursday, 11 a.m. EDT | Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinHillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues On The Money: Senate Dems pump brakes on new stimulus checks | Trump officials sued over tax refunds | Fed to soon open small-business lending program Schumer slams Trump's Rose Garden briefing on China as 'pathetic' MORE to join The Hill’s Editor in Chief Bob CusackRobert (Bob) CusackThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Mnuchin: More COVID-19 congressional action ahead On The Money: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | 2.4 million more Americans file new jobless claims | Top bank regulator abruptly announces resignation Overnight Health Care: Trump says US won't close over second COVID-19 wave | Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | Why the US has the most reported coronavirus cases in the world MORE        On Thursday, The Hill will host “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy. The summit will feature three one-hour segments, beginning at 11 a.m. EDT.    Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin joins The Hill’s Editor in Chief Bob Cusack for a keynote interview followed by an afternoon of discussion with leading CEOs and national health experts including:    > U.S. Surgeon General Jerome Adams  > Sen. Mark WarnerMark Robert WarnerExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support Senate Democrats pump brakes on new stimulus checks Trump signs order targeting social media firms' legal protections MORE (D-Va.) > Sen. Ben CardinBenjamin (Ben) Louis CardinSchumer to GOP: Cancel 'conspiracy hearings' on origins of Russia probe On The Money: Senate Dems pump brakes on new stimulus checks | Trump officials sued over tax refunds | Fed to soon open small-business lending program Senate Democrats pump brakes on new stimulus checks MORE (D-Md.)  > Rep. Will HurdWilliam Ballard HurdJulián Castro launches PAC to support progressive candidates The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump visits a ventilator plant in a battleground state The Hill to interview Mnuchin today and many other speakers  MORE (R-Texas) > Rep. Rodney DavisRodney Lee DavisThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump visits a ventilator plant in a battleground state The Hill to interview Mnuchin today and many other speakers  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mastercard CEO Ajay Banga says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now; Teva's Brendan O'Grady says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like Strategic Oil Reserve MORE (R-Ill.)  > Mayor Michelle De La Isla, city of Topeka > Teva North America President and CEO Brendan O'Grady  > Mozilla CEO Mitchell Baker  > GoDaddy CEO Aman Bhutani  > Citizen Founder and CEO Andrew Frame  > Independent Restaurant Coalition Founder chef Tom Colicchio   > AOL Founder and Revolution Chairman Steve Case > Chester River and Cheese Co. co-proprietor Jennifer Laucik Baker  > Siemens USA President & CEO Barbara Humpton > Wells Fargo CEO and President Charles W. Scharf   *Additional speakers to be announced  REGISTER HERE! And join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.          Wednesday at 1 p.m. EDT, The Hill will host “The Vir [tech] tual World Ahead,” a virtual program focusing on our dramatic shift to a digital ecosystem at a time when digital literacy continues to be uneven, much as basic access to the internet can be.    Steve Clemons, The Hill’s editor-at-large, will be speaking with:    > FCC Commissioner Michael O’Rielly  > Rep. Suzan DelBeneSuzan Kay DelBeneExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support House Democrats press Treasury on debit cards used for coronavirus relief payments Hillicon Valley: Trump threatens Michigan, Nevada over mail-in voting | Officials call for broadband expansion during pandemic | Democrats call for investigation into Uber-Grubhub deal MORE (D-Wash.)  > Superintendent of the Dallas Independent School District Michael Hinojosa > Next Century Cities Executive Director Francella Ochillo  > Information Technology Industry Council President and CEO Jason Oxman  REGISTER HERE! And join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE  There are 4,867,515 reported cases of COVID-19 throughout the world and 321,459 deaths as of the time of this newsletter.    The U.S. is reporting 1,519,986 cases of coronavirus and 91,179 deaths. Russia is reporting 299,941 cases. Brazil’s 262,545 cases are now third most in the world. The U.K. is reporting 250,121 cases. 232,037 in Spain. 226,699 in Italy. 180,933 in France. 177,574 in Germany. 151,615 in Turkey. Iran 124,603. India 106,453. Peru 94,933. Saudi Arabia is reporting 59,854 cases. 51,633 in Mexico. 30,799 in Sweden. 28,794 in Singapore. 18,876 in Ukraine. 18,496 in Indonesia. South Africa 16,433. Egypt 13,484. South Korea 11,078. Cameroon 3,529.   New York is reporting 352,845 cases. New Jersey 149,356. Illinois 96,485. Massachusetts 87,052. California is reporting 81,904 cases. 67,311 in Pennsylvania. 51,915 in Michigan. 49,308 in Texas – where cases are increasing as the state begins to reopen. 46,944 in Florida. 38,116 in Connecticut. 28,956 in Ohio. 28,704 in Indiana. 19,239 in North Carolina. Iowa 15,296. Arizona 14,576. Rhode Island 12,951. 10,625 in Nebraska. 8,942 in South Carolina. 4,085 in South Dakota. 3,687 in Oregon. 640 in Hawaii.    11,834,508 COVID-19 test results have been recorded in the U.S. and 283,178 have reported full recoveries from the virus.  WASHINGTON WATCH  Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin and Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell testify before the Senate Banking Committee. During the hearing, Sen. Sherrod BrownSherrod Campbell BrownHillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues Democratic senators urge regulators to investigate Instacart over 'tip baiting' Senate Dems press DOJ over coronavirus safety precautions in juvenile detention centers MORE (Ohio) and Mnuchin had a tense exchange when the top Democrat on the committee asked whether people were being pushed to go back to work amid a pandemic to boost stock markets. Brown argued that people were being pushed “back into the workplace” with “no national program to provide worker safety.” (The Hill)    Trump threatens to permanently cut WHO funding, leave body if changes aren’t made. President Trump threatened Monday to permanently halt U.S. funding to the World Health Organization and “reconsider” the country’s membership in the United Nations body if it does not “commit to major substantive improvements” within the next 30 days. In a letter to the WHO posted in a late-night tweet, Trump said the global health agency floundered in its early responses to the coronavirus outbreak. (Washington Post)     Read the president’s “self explanatory” letter here.    White House, CDC rift spills into the open. The rift between the White House and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has spilled out into the open as one of the nation's top public health agencies finds itself on the margins of the response to a once-in-a-generation pandemic. “To allude that we’re sort of taking a backseat to this response just because we haven’t had such a forward-facing presence with the news media really does disservice to what we have actually done as far as leading the public health response to this,” a CDC spokesperson said. (The Hill)    Congress eyes changes to small-business pandemic aid. Lawmakers are pushing for changes to a key program that provides aid to small businesses impacted by the coronavirus. Talks about “fixes”— from tweaks to an overhaul of the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) to changes to other programs — come as Congress remains divided over a so-called Phase Four relief bill, which would actually be the fifth agreement reached on the coronavirus response since early March. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. Jacky RosenJacklyn (Jacky) Sheryl RosenThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of another relief package; Warner says some businesses 'may not come back' at The Hill's Advancing America's Economy summit  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: CDC Director Redfield responds to Navarro criticism; Mnuchin and Powell brief Senate panel Hillicon Valley: Experts raise security concerns about online voting | Musk finds supporter in Trump | Officials warn that Chinese hackers targeting COVID-19 research groups MORE (D-Nev.)  @SenJackyRosen .@SenCortezMasto and I are calling for ramping up #COVID19 testing.  Our public health, government, and business leaders need information about who has COVID-19, who needs to be isolated or quarantined, and who may have already had the virus.   Sen. Joni ErnstJoni Kay ErnstThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: National Portrait Gallery's Kim Sajet says this era rewiring people's relationship with culture, art; Trump's war with Twitter heats up  The Hill's 12:30 Report - Presented by Facebook - Cuomo rings the first opening bell since March House Democrats make initial ad buys in battleground states MORE (R-Iowa)  @SenJoniErnst In the bipartisan #COVID19 relief packages, we worked to ensure states like Iowa received funding to increase testing capabilities. Last week,  @CDCgov announced that Iowa will receive over $114 million to enhance testing in our communities.   Rep. Debbie Mucarsel-PowellDebbie Mucarsel-PowellGun control group rolls out House endorsements  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: CDC Director Redfield responds to Navarro criticism; Mnuchin and Powell brief Senate panel Human Rights Campaign rolls out congressional endorsements on Equality Act anniversary  MORE (D-Fla.)  @RepDMP The GOP Senate has to get to work to help those hurting in this crisis instead of appointing right wing conservative judges. They need to work for the people and bring the #HeroesAct to the floor. Americans are hurting. They need this assistance and there’s no time to waste.  ACROSS THE NATION  Texas, North Carolina, Alabama see rising cases as they reopen. North Carolina and Arizona are among the states seeing rising numbers of coronavirus cases, intensifying concerns as they seek to reopen shuttered economies. Texas saw its largest one-day increase in cases on Saturday, with 1,801 new cases. North Carolina also saw its largest single-day jump on Saturday with 853 new cases. And Arizona reported 462 new cases that day, close to a record high. (The Hill)   Chicago blocks church parking lots to enforce stay-at-home order. The city of Chicago blocked parking at some churches’ lots Sunday in order to enforce Illinois’s stay-at-home order. (The Hill)  Coronavirus having “catastrophic” impact on children’s hospitals. Children's hospitals across the country are experiencing "catastrophic losses" after stepping up to help in the COVID-19 fight, Fox News has learned, and they are calling on the Department of Health and Human Services for urgent help. In a letter Tuesday to HHS Secretary Alex Azar, the leaders of some 76 children's hospitals across the country are suggesting that "failure to provide immediate relief to children’s hospitals will weaken our infrastructure and risk our current capability to care for all the nation’s children." (Fox News)   WORLD VIEW   China hits back, in words and aid pledges, as America goes at it alone. The World Health Organization’s annual meeting entered a second day on Tuesday, after an opening dominated by feuding as the United States escalated threats of isolationism and China bit back against criticism. “The United States has made a miscalculation and found the wrong target when it picks on China, shirks its responsibilities and bargains on how to fulfill its international obligations to the World Health Organization,” Zhao Lijian, a Chinese foreign ministry spokesman, told reporters. (New York Times)    ️ A super cyclone racing toward India and Bangladesh threatens coronavirus response. A crushing cyclone barreled up the Bay of Bengal on Tuesday, heading for a swampy stretch along the border of India and Bangladesh and threatening to unleash 165-mile-an-hour winds and massive floods when it makes landfall Wednesday. The power of the storm is not the only threat, as the cyclone, Amphan, nears coastal areas. It also poses a risk to the coronavirus response as hundreds of thousands of people begin moving toward emergency shelters. (New York Times)   SCIENCE  Trump administration picks U.S. firm to manufacture COVID-19 drugs now made overseas. The Trump administration is awarding a $354 million, four-year contract to a Virginia-based company to manufacture generic medicines and pharmaceutical ingredients needed to treat COVID-19, federal officials and the company announced Tuesday. Phlow Corp. said in a release it was awarded the federal contract to create “essential medicines at risk of shortage,” including medicines for the COVID-19 pandemic response. (The Hill)    Global emissions plunged unprecedented 17 percent during coronavirus pandemic. The wave of lockdowns and shuttered economies caused by the coronavirus pandemic fueled a momentous decline in global greenhouse gas emissions, although one unlikely to last, a group of scientists reported Tuesday. (Washington Post)   BUSINESS  Top execs for Netflix, Disney, Salesforce and others call on Congress to provide $1T in coronavirus relief to local governments. Top business leaders in California are urging Congress to approve an additional $1 trillion in spending to head off massive budget cuts facing state and local governments due to COVID-19. In a letter to Congress, members of California Gov. Gavin NewsomGavin NewsomSupreme Court denies California church's challenge to state restrictions Supreme Court denies Illinois churches' request for action after state eases restrictions Coronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Rep. Ro Khanna MORE’s task force on business and jobs recovery wrote, “the worst of the economic impact [is] likely still to come.” The letter, sent Friday, was signed by nearly 100 business leaders. (CNBC)    “Way too late”: Inside Amazon’s biggest outbreak. An Amazon warehouse in the foothills of the Pocono Mountains of northeastern Pennsylvania has become Amazon’s biggest COVID-19 hot spot. (New York Times)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS  House Democrats’ HEROES Act is a giant political scam. When House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) said on Thursday that the current coronavirus crisis “is really quite an exciting time for us,” she meant it. On Friday, House Democrats passed a gargantuan $3 trillion COVID-19 bill — the HEROES Act — that will serve as a starting point for negotiations with Senate Republicans and the White House over the next round of coronavirus “relief” legislation. In addition to bailing out numerous irresponsible state and local governments and the Postal Service, the legislation is chock full of radical, wildly irresponsible provisions that clearly show that congressional Democrats are more concerned with expanding their power and pleasing their allies than they are fixing our broken economy. (Justin Haskins for The Hill)    Fighting vulnerable workers instead of the virus. Everyone wants to get tough on the coronavirus, but so far that has proven difficult. Unfortunately, rather than redoubling efforts in that fight, some are seeking an easier target: vulnerable low-wage workers.Cynical politicians are threatening the workers most at risk of infection, many of whom face heightened risks of serious illness or death. Some of these threats are fraudulent, ugly bluffs. The very fact that they are being made, however, tells us something ugly about how we are responding to this crisis. (David Super for The Hill)  GENEROUS SPIRITS Magic Johnson pledges $100M to help minority businesses. The NBA Hall of Famer joined “Good Morning America” on Tuesday to discuss the new program he’s creating to provide loans to mostly minority and women-owned businesses struggling to get PPP assistance.   ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. LEE ZELDIN (R-N.Y.)  > Steve interviews former Maryland Lt. Gov. and ex-RNC Chairman MICHAEL STEELE  > Steve interviews former U.S. Energy Secretary ERNEST MONIZ  > Steve interviews Sen. JOE MANCHIN (D-W.Va.)  > Steve interviews Mylan CEO HEATHER BRESCH  > Steve interviews Wilson Center President and CEO JANE HARMAN  > Steve interviews Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Director TOM INGLESBY  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.   CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.        VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVE View the discussion thread.

The Hill’s Steve Clemons interviewed Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Robert Redfield.  Read excerpts from the interview below.  CDC Director Robert Redfield: Steve, I think it's really one of the important awakenings for a broad aspect of our society is that the public health infrastructure of this nation has been under-invested in for decades. And so when you really look at it now, there are certain capabilities that we really need to have in place. And we need to have them in place for the fall and winter as we confront both COVID and flu. That's data, data analytics, modernization of our data system. We're using a data system that's decades old, and we don't have an integrated public health system for this nation. We need to get that correct. Laboratory resilience. We need to have multiple laboratory platforms in the public health lab, so there's really remarkable redundancy and surge capacity. We need a public health workforce — and the public health workforce that we're going to need to do the contact tracing and vaccine distribution, both for influenza and for the coronavirus vaccine when it's completed is substantial. And, of course, we need to have a concentration, we’ll come back to later on our global health security, to make sure that we have the capacity around the globe to detect, prevent, respond to new pathogen at their source.   Clemons: Many people were worried that a global pandemic was coming this way. So why is public health infrastructure in such antiquated condition? Redfield: You know, I think a lot of people have discussed it.  And I think I saw some clips the other night about President Obama in 2014. I've seen it go way back. But unfortunately, no one's really gone beyond to do the action required to rebuild our public health infrastructure to where it needs to be. I'm of the point of view, now is the time. If the experience that we just went through so far with the coronavirus can’t awaken all of us, that we can't afford not to be over prepared and over invest. I kind of say it's time for our nation to have the public health infrastructure capacity not only that our nation needs, but that our nation deserves, and it's going to take a sizable investment. But I'm going to say the lack of that public health infrastructure —. Very rapidly this outbreak when it started as that outbreak started in the nursing home in Seattle, one of the best public health departments in this country, King County in the state of Washington. They rapidly were overwhelmed so they could no longer stay in what we call containment mode. Early diagnosis, contact tracing, isolation and quarantine. And I even deployed about 40 people there to help them in those early weeks. And the bottom line is the public health system was overwhelmed, and they went then to full mitigation. And that full mitigation led to the economic shutdown that we've seen. We can't go back there. We need to get the public health infrastructure in this nation that we can operationalize containment. That's early diagnosis. And that means rapidly, readily available testing wherever we need it, and getting timely results. We need to have contact tracing. And that means those contacts have to be all identified and traced and evaluated and tested within a day or so. They need to have capacity to isolate people, and, you know, there are a number of people that are going to need isolation that don't have homes or they live in multigenerational houses. That has to be developed. And then again, this is part of the critical component so we can do this. And then you put on top of it what I said — why I said this fall/winter is going to be difficult. I didn't say it was going to be worse. I didn't say it was going to be more deadly, as some quoted, I said it's going to be more difficult because we're going to be getting the second experience with coronavirus as it expands in the fall and winter at the same time we're getting influenza. This time, we were lucky in one sense that the coronavirus became active after the second wave of influenza A basically went back to baseline. But this fall it's going to be coronavirus and flu. And then when you asked me, what else can we do? What we can do is get the American public to a point that they'll embrace flu vaccine with confidence. Right now, less than 50 percent of the American public take advantage of the flu vaccine, and many people don't realize — sadly were over 90,000 deaths from coronavirus so far this year — but over the last decade, we lost 360,000 people who died in this country from flu. And we have a vaccine that more than half of the people in this country decide not to take. So, we're going to be working hard to get people to accept flu vaccine with confidence. We're going to be working hard to expand testing capabilities all across this country. Congress just appropriated another $11 billion to help states, local territorial travel health departments to get that up to speed. And we're working with them. We're going to expand the contact tracing public health workforce. And when I say expand, I'm talking about increasing it by 30,000 to 100,000 people.   Clemons: We don't have those thousands of people in place. We don't have the testing and the contract tracing and the public health infrastructure to the point where you think it should be. Is the nation ready to go through this reopening phase right now? Redfield: CDC is putting out guidance. We put out a lot over the weekend again about you know how to reopen safely. I want to clarify that the community-based transmission, the community to community transmission that overwhelmed the public health departments in late February, March, April — that's really coming down. Right now, what CDC and the state public health systems are doing is we're fighting outbreaks. We have nursing home outbreaks, and we're going in and containing them. We are having meatpacking plants — containing them. Prison — Homeless — containing them. Certain social events from a wedding or a funeral — containing them. And we're going to continue to do that over the summer. And as we do that, we're going to be expanding what I just told you, but we have the capability and as part of the guidance that we gave — that the president gave — for the states to open up, it was important that they could test people that have flu like illness and or syndromic disease. They could set up surveillance. They had the contact tracers that they needed right now. But in the fall/winter, we're going to need a much more robust workforce because we're going to make the mission that we're going to stay in containment. We can’t get to the point that we have to retreat from containment. I believe we're going to get there. The testing has to be readily available, and it's increasing. I think yesterday there were 400,000 tests done in a day. You know where that exact number needs to be is being defined. But Congress really helped enormously, where they released $11 billion for the states to begin to really concretize that testing and contact tracing and isolation. Clearly from the testing point of view, the states are required to have a plan that CDC and Admiral Giroir at HHS, we're all working together to help them with their plan which will be due at the end of May for at least June and July, and then by middle of June for the rest of the year. So there's going to be a robust plan. In that plan, it's also going to incur aggressive surveillance. One of the complexities about the coronavirus, unlike flu, is that a substantial amount of the human-human transmission is occurring from people who don't even have symptoms. So that makes it harder. How do I know who's infected if there's no symptoms? So, we are establishing really a robust surveillance program, which is going to be very intensive on testing. … We're expanding the nursing home testing so that every individual resident of a nursing home will be tested so we can make sure. We're going to be developing similar surveillances in inner city clinics and homeless populations and meat packing things, that other parts of society to try to figure out what the best way is. But I want to be confident and give — I'm confident that if we make this investment, we're going to get the infrastructure in place, and we have every intent of sustaining containment. The public health capacity of this country is great, but the challenge has been we haven't had a sustained investment in data modernization. We have some health departments that are still using pen and pencil. We've got to get an integrated data system for the whole nation and actually have that data system and its analytics be so effective that it actually can do predictive data analysis so you can predict what's going to happen in the next day or two so you're going to be on top of it. We need that laboratory resilience — and with multiple platforms in these laboratories, we're going to have to make that investment and the workforce. Now I'm just going to say one last thing and I’ll go back to your question. It's going to cost money.   Clemons: Is there a gap between what the White House released and what the CDC internal guidelines were? Redfield: Well, I’m going to say politics didn't push us there, Steve. First and foremost, when this outbreak started, it was a CDC task force within one of my centers — on the 7th of January. And then it became on the 17th an operationalized emergency response center there for all the CDC. And then on January 27th, it became HHS and the task force, and then it became the vice president. So this outbreak has gone from a CDC to an all of government response. As a consequence, there are guidances that we come up that have significant interagency implications and say they go up through an interagency review. And the interagencies make different comments and they come back to us not as mandates, but as comments. And then we have to integrate them. One of the things that became clear at the task force when we put up our initial guidelines is the number of people criticized, and I think, appropriately, that a lot of our guidelines are written in what they called CDC-eze, meaning that they're not easy for the American public to actually get through. And so the decision was, why don't you guys do some decision trees that are simple, one-pagers. You've probably seen them targeting the American public. And we released those six decision trees last week. But behind those decision trees are the regular specific CDC documents that we have for the public health community. They went back through the interagency review — good comments, and they were also all released. In addition, all of our documents on reopening America again related to surveillance, the surveillance in hospitals, our contact tracing guidance, testing, and these specific business issues and opening your business, bars, and restaurants, camps and youth schools, day care centers. All of those now are out on our website   Clemons: What is your take on the strengths or weaknesses of our own “global” public health network right now? Redfield: I think it's a really important and, truthfully, Steve, I think it is the most critical. This nation is going to need a health security capacity as long as we're a nation. And if this didn't remind people, and I'm in the process of restructuring, it's actually one of my top-top priorities. As you know, I spent 23 years in the armed forces. I think I've got a good handle on this to put in place the global health security structure that this nation needs for 2030, 2050 and beyond. And we're in the process of trying to strategically decide where that is. Right now, I have people in over 60 countries with offices in over 45 and around the country. I'm trying to really consolidate it, so I have full capacity, kind of in a regional strategy, maybe eight to 12 regional capacity, they’re full CDC capacity strategically placed around the world. Think of it no different than what the Defense Department does when it sets up its bases. CDC is not a health development organization. We can do health development. We help in it like PEPFAR and the malaria programs, but we have a health development corporation — it's called USAID. I argue that CDC is a health security organization. It's a core responsibility and needs to be built as a core capability of CDC. We’re the tip of the spear so that we can diagnose, prevent and respond to outbreaks at their source, as we're doing right now.   Clemons: Share your own insights into the CDC and institution and respond to those who have been public with their criticisms. Redfield: I would say CDC has never been stronger. We have tens of thousands of the finest dedicated individuals that are data-driven and grounded in science. And the thing that really — I didn't realize how much I missed it after I left the military and went into academia — these men and women are service individuals. They're committed to public service, and CDC as jumped out on this outbreak from the beginning. The first notification from CDC of the unspecified pneumonias that occurred in Wuhan, I had on Dec. 31. All right, the first sitrep [situation report] we did over this was on Jan. 1. We notified the National Security Council on Jan. 2. We activated our emergency incident commander system within the Center for Immunizations and Respiratory Diseases back on Jan. 7. I activated all the CDC. I've only done it, I've only done it two other times since I've been CDC director, one for Ebola and one for EVALI [e-cigarette, or vaping, associated lung injury]. We activated our entire agency for emergency response on Jan. 17. And again, obviously, the secretary called a public health emergency I think on Jan. 27. And so an enormously aggressive response. Dr. Birx and I, we go back a long way. We worked together in the military for over a decade. … She was articulating what I'm articulating. There was no, you know, despite the press, there was no space between us. She was articulating that the data system that we currently rely on is archaic. Well, I've been arguing that before Congress for two years. That's why Congress stepped up to give us originally $50 million for the data modernization. We need to have modernized the data system, and we need to have one public health data system for the whole nation, not every single state having it. So we're actually saying the same thing. The conversation that was going back and forth was we’re in the process of getting that operationalized over the next 12 months or so. And Dr. Birx was making an argument, which I totally agree with. It would benefit this nation for us to get it done soon. ... And Peter Navarro. I don't know where his comments from, they were highly inaccurate, unfortunately. The CDC developed a test for this virus within 10 days of the sequence being published. I don't think anyone's ever developed one that quick in the history of mankind, and we actually were able to use that test to diagnose the original cases Jan. 21. … It's not faulty, it's not flawed, it works perfectly. It's a great test. Many people have developed their test after it, since we've published exactly how to do it. Where the complication and that test was available at CDC then, it's available today. It's never been not available. The only complexity was you had to send the sample to CDC in Atlanta. We, our team tried to then manufacture and scale-up so that we could get that test in all the public health labs in the country. And in that production process, one of the re-agents got contaminated and didn't perform reliably. Nobody was told they were positive or negative incorrectly, but it just didn't work. But we figured out what it was, really within days. … And what I want to emphasize, because this gets lost, is there wasn't a moment in this nation's history with COVID that we didn't have the availability of the public health testing at CDC. … But I will tell you that rather than being criticized, and I go back to something I read every day now from Teddy Roosevelt. Never mind the critic, and I paraphrase, credit goes to the men or women that are in the arena all bloodied and scarred and marred, but at least we’re out there, and failing, failing and going better, failing and going better. And at the end of the day, we either know the triumph of high achievement, or we end up falling short and failing. But at least we failed while daring greatly. View the discussion thread.

WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > US stocks jump after Moderna reports ‘positive’ results from early data on vaccine > WHO holds first global assembly since outbreak, China insists it acted transparently  > Trump officials deflect blame for US death toll, escalate push to reopen country  > Fed chair says full economic recovery may not happen without a vaccine  > Brazil emerges as new virus hotspot amid political turmoil > Dr. Tom Inglesby says society will have to learn to live with virus until vaccine emerges, calls on US to invest now in vaccine preparedness for ‘next pandemic’ and applauds Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan (R) for listening to scientists and hospitals and demonstrating himself importance of wearing a mask         The World Health Organization (WHO) held its annual assembly virtually Monday, the first large gathering of the body since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. Amid growing calls for an independent investigation into the novel coronavirus pandemic, Chinese President Xi Jinping told the annual assembly via video that he supports an international review led by the WHO — once the health emergency ends. President Xi also called on the world to rally behind the WHO and support developing countries. Xi’s speech, delivered over video at the invitation of WHO Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, signaled a growing sense of assuredness from China. (Washington Post)    US, China tensions threaten to dominate Monday’s meeting as President Xi double downs on China’s handling of the pandemic. “We have done everything in our power to support and assist countries in need,” he said. The meeting — which  WHO Director General Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said was perhaps the most important for the world since the organization was founded in 1948 — comes amid rising tension between the U.S. and China over the origin of the coronavirus and China’s alleged delay in alerting the WHO of the severity of the Wuhan outbreak. (New York Times)     THE INTERVIEW Dr. Tom Inglesby, Director, Johns Hopkins Center for Health & Security  Johns Hopkins’s Dr. Tom Inglesby says society will have to learn to ‘live with virus’ until vaccine achieved, says US should be investing now in vaccine preparedness for ‘next pandemic,’ says it’s unacceptable to have to wait 12-18 months to react to virus, says supply chain can’t have just a few nations providing gloves, masks, gowns, and eye protection; applauds Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan for listening to scientists and hospitals and demonstrating himself importance of wearing a mask         Watch the full interview here.   THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Monday, May 18.  Editor’s Note.    One book that has sat far too long on my pile of procrastinated must read books is Michael Lewis’s “The Fifth Risk” It was published in 2018, but at the time I got it I had every intention of jumping into it, like so many other things. As Carlos Lozada wrote about the book in The Washington Post, “The Fifth Risk” is Michael Lewis’s love letter to federal workers, an appreciation for the vital work of countless, mostly anonymous, citizens. It highlights what they do to advance the nation’s interests and to keep unbelievable calamities from happening — from safeguarding the nation’s nuclear stockpile and warheads, to managing an incredible array of national assets like federal lands, inspecting meat packing and pharmaceutical manufacturing facilities and so much more.   One of the interview subjects of Lewis’s book laid out a series of risks he had hoped to outline for his Trump administration successors, but they never showed up for any of the briefings.  They never got the outline of high consequence events that could rock the nation. This willful disinterest is relevant today amid reports that the Trump administration never seriously looked at the global pandemic playbook that the Obama administration had drafted for the incoming president and his team. Lewis illustrates time after time — at the Department of Energy, the Department of State, the Department of Agriculture — how federal employees in departments throughout the government expected Trump personnel to show up the day after he was elected and begin the process of government transfer to a new team. But they didn’t show up.   Not to ruin the book for those of you who should get it on your own must read pile, but “The Fifth Risk” is “project management.” It’s when low-level malfunctions can have enormous consequences. When the CIA and FBI failed to communicate key information to each other in a regularized way, terrorists were able to exploit the dysfunction and attack America by turning its own airplanes on the World Trade Center and Pentagon. It’s sort of like if Boeing, which makes one of the most complex products in the world, were to get an element in their systems integration wrong and compound the issue with a sales department that put a price tag on safety. That’s a project management foul.   And what Lewis documents is that the Trump administration brought in a number of people into government positions who had high marks in Trump loyalty but not as high marks in knowing much about the positions they would be occupying, nor interest in learning from their predecessors. This is not a partisan statement — it’s one of observations that rings mostly true with what we have seen unfold in Washington. There are exceptions to this. There are outstanding personnel whom the Trump administration has brought in and who have worked hard to get to know their buildings and teams and to steer policy in a direction consistent with what the president has outlined. That’s the way it should happen. But there are gaps — and today the issue of project management of the world’s most complex organization is being tested in a defining manner.   Time will tell how the administration does. If a vaccine is quickly secured, much of the memory of missteps and slowness to act may fade away — but if the numbers of dead surge from the current 90,000 to 200,000 or 500,000 over time — then “The Fifth Risk” of project management challenges will be identified as one of the villains of this time.   – Steve Clemons    Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE  Thursday, 11 a.m. EDT | Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinHillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues On The Money: Senate Dems pump brakes on new stimulus checks | Trump officials sued over tax refunds | Fed to soon open small-business lending program Schumer slams Trump's Rose Garden briefing on China as 'pathetic' MORE to join The Hill’s Editor in Chief Bob CusackRobert (Bob) CusackThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Mnuchin: More COVID-19 congressional action ahead On The Money: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | 2.4 million more Americans file new jobless claims | Top bank regulator abruptly announces resignation Overnight Health Care: Trump says US won't close over second COVID-19 wave | Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | Why the US has the most reported coronavirus cases in the world MORE          On Thursday, May 21, The Hill will host “A National Virtual Summit on Advancing America's Economy,” a forum to discuss a responsible reopening of the U.S. economy. The summit will feature three one-hour segments, beginning at 11 a.m. EDT.   > Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin joins The Hill’s Editor in Chief Bob Cusack for a keynote interview followed by an afternoon of discussion with leading CEOs and national health experts. > U.S. Surgeon General Jerome Adams  > Sen. Mark WarnerMark Robert WarnerExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support Senate Democrats pump brakes on new stimulus checks Trump signs order targeting social media firms' legal protections MORE (D-Va.) > Sen. Ben CardinBenjamin (Ben) Louis CardinSchumer to GOP: Cancel 'conspiracy hearings' on origins of Russia probe On The Money: Senate Dems pump brakes on new stimulus checks | Trump officials sued over tax refunds | Fed to soon open small-business lending program Senate Democrats pump brakes on new stimulus checks MORE (D-Md.)  > Mayor Michelle De La Isla, City of Topeka, Kansas  > Gramercy Tavern co-founder and master chef Tom Colicchio > AOL Founder and Revolution Chairman Steve Case > Siemens North America CEO Barbara Humpton > Wells Fargo CEO Charles Scharf   *Additional speakers to be announced  REGISTER HERE! And join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.            Wednesday, May 20 at 1 p.m. EDT, The Hill will host “The Vir [tech] tual World Ahead,” a virtual program focusing on our dramatic shift to a digital ecosystem at a time when digital literacy continues to be uneven, much as basic access to the internet can be.    Steve Clemons, The Hill’s editor-at-large, will be speaking with:    > FCC Commissioner Michael O’Rielly  > Rep. Suzan DelBeneSuzan Kay DelBeneExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support House Democrats press Treasury on debit cards used for coronavirus relief payments Hillicon Valley: Trump threatens Michigan, Nevada over mail-in voting | Officials call for broadband expansion during pandemic | Democrats call for investigation into Uber-Grubhub deal MORE (D-Wash.)  > Superintendent of the Dallas Independent School District Michael Hinojosa > Next Century Cities Executive Director Francella Ochillo  > Information Technology Industry Council President and CEO Jason Oxman  REGISTER HERE! And join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE  There are 4,758,937 reported cases of COVID-19 throughout the world and the virus has claimed 316,898 lives.    The U.S. is reporting 1,496,509 reported cases and 89,874 deaths. Russia’s cases continue to skyrocket and the country is now reporting 290,678 cases with most experts in agreement that Russia’s caseload is likely being underreported. The U.K. is reporting 247,706 cases. 245,595 in Brazil where the resignation of yet another health minister is muddying the waters for the government’s response to the pandemic. 231,606 cases in Spain. 225,886 in Italy. 179,693 in France, 176,551 in Germany. 150,593 in Turkey. 122,492 in Iran. 100,340 in India. 92,273 in Peru. 16,643 in Israel. 16,285 in Japan. Kuwait 15,691. South Africa 15,515. 12,764 in Egypt. 12,725 in the Dominican Republic. 912 in Kenya.    New York is reporting 351,371 cases as of the time of this newsletter. 148,128 reported cases in New Jersey. 94,191 in illinois. 86,010 in Massachusetts. 80,314 in California. 65,700 in Pennsylvania. 51,142 in Michigan. Texas 48,416. Maryland 39,762. 21,938 in Colorado. 18,433 in Washington. 12,543 in Wisconsin. 12,052 in Alabama. 11,439 in Mississippi. 7,270 in the District of Columbia. 5,938 in New Mexico. Oklahoma 5,398. 4,027 in South Dakota. 2,710 in Puerto Rico. 940 in Vermont. 754 in Wyoming.    11,499,203 COVID-19 test results have been recorded and 272,265 have reported full recoveries from the coronavirus in the U.S.   WASHINGTON WATCH  Top official: Navarro is criticizing Trump with shots at CDC. A senior official for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said that White House trade adviser Peter Navarro’s criticism of the agency's initial coronavirus testing response is actually a denunciation of President TrumpDonald John TrumpDonald Trump and Joe Biden create different narratives for the election The hollowing out of the CDC Poll: Biden widens lead over Trump to 10 points MORE. "We should remind Mr. Navarro that the CDC is a federal agency part of the administration. The CDC director is an appointed position, and Dr. [Robert] Redfield was appointed by President  Trump," the unidentified CDC official told CNN on Sunday. (The Hill)    Trump officials deflect blame for U.S. death to escalate reopening push. Two of President Trump's top officials are now pointing the finger at the administration's own scientists and Americans' pre-existing health conditions to explain the country's world-leading COVID-19 death toll. Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar suggested Sunday that underlying health conditions, including among minorities, were one reason for the high American death toll — nearly 90,000 as of Sunday evening. And Trump trade adviser Peter Navarro added the government's own Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to its list of scapegoats alongside China and the Obama administration. (CNN report)   Critics say Trump, Congress fumbling economic response to COVID-19. Ten weeks after President Trump signed the first coronavirus relief bill into law, many economists, business groups, lawmakers and labor advocates contend the multitrillion-dollar response has been insufficient, misguided or both. (The Hill)    Gottlieb calls for CDC to have “elevated” role in coronavirus fight. Former Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Scott Gottlieb called on the Trump administration to avoid sidelining the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in an op-ed in The Wall Street Journal published Sunday evening. Gottlieb wrote in his column that the CDC has released less information than is customary during public health emergencies and argued that information about the coronavirus is not being shared with the public in an adequate fashion. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Rep. Sharice DavidsSharice DavidsGun control group rolls out House endorsements  Minority lawmakers gain unprecedented clout amid pandemic The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Dr. Tom Inglesby says society will have to learn to live with virus until vaccine emerges; Good news on vaccine trial propels stocks MORE (D-Kan.)  @RepDavids I have championed the need for state and local aid. I think it MUST be included in any deal made. But the 1800 page bill passed on Friday included things that had very little to do with the crisis at hand. Kansas needs real help and both parties need to work together on that now.   Sen. John KennedyJohn Neely KennedyMORE (R-La.) @SenJohnKennedy Despite Speaker Pelosi’s $3 TRILLION gambit, Congress can't appropriate enough money to buy the U.S. economy. Only 1 thing is going to lift us out of the #coronavirus economy: the American people and private sector. We have to open up safely and soon.   Senate Minority Whip Dick DurbinRichard (Dick)  Joseph DurbinFrustration builds in key committee ahead of Graham subpoena vote  Senate Democrat introduces bill to protect food supply Democratic unity starts to crack in coronavirus liability reform fight MORE (D-Ill)  @SenatorDurbin Our hospitals & health care workers could use all the help we can give them. That’s why @SenBrianSchatz, @SenatorBaldwin, @ChrisVanHollen, @SenatorTester, & I are urging President Trump to finally do what he should have months ago & fully invoke the DPA.  ACROSS THE NATION  “Hang Fauci, Hang Gates” sign held at Open New York protest. A protestor at an Open New York rally last week that was praised by President Trump held up a sign reading “Hang Fauci, Hang Gates.” The sign seemingly refers to the nation’s top infectious disease expert Anthony FauciAnthony FauciOvernight Defense: Trump extends deployment of National Guard troops to aid with coronavirus response | Pentagon considers reducing quarantine to 10 days | Lawmakers push for removal of Nazi headstones from VA cemeteries Don't move the COVID-19 goalpost Overnight Health Care: Sewage testing gives clues of coronavirus | White House says Trump would take hydroxychloroquine again | Trump marks 'very sad milestone' of 100K virus deaths MORE, a member of the White House coronavirus task force, and Bill Gates, a billionaire philanthropist donating funds to aid coronavirus research and issuing warnings about the global pandemic. (The Hill)   “This feels great.” A preview from Georgia about how America might reemerge from the coronavirus. In this grand gamble, Georgia has gone first, with Gov. Brian Kemp (R) dismissing public health experts who’ve warned that opening too soon could cause a catastrophic surge of deaths, placing his faith instead in the residents of Georgia to make up their own minds about what risks and sacrifices they were willing to accept. (Washington Post)   Illinois business owners could face fine, jail time for reopening. Business owners in Illinois could now face a Class A misdemeanor charge for opening their establishments in defiance of the state's stay-at-home order. Gov. J.B. Pritzker (D) on Friday filed an emergency rule that would penalize owners of restaurants, bars, gyms, barbershops and other businesses for reopening before coronavirus restrictions are lifted, according to The New York Times. (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW   Brazil, once a leader, struggles to contain virus amid political turmoil. Brazil’s national confusion — compounded by the resignation of the second health minister since the pandemic began — has helped fuel the spread of the disease and contributed to making Brazil an emerging center of the pandemic, with a daily death rate second only to that of the United States. Public health experts say the disorderly approach has further saturated intensive care units and morgues and contributed to the deaths of scores of medical professionals as Latin America’s largest economy plunges into what may be its steepest recession in history. (New York Times)  Lessons from Slovakia — where leaders wear masks. Within 10 days of identifying its first case, Slovakia went into lockdown: Its borders were sealed, schools and restaurants were closed, and face masks were made mandatory in public places, with some of the country’s most visible public figures, including its president and prime minister, sporting them to set an example. Today, life in Slovakia is slowly returning to its usual rhythm. (The Atlantic)   SCIENCE  Moderna reports “positive” results from early data on coronavirus vaccine. The biotech company Moderna on Monday reported “positive” data on its potential coronavirus vaccine from an early clinical trial, raising hopes about the effort. The company said early data from a phase one clinical trial showed that people given the potential vaccine generated an immune response similar to that in people who had recovered from the disease. (The Hill)    And some more promising news on the vaccine front . . .  Large-scale vaccine testing expected by July, NIH director says. National Institutes of Health Director Francis Collins said at least four to five COVID-19 vaccines “look pretty promising” and wide-scale testing could begin with one or two by July, according to The Associated Press. (The Hill)  BUSINESS  U.S. stocks jump amid vaccine, reopening optimism. Stocks jumped to the highest levels in almost three weeks after promising early results for an experimental vaccine sparked speculation economies could snap back quickly. Crude oil advanced and yields on Treasuries rose. The S&P 500 surged more than 2.5 percent after Moderna Inc. said its vaccine tests yielded signs it can create an immune-system response in the body. (CNBC)   Powell says a full economic recovery may not happen without a vaccine. The U.S. economy will claw its way back from the current downturn but may need a coronavirus vaccine before that is complete, Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell said. “In the long run and even in the medium run, you wouldn’t want to bet against the American economy. The American economy will recover,” Powell said in an interview with CBS’s “60 Minutes.” (CNBC)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS  Judd Gregg: The world’s hope is America. Even if our leaders do not seem to be capable of getting past their own personal prejudices, it is clear the world expects our people to excel, to take on this crisis and handle it with strength and purpose. The world is betting on America. They are betting that we the people will pull ourselves through and bring much of the world with us. It is a good bet. (Judd Gregg for The Hill)    Adding to Fauci’s diagnosis: The critical case for ending our shutdown. The total lockdown may have been justified at the start of this pandemic, but it must now end — smartly, without irrational, unnecessary requirements contrary to medical science, common sense and logic. (Dr. Scott W. Atlas for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS Bon Jovi launches Long Island food bank amid coronavirus shutdowns. Jon Bon Jovi and his wife, Dorothea Bongiovi, are launching a food bank on Long Island amid the spike in unemployment that has come with the coronavirus pandemic. The Jon Bon Jovi Soul Foundation says it started distributing food Monday to help organizations combat food insecurity throughout the summer. (The Hill)  ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. LEE ZELDIN (R-N.Y.)  > Steve interviews former Maryland Lt. Gov. and ex-RNC Chairman MICHAEL STEELE  > Steve interviews former U.S. Energy Secretary ERNEST MONIZ  > Steve interviews Sen. JOE MANCHIN (D-W.Va.)  > Steve interviews Mylan CEO HEATHER BRESCH  > Steve interviews Wilson Center President and CEO JANE HARMAN    Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.   CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.     VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVE View the discussion thread.

The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Tom Inglesby, director of the Center for Health Security of the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.  Read excerpts from the interview below.  Tom Inglesby: Well, I think what's going well is that the messages around physical distancing, and masks, and avoiding gatherings, and telecommuting, I think people are hearing those messages and largely responsive to them. Obviously, it's not universal, and there are some people in the country who are not necessarily persuaded of those actions. But I think overall, collectively we should be happy as a country that we've been able to change the trajectory of the epidemic. We continue to have the largest epidemic in the world, but we've been able to change that trajectory. ... What I’m more worried about is, that there is a sense by some that this may be over in, you know, in June or that this may end soon, and that will be completely back to where we were before. That's not going to happen. This virus is still circulating in our country. It's still circulating the world. It's causing terrible damage in countries around the world. In some places, many, many countries have increasing numbers of cases on a day-to-day basis that are rising pretty sharply. So, we're going to have to find a way to live with this virus until we have a vaccine. And I think that the measures that we've been talking about are the most important ones even as we reopen.   Clemons: Do you sense from your colleagues that they think this is going to be a shorter road than we would normally have?  Inglesby: Well, yeah. I didn't mean to imply on the discussion with Chuck ToddCharles (Chuck) David ToddCoronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Dr. Tom Inglesby Gottlieb calls for CDC to have 'elevated' role in coronavirus fight Navarro: CDC 'really let the country down with the testing' MORE yesterday that it's going to be a short road. Even if we do have a vaccine at the end of the year or the beginning of next year that still needs to be produced on a large scale, it still needs to be distributed to places around the world. It would not all be ready at the same time. So even if we do have a vaccine at the end of this year or the beginning of next year, there will be a lot of work to do both in the U.S. and around the world to get it to people, to figure out who's at highest risk, who should be the highest priority for getting the vaccine. I do think everything would have to go in the right direction for us to have a vaccine by the end of this year, the beginning of next year. There are lots of ways that it might not work, in the event that the vaccine doesn't prove to be as safe as we hope it would be or as effective.   Clemons: What are the best insights you have on how to resolve the tension between scientists and the politics of just giving people what they want? Inglesby: I do think it needs to be a partnership between political leadership, and public health input, and scientific input. I think one without the other won't work. But we’ve seen that in countries around the world, some of the countries that have great success, like New Zealand, there's a very close partnership between political leadership and public health leadership, and it's a model that's worked before, and I think it's going to continue to be important throughout our response in the United States. We're going to need to have the input of scientific and public health leaders because things are going to keep evolving. Different challenges will emerge both with our public health response, with new therapies, with new clinical developments that we learned about with this virus. Even in the last month, we've seen this virus could do things that we didn't anticipate as recently as April. So, there will need to be very close partnership between scientific leaders and political leaders. And, I think the role of CDC is very important, and we should make sure that CDC continues to have a strong voice in the country they have in all past outbreaks, since I can remember, and they should continue to bring their expertise to bear. We have thousands of people working at CDC on epidemic response, and they're very important. We also have amazing federal agencies like NIH, FDA, BARDA, ASPR, and a really strong research community in this country. So hopefully, those voices will be able to help usefully shape the response and bring political leaders the input they need to make good decisions.   Clemons: How do we go from this moment of fighting the current pandemic to being much smarter about the future and the next pandemic? Inglesby: Yeah, there has been definitely a cycle in public health response to infectious disease emergencies. There's a lot of attention at the moment of an event and then in the years that follow there's a period of kind of loss of attention, people move on, political leaders have other priorities that emerge. So hopefully, the traumatic nature of this event is so compelling that there is a bipartisan consensus that we need strong public health programs in this country. We need to spend more money on vaccine development which could change everything. There has been a dramatic shortening of the timeline of vaccine development around the world in the last 15 years because of loss of investment. But, waiting a year or 18 months to have a new vaccine with this kind of pandemic ravaging the world, we should just all collectively say that's unacceptable and we will spend the money needed to shorten vaccine timelines dramatically before we have another pandemic that's on top of us. So, we need to make big investments in vaccine development that are sustained. We need to change the way we think about our supply chain. We can't be in a position where only a few countries were providing masks, gowns, gloves, eye protection and everyone needs them at the same time in the world. We saw our doctors and nurses in March having to go take care of COVID patients without the proper equipment. We can't let that happen again. We have to prepare our health care systems better.   Clemons: Gov. Larry Hogan of Maryland seems balanced. What do you think a successful governor looks like in the era of coronavirus? What can they get right, and what can they get wrong?  Inglesby: Yes, I have been very impressed with Gov. Hogan's approach to this. Right from the beginning, I think he was asking for scientific advice, public health input, hospital-based input as he was making decisions about stay-at-home orders or social distancing measures. And I've also been impressed that he thinks it is very important to wear a mask, for himself personally to wear a mask in public, he's been very clear about the need to wear masks when people are in indoor spaces, outside of their homes. He's been very clear about physical distancing, the importance of avoiding gatherings. So, he's been very clear with his messages and he's been very methodical and seeks the input of outside scientific public health folks, consistently. I think, as a model, I think, for the country I think it's going to be really important for political leaders to continue to communicate how important it is to take individual actions, even as they're opening their own states by various processes, they’re opening businesses or whatever steps people are taking, governors are taking, it's going to be very important for them to continue to say how vital it is to continue individual physical distancing. And I think governors that are doing that well, that's a really important part of leadership right now. View the discussion thread.

WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TODAY > Trump announces leaders of ‘Warp Speed’ vaccine effort  > House to vote on  $3T relief package today, Senate GOP says its ‘dead on arrival’  > Breaking with Trump, McConnell says Obama administration ‘did leave behind’ pandemic plan > Less than 40 percent of small businesses have received PPP funds  > U.S. retail plunged 16.4 percent in April, largest two-month decline on record  > Could coronavirus render cash useless? Mobile money on the rise throughout pandemic > Former Rep. Jane Harman warns pressure on intelligence community possibly leading to another misguided war, says Russia and other nations trying to exploit America’s distraction at moment > Mylan’s Heather Bresch says U.S. should make strategic reserve in medicines, says no country in world can make all of its own medicines         President TrumpDonald John TrumpDonald Trump and Joe Biden create different narratives for the election The hollowing out of the CDC Poll: Biden widens lead over Trump to 10 points MORE unveils leaders of “Operation Warp Speed.” Moncef Slaoui, the ex-head of GlaxoSmithKline's vaccines division, and four-star Army General Gustave Perna will lead the administration’s efforts to fasttrack research and development of a vaccine for the coronavirus.   THE INTERVIEWS Double Header!  Former Rep. Jane Harman (D-Calif.) warns pressure on intelligence community possibly leading to another misguided war, says John RatcliffeJohn Lee RatcliffeFlynn urged Russian diplomat to have 'reciprocal' response to Obama sanctions, new transcripts show READ: Newly declassified transcripts of Flynn calls with Russia ambassador Intel chief Ratcliffe declassifies transcripts of Flynn calls MORE overcommitting to Wuhan Lab virus story needs to follow evidence and not politics and maintains Russia and other nations and failed states trying to exploit America’s distraction at the moment         Watch the full interview here.     Mylan’s Heather Bresch calls on U.S. to make strategic reserve in medicines, says no country in world can make all of its own medicines and maintains U.S. is overly dependent on China for active ingredients and raw materials.         Watch the full interview here.   Sponsored Content Presented by Nokia     THE HILL'S CORONAVIRUS REPORT  Welcome to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. It’s Friday, May 15 Yesterday in my Editor’s Note, I wrote about the necessity of nightmares and avoiding false illusions and fantasy in this era of coronavirus carnage. But today in an oped for The Hill, I write about green sprouts — or “ventures” — that are being created by people trying to move a cause, sell some oysters or cheesecake online, or help young kids have a good birthday through “Remote Fun.” I write about big new online events companies, about mentors online and bakeries delivering special graduation packages. I did this because I recently became intrigued with a study, called Venture Forward, commissioned by GoDaddy along with the University of Iowa and Arizona State University that looked at the ecosystem of 20 million internet-based ventures that had been created — most businesses but many causes and nonprofits as well.   During the Great Recession of 2008-2009, those counties in the U.S. that had the most online-connected ventures created turned out to be the ones that recovered the fastest. Fascinating insights in the study — which I recommend readers investigate. But public policy officials — mayors, economic planners, governors and members of Congress — need to ask themselves what barriers are there to people building and starting a microenterprise? What regulations can be eased? What literacy in business or cause entrepreneurship can be nudged forward? These businesses cannot offset an unemployment figure greater than 36 million and growing, but they can give hope, help with resilience in a community and create a personal mission or cause for people in a time of nightmares.   – Steve Clemons Your Coronavirus Report team includes Steve Clemons, editor-at-large of The Hill, and researcher Andrew Wargofchik. Follow us on Twitter at @SCClemons and @a_wargofchik. CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.   THE HILL 'VIRTUALLY' LIVE  Next Week: Treasury Secretary Steven MnuchinSteven Terner MnuchinHillicon Valley: Twitter flags Trump tweet for 'glorifying violence' | Cruz calls for criminal investigation into Twitter over alleged sanctions violations | Senators urge FTC to investigate TikTok child privacy issues On The Money: Senate Dems pump brakes on new stimulus checks | Trump officials sued over tax refunds | Fed to soon open small-business lending program Schumer slams Trump's Rose Garden briefing on China as 'pathetic' MORE joins The Hill's Editor-in-Chief Bob CusackRobert (Bob) CusackThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Mnuchin: More COVID-19 congressional action ahead On The Money: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | 2.4 million more Americans file new jobless claims | Top bank regulator abruptly announces resignation Overnight Health Care: Trump says US won't close over second COVID-19 wave | Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of needing another COVID-19 relief bill | Why the US has the most reported coronavirus cases in the world MORE  U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Steven Mnuchin will join The Hill’s editor-in-chief Bob Cusack for a one-on-one interview next Thursday, May 21, at 11 a.m. EDT. The interview will be part of our larger virtual summit exploring efforts to safely reopen the country and restore the nation’s economy.            Join us for our upcoming virtual event “The Vir-tech-tual World Ahead,” that focuses on our dramatic shift to a digital ecosystem at a time when digital literacy continues to be uneven, much as basic access to the internet.    Steve Clemons, The Hill’s editor-at-large, will be speaking with:    > FCC Commissioner Michael O’Rielly  > Rep. Suzan DelBeneSuzan Kay DelBeneExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support House Democrats press Treasury on debit cards used for coronavirus relief payments Hillicon Valley: Trump threatens Michigan, Nevada over mail-in voting | Officials call for broadband expansion during pandemic | Democrats call for investigation into Uber-Grubhub deal MORE (D-Wash.)  > Superintendent of the Dallas Independent School District Michael Hinojosa > Next Century Cities Executive Director Francella Ochillo  > Information Technology Industry Council President and CEO Jason Oxman    REGISTER HERE. And join the conversation using #TheHillVirtuallyLive.   CORONAVIRUS NUMBERS AT A GLANCE  There are 4,498,579 reported cases of COVID-19 throughout the world and 303,825 deaths from the virus.    The U.S. is reporting 1,420,299 cases and 86,228 deaths as of the time of this newsletter. Russia is reporting 262,843 cases. 238,001 in the U.K. 230,183 in Spain. 223,096 in Italy. 206,507 in Brazil. Turkey is reporting 144,749 cases. Iran 116,635. Portugal is reporting 28,583 cases, but the number of hospitalized patients in the country has dropped by more than 17 percent since lockdown measures were loosed on May 4. 26,891 cases in Singapore. 13,610 in Colombia. 10,989 cases in Denmark, where Thursday marked the first day since mid-March with no new virus deaths.   From Reid Wilson, The Hill’s National Correspondent: A glimpse into coronavirus case rates throughout the U.S.: Alabama worst day so far on Thursday, +401 cases, up to 11,101. Alaska has gone 32 days without a double-digit case increase. Hawaii's streak is 26 days. Montana's is 28 days. Vermont's is 11. Illinois had its worst day on Tuesday, +4,045 cases, up to 88,081. The state added almost 9,000 new cases in the last three days. New Jersey had two days this week with fewer than 1,000 cases for the first time since March 25. North Carolina had its worst day yet Thursday, +743 cases, up to 16,593 total. Texas had its worst day yet Wednesday, adding 1,474 cases. 45,169 cases in total.  WASHINGTON WATCH  Hope fades for more coronavirus relief before June. Striking a bipartisan deal over a new coronavirus relief bill is becoming increasingly unlikely before June as Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnellAddison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellFor city parks: Pass the Great American Outdoors Act now US ill-prepared for coronavirus-fueled mental health crisis Schumer to GOP: Cancel 'conspiracy hearings' on origins of Russia probe MORE (R-Ky.) and Speaker Nancy PelosiNancy Pelosi Sunday shows preview: Leaders weigh in as country erupts in protest over George Floyd death 5 things to know about US-China tensions over Hong Kong Pelosi calls Trump's decision to withdraw US from WHO 'an act of extraordinary senselessness' MORE (D-Calif.) are at odds over additional legislation. (The Hill)    McConnell: “High likelihood” that Congress will need to pass fifth coronavirus bill. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) said Thursday evening that Congress would likely need to pass a fifth coronavirus relief bill, but declined to give a timeline for additional legislation. McConnell, during a Fox News interview, said he did "anticipate" that Congress will need to "act again at some point" but that Republicans first wanted to review the roughly $2.8 trillion already appropriated by Congress. (The Hill)    CDC issues tools to guide reopening of schools, businesses, transit. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) released a set of documents on Thursday designed to provide guidance on how child care centers, schools, restaurants and bars, and other establishments could begin the process of reopening in the face of the coronavirus. The direction comes after calls from lawmakers and state officials mounted for the CDC to weigh in on how regions should reopen their economies.  Senate Majority leader says Obama administration “did leave behind” pandemic plan. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) on Thursday walked back comments made earlier this week that the Obama administration didn't leave behind a "game plan" for a pandemic. (The Hill)   LAWMAKERS TWEET  Sen. Mark WarnerMark Robert WarnerExpanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support Senate Democrats pump brakes on new stimulus checks Trump signs order targeting social media firms' legal protections MORE (D-Va.)  @MarkWarner Don’t forget, the Trump administration is going to the Supreme Court in the middle of a pandemic, trying to dismantle coverage and pre-existing conditions protections for millions of Americans.   House Republican Conference Chairwoman Liz CheneyElizabeth (Liz) Lynn CheneyHillicon Valley: House FISA bill in jeopardy | Democrats drop controversial surveillance measure | GOP working on legislation to strip Twitter of federal liability protections The Hill's Campaign Report: Trump ramps up attacks against Twitter The Hill's Coronavirus Report: National Portrait Gallery's Kim Sajet says this era rewiring people's relationship with culture, art; Trump's war with Twitter heats up  MORE (Wyo.)   @Liz_Cheney No, @SpeakerPelosi, holding China accountable for the death and devastation they have caused is not “an interesting diversion.” Maybe you should have been focused on China earlier this year when you were busy handing out fancy impeachment pens.   Rep. Lisa Blunt Rochester (D-Del.)  @RepLBR Today’s a big day. The House is back in session to vote on the #HeroesAct - a bold and necessary step in our fight against #COVID19. From testing, to tracing, to treatment - this package takes the bold action we need now. #ForThePeople.   ACROSS THE NATION  NYC extends stay-at-home order while some upstate areas are allowed to reopen. As parts of upstate New York prepared for a gradual reopening, Gov. Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo calls Brooklyn clashes 'disturbing,' asks attorney general to review Overnight Health Care: Trump says US 'terminating' relationship with WHO | Cuomo: NYC on track to start reopening week of June 8 | COVID-19 workplace complaints surge 10 things to know today about coronavirus MORE (D) issued an executive order late Thursday night extending stay-at-home orders for regions, including New York City, that do not meet the state’s criteria. Cuomo had earlier said that Central New York, which includes Syracuse, had joined four other upstate regions where some nonessential businesses — including construction, manufacturing and curbside retail — could restart Friday after meeting seven benchmarks set by the state. (New York Times)    Nation’s largest mall to reopen June 1. The largest mall in the United States, Mall of America, won't open its doors until June 1 despite Minnesota's expiring stay-at-home order this month, according to the Star Tribune, Minnesota Gov. Tim WalzTimothy (Tim) James WalzOmar says some protestors 'felt terrorized by the presence of tanks,' National Guard Trump says National Guard should have been used in Minneapolis two days ago: 'No games' Military units placed on four-hour recall status to assist Minnesota authorities with protests MORE (D) announced on Wednesday that the state's stay-at-home order would expire Monday, allowing nonessential retail stores and malls to reopen amid the coronavirus pandemic. (The Hill)    City of Pittsburgh says large group events will not be allowed this summer, including July 4 fireworks. The city of Pittsburgh announced how summertime activities will be impacted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on Friday. Officials said that while many activities will be allowed, others will be canceled or postponed. All decisions follow the federal and state guidelines. Large events that cannot comply safely with social distancing guidelines — from July 4 fireworks to the annual Great Race 5K — will not be allowed. (WTAE)    Re-imaging the first LGBTQ+ pride online in the age of coronavirus. “The unprecedented challenges of COVID-19 mean that most Prides will not take place as planned in 2020, but we’re determined that this won’t stop us from coming together as a united, strong LGBTQIA+ community to celebrate who we are and what we stand for,” says Kristine Garina, president of the European Pride Organisers Association. “We need community and connection more than ever.” (The Hill)   WORLD VIEW   The coronavirus is upending cash economies. Mobile money could emerge as the winner. In the United States and elsewhere, mobile money services such as Apple Pay, Google Pay and PayPal, along with its subsidiary Venmo, are rising in popularity by offering mobile wallets that allow users to send money digitally. A similar model has taken off in developing countries, particularly in Africa, targeting those with no or limited access to the banking and financial system. Experts and members of the industry say the pandemic is likely to escalate that trend. (Washington Post)     New coronavirus cases nearly triple in Germany after lockdown loosened. On Monday, it looked like newly reported cases, hospitalizations and fatalities in Germany were decreasing. Just one day later, the number of new cases had almost tripled from the day before. The Robert Koch Institute, the German federal government agency responsible for disease control and prevention, reported an estimated 357 new coronavirus cases on May 11. The next day, that number jumped to 933 new cases. (The Hill)   Yemen, buffeted by war, is now ravaged by pandemic, too. It was just two weeks ago that war-ravaged Yemen, the Arab world’s poorest country, reported its first cluster of coronavirus cases. Since then infections appear to have exploded, realizing the worst fears of aid groups. The five-year war in Yemen and the nine-year one in Syria have combined with the pandemic to create especially dire challenges for vulnerable civilian populations. (New York Times)   SCIENCE  Five recent developments contributing to progress in vaccine R&D. Much attention has been given to the speed at which biopharmaceutical researchers are working to identify and develop safe and effective vaccines against the coronavirus. The first clinical trial for a potential vaccine identified by a biopharmaceutical company was initiated less than three months after the first reported case. See here for five recent developments contributing to the industry’s progress in vaccine research and development. (Innovation.org)   Sponsored Content Presented by Nokia    BUSINESS  Less than 40 percent of small businesses have received emergency coronavirus loans: Census Bureau. Less than 40 percent of small businesses have received support from the Treasury Department and Small Business Administration's (SBA) emergency coronavirus lending initiative, according to Census Bureau data released Thursday. While 74.9 percent of respondents to the Census Bureau’s survey of small businesses applied for a forgivable loan through the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), only 38.1 percent received aid. (The Hill)    J.C. Penny is planning to file for bankruptcy as early as Friday. J.C. Penney is planning to file for bankruptcy protection, people familiar with the matter tell CNBC. Its advisers are currently working on a bankruptcy filing that could Friday. They cautioned there is still a chance that final negotiations between the retailer and its lenders spill into the weekend and delay the filing. (CNBC)    Retail sales fall 16.4 percent in April. The shutdowns across the United States devastated retailers in April, as retail sales plunged a record 16.4 percent, according to government data reported Friday. That followed an 8.3 percent drop in March, producing by far the largest two-month decline on record. (New York Times)   ISSUES, CAUSES, PASSIONS  While COVID wrecks the economy, US entrepreneurship and new ventures are hopeful green sprouts. These examples of new-venture creation don’t fix the aggregate of massive economic loss in the country. But we do know that ventures help with resiliency, they help their communities recover more quickly and, perhaps most importantly, they empower people, inspire others and generate hope alongside some income. (Steve Clemons for The Hill)    America’s debt threatens our national security. Congress has passed more than $2.7 trillion in stimulus. This includes subsidized loans to businesses, increased unemployment insurance, direct payments to Americans, and funding for hospitals and state and local governments. As a result, the federal deficit will be at least $3.7 trillion for fiscal 2020 — because we already were running a $1 trillion deficit before we added the coronavirus stimulus. (Willis Krumholz for The Hill)   GENEROUS SPIRITS These identical twin sisters are nurses working in the same COVID-19 unit. Samantha and Rebecca Silverman are working together for the first time on the job on what will likely be the hardest assignment of their careers. The 25-year-old identical twin sisters are both registered nurses working in the COVID-19 unit at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago. "We really are best friends," Samantha said. "Amidst all the craziness of COVID, to be able to work alongside each other is just so lucky for us." (Good Morning America)  ICYMI: STEVE'S INTERVIEWS, 15 MINUTES EACH  > Steve interviews Rep. ROSA DELAURO (D-Conn.) > Steve interviews BIO President and CEO JIM GREENWOOD  > Steve interviews former Surgeon General VIVEK MURTHY  > Steve interviews World Central Kitchen founder chef JOSE ANDRES  > Steve interviews Rep. WILL HURD (R-Texas)  > Steve interviews Sen. JOHN BARRASSO (R-Wyo.)  > Steve interviews Rep. LEE ZELDIN (R-N.Y.)  > Steve interviews former Maryland Lt. Gov. and ex-RNC Chair MICHAEL STEELE  > Steve interviews former U.S. Energy Secretary ERNEST MONIZ  > Steve interviews Sen. JOE MANCHIN (D-W.Va.)  Watch all Coronavirus Report interviews here.   YOUR WORLD, YOUR STORIES  SEND US YOUR OWN PICS – from your own walks or adventures – during this time of physical distancing but social connection. And SEND US YOUR STORIES of how teleworking is going, what you have learned from homeschooling, new ways to exercise, and special moments or standout heroism you want to share. What’s working for you? What’s comic in these dark days?    Send to YourStories@TheHill.com. Our thoughts are with you, our readers, and we hope and trust that no matter the weight of burdens on you now — and it’s not a good story for everyone we know — that we all stand together, resilient and confident, on the other side of this. There will be another side.   CLICK HERE to subscribe to The Hill’s Coronavirus Report. To stay up-to-date on all things coronavirus, visit TheHill.com and SUBSCRIBE to our Overnight Healthcare newsletter.      VIEW ALL – CORONAVIRUS REPORT ARCHIVE View the discussion thread.

The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews former Rep. Jane Harman (D-Calif.), CEO of the Woodrow Wilson Center. Read excerpts from the interview below.   Clemons: Let’s focus on national security. What most worries you? What do you see out there about those trying to exploit this moment and cause increasing troubles for the United States?      Tell us your thoughts on John RatcliffeJohn Lee RatcliffeFlynn urged Russian diplomat to have 'reciprocal' response to Obama sanctions, new transcripts show READ: Newly declassified transcripts of Flynn calls with Russia ambassador Intel chief Ratcliffe declassifies transcripts of Flynn calls MORE for the role of the Director of National Intelligence. Harman: Well, I don't know what he's looked at, but my understanding from publicly reported sources is at least 12 presidential daily briefs, briefed the president, this president, in January and February on the possible coronavirus threat to the United States. Those briefings were ignored. So, let's start with that. What I'm talking about is in the run up to war with Iraq, I was there. I was ranking member on the House Intelligence Committee at the time. There was enormous pressure on the intelligence community to produce proof, proof that there were weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. Now everybody knew Saddam wanted to develop WMDs, and he did have certainly a chemical industry going on there. He had gassed his own people, and so we all understood that. But the pressure produced a wrong National Intelligence Estimate. Now, what I see is pressure on the IC [intelligence community] where we've had huge turnover in leadership. Ratcliffe would come in, he's been nominated to be Director of National Intelligence, he hasn't been confirmed yet, but some call it a purge at the top and enormous pressure. And if the pressure is to produce proof, proof that there was a man-made virus developed and distributed in the Wuhan lab, no proof for that that I'm aware of, then we'll come up with another wrong intelligence product that could lead to another misguided war.   Clemons: There almost seems to be a partisan divide over how science and empirical research are dealt with around the president. Do you worry about that? Harman: Sure, I do. I don't know — It's probably a partisan divide in Washington because everything's a partisan divide in Washington. But when you look at what the states are doing and the efforts of governors, both Democrats and Republicans, I don't see that kind of divide. I have a kind of personal heroes list, of course, my own governor’s Gavin NewsomGavin NewsomSupreme Court denies California church's challenge to state restrictions Supreme Court denies Illinois churches' request for action after state eases restrictions Coronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Rep. Ro Khanna MORE of California. But Andrew CuomoAndrew CuomoCuomo calls Brooklyn clashes 'disturbing,' asks attorney general to review Overnight Health Care: Trump says US 'terminating' relationship with WHO | Cuomo: NYC on track to start reopening week of June 8 | COVID-19 workplace complaints surge 10 things to know today about coronavirus MORE is doing well. Mike DeWine, who was a friend of mine in Congress, governor of Ohio, a Republican, who is doing great. Larry Hogan, another Republican doing great. These are governors of pretty big states, trying to figure out how to have both, protect the health of their citizens and have an economy that will be able to function in a fairly near term while protecting the health of their citizens. And that's what they're doing. So, I just want to give a shout-out to most of the governors. They all seem to be very sensible to me.   Clemons: What will it take to actually invest in the protection, in the infrastructure, and the investment in science that we need for this pandemic and the next one? Harman: Well, let's start with leadership — leadership that wants to solve the problem, not just blame leadership on the other side for not solving the problem. And it's hard for leaders in Congress to show leadership. I would give my Girl Scout badge to [Speaker] Nancy PelosiNancy Pelosi Sunday shows preview: Leaders weigh in as country erupts in protest over George Floyd death 5 things to know about US-China tensions over Hong Kong Pelosi calls Trump's decision to withdraw US from WHO 'an act of extraordinary senselessness' MORE, who worked very closely with Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin on the last big bill, the multitrillion-dollar bill, which is providing some aid for a lot of folks. ... I don't have specific information, but I'm listening to the chairman of the Fed yesterday saying we need more and let's have bipartisan leadership focus on what the next tranche should be. I take seriously the ballooning, exploding deficit. I think it's a real problem for national security, American security going forward. But I also think it won't matter if we have a big deficit, if we have a lot of dead people and no economy.   Clemons: What do you think some of your former colleagues and the Democratic Party haven't gotten right as they've stepped forward?   Harman: Somebody has to say — and a few do and I bet you Joe ManchinJoseph (Joe) ManchinDemocratic unity starts to crack in coronavirus liability reform fight Stakes high for Collins in coronavirus relief standoff The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Surgeon General stresses need to invest much more in public health infrastructure, during and after COVID-19; Fauci hopeful vaccine could be deployed in December  MORE is one of those — I'm gonna put the country first. This is a problem. The COVID virus is an invisible enemy, to quote our president. It doesn't choose us by party affiliation. So, if we don't put the country first here, again, we're gonna have a lot of dead people and a dead economy. And that is just how it is. And so I would say to my constituents, and I had a pretty bipartisan district all those years. I would say to my constituents, this is what I think. I would be willing to talk to any of them, but I would take a risk and do what I thought was the right thing, regardless of which party I was voting with or working with.   Clemons: How prepared or unprepared are we, in your eyes, for the November election and this worry about outside meddling? Harman: Well, I'm worried about it. I think we're better prepared than we were in 2018 for sure, or 2016. And I, you know, shout-out to the Department of Homeland Security, which is working well with all the states. Let's understand the states regulate the time and manner of elections. We don't have a national election. We have 50 state elections. But they are working with the federal government. Just before the end of the Obama administration, election machinery and the election process was declared critical infrastructure, which it is. And so that's good. Also a shout-out to some states, like mine, California, which is going to all mail, M-A-I-L not M-A-L-E voting. And I think that's a good thing. It obviously has to be worked on so that it can't be manipulated. But let's expect that Russia and others will try to be there and let's understand that we have a way to go and we have technology that could go there to make a vote-by-mail election secure. Another reason to do that, by the way, Steve, of course, is if we have COVID-19 in our fall, which is predicted or some permutation, which is even worse. God forbid. People are not gonna go to polling places. And, I heard that Jared KushnerJared Corey KushnerTrump's strategy to stay in office Trump tries to soothe anxious GOP senators Press: King Donald's goal - no checks, no balances MORE — this could be an urban legend — said, well, then maybe we won't have an election. Well, oops! I don't think that's the White House's call. I think our Constitution provides that we have elections for president and other offices every four years, and the states have to regulate that. And I think most of our states, and I would hope all of our states, are up to that.   Clemons: I'd love to get your insights as a sculptor of big legislation in the past. How should we be thinking? Is Ernest MonizErnest Jeffrey MonizThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Surgeon General stresses need to invest much more in public health infrastructure, during and after COVID-19; Fauci hopeful vaccine could be deployed in December  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mnuchin sees 'strong likelihood' of another relief package; Warner says some businesses 'may not come back' at The Hill's Advancing America's Economy summit  The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Mastercard CEO Ajay Banga says supporting small business single most important thing we should do now; Teva's Brendan O'Grady says U.S. should stockpile strategic reserve in drugs like Strategic Oil Reserve MORE on the right track with calling for a TVA or CCC? Where are you on tech and what it can do to sort of rebuild our social contract in America? Harman: Well, I think tech is no longer optional, if it ever was. Even I have learned how to sort of kind of work Zoom and do a few other things that I never thought I could do. But I think the future of work is going to be much more technology based. I think not everyone's going back to an office, so let's start with that. I think that, you know, to quote Rahm Emanuel, "Let's not let a crisis go to waste." This crisis could be an accelerator of bad things, that is, more dictators controlling more of their countries, or it could be an accelerator of good things. And that is using technology to build jobs of the future in the energy sector, certainly, that's one. But you know, climate is a gigantic challenge, but also jobs in the national security sector, and in the health care sector. All of this stuff could benefit from technology. I've just been watching, another shout-out, Ken Burns’s series on the Roosevelts, and how Franklin Roosevelt, at the darkest time, before this time, developed all these new agencies, the ones you were talking about, which jump-started our economy. And then came a war. Let's not start another war. He didn't start World War II. And the defense production business lifted millions out of unemployment. So, I'm not recommending war, but I am recommending taking on the big challenges that we know we face and doing exactly what Ernie Moniz says. View the discussion thread.

The Hill’s Steve Clemons interviews Heather Bresch, CEO of pharmaceutical company Mylan. Read excerpts from the interview below. Clemons: What are the supply chain realities? Are we in trouble or are we secure?    Clemons: How should we deal both competitively with China, but also constructively? Bresch: There's no question there is an over reliance, both on intermediates as well as active pharmaceuticals and some finished dosage forms, on China. I think that the diversification you spoke of, what our supply chain, almost half of our raw materials come from China and India and almost half come from Europe or other countries. So, I think as a country, countries need to look at that same diversification. As I said, You're never gonna be able to say we're going to make everything we need in the United States. What we could do is have a much more strategic approach so there's not an over reliance on any one part of the world, not only from a trade or a relationship perspective, but you never know how a crisis is gonna hit or could take a country offline for some period of time. So, I, you know, I've been in conversations with legislators and regulators thinking about, could we be more strategic about the Western Hemisphere? And thinking about countries that could be natural allies to help build up their capabilities. I think we're gonna have to take a long-term view on this to not only strategically be diversified, but really think about the alliances and how we’re not over reliant on any one country because, as you know, those relationships are going to come and go and have their ups and downs.   Clemons: What is the hydroxychloroquine story? Is it being clinically successful? Is it not? Were the steps that we took to stockpile the drug a misstep? Bresch: Let me start with this, science is important and plays a critical role in giving us information and insight to how drugs are working on treatments, and that is a necessary step. I think that the ups and downs and the surges with hydroxy has been we have not completely let the science vet out. And I think it's gonna be until fall until a lot of these very large, statistically significant clinical studies, until those end points come back. I think obviously we're seeing more anecdotal information that would say, perhaps it's not being as effective as we had hoped. And I think to your point there are many other products, remdesivir being one. I don't know If you saw that yesterday, Gilead announced partnering with companies — Mylan is one of the companies they're partnering with — for us to be able to manufacture and produce the product. And we're going to continue to be working with them to do just that globally. So hopefully given our platform and given the diversification us being able to partner with governments, with other companies that we’re continuing to be able to leverage this platform and be able to work very effectively and efficiently and very quickly to hopefully be able to, as science continues, as clinical trials come in, as we get more data, we're gonna be able to respond to that pretty rapidly.   Clemons: How hopeful are you that we will get some therapies and vaccines at the end of this race? Bresch: I'm very hopeful. I mean, I think if COVID hasn't done anything, it has showed not only the human spirit, the human resiliency and the human ingenuity. And I think as we see globally really coming together scientists from around the world, the best research in the world coming together, there's no question that we're going to, I very much believe, not only have treatment, but hopefully a cure. I think we've got to recognize time. You know, when you think back about HIV and the evolution of our understanding of that virus and how smart it was and how much it could manipulate itself inside the human body, that it would take a cocktail of products, it would take us years to figure out what that cocktail needed to be. When you think about something in the infectious disease, these viruses are smart, and it takes time to figure out how they're going to mutate, how we build an immune response, the best effective way to treat them, whether that's one drug, multiple drugs, ultimately a vaccine. But I absolutely believe that when this world rallies together, as I think we are around COVID, there's no question we're gonna accelerate those timelines. We're gonna accelerate getting to a treatment that works. But unfortunately, the race against the tragedy of this disease and the lives it's taking between now and then is just that — it's tragic. But I totally believe that we're going to absolutely have a treatment, you know, in the near future.   Clemons: There are a lot of skeptics out there that say, at the end of the day, we're not gonna have enough supply. Not everyone's going to get it. And there are gonna be some costs and accessibility issues. I'd love to get your thoughts. Bresch: Look, that, the balancing act of accessibility and affordability is, you know, one that's constant and the responsibility is significant. And I think as companies think about how to balance that act, there’s a lot of work in that area. There's no question. I think Gilead is a great example here just recently. I think they were very upfront about what they were capable of supplying. And that's why bringing on other companies to partner with them, to make sure that as the science develops, and if this product is going to show any hope for treatment, that they can quickly be able to ramp up and have these other companies ramp up production. So, I think as one of the largest generic pharmaceutical companies in the world, our focus and vigilance on reaching as many people as possible, getting medicine into the hands of the people who need it has been our mission for 60 years, and I can assure you that that's front and foremost in our mind. I think that the pharmaceutical industry has cured many diseases over the hundreds of years that it's been in business. It's not only shown treatments and cures and has completely moved the needle on the quality of life that we live. But that's only as good as getting it where it needs to be. So, yes, I think this industry will continue to come together and do the right thing and provide access to this medicine. And I think that obviously the costs that go into developing these products as you look across peoples, pipeline and products, there's no question there's cost and research and development is expensive, but the ability to partner and to lower cost economics and to lower cost countries, our ability to like I said, reach those people is utmost important. We showed we could do that on HIV and I think there's no reason we can't show that on COVID or any other crisis or disease that could be inflicted, you know, as we continue to be part of a very global economy.   Clemons: A lot of policy folks are watching this show. What do you think they most need to know? Bresch: So, I think two parts to that. I think our first discussion around strategic supply, I think here in the very near term, not trying to do something that would have significant unintended consequences. I've seen bills being proposed that talk about having only American produced medicine. I can assure you that would do way more damage than COVID has done to our society. So, to be thoughtful about how we think about supply would be first. I think longer term, to your point, COVID is certainly illuminating the issues and the weaknesses of the drug supply system here in the United States from pricing to access. So, do I think that we hopefully now COVID has certainly brought this front and center, and we should take this opportunity to absolutely study and look at the system, why we are where we are, and some of the fixes that it's going to take. And they're not easy. There's not one magic bullet, but we've continued to, you know, very much believe there is a road map to have a more sustainable, a more transparent system so that people know what they're buying, what the cost for what they're buying is, and how their employer or the government through their health care insurance can help supplement that. And today all of those areas are very, very opaque. There's no transparency, and that's something that I believe very much needs to happen. I think that that's going to take a lot of leadership in Washington. It's going to take people from both sides of the aisle to come together, and hopefully COVID is bringing a very unified look in response to this because that's what it's gonna take to fix the broken system that we're participating in right now. View the discussion thread.

North Carolina saw its largest daily number of new coronavirus cases on Thursday with 743, bringing the Tar Heel State's total to more than 16,500 as it continues with the first phase of its reopening plan. Before Thursday, the largest daily number was May 7, when the state saw 648 new COVID-19 cases. A day later, Gov. Roy Cooper (D) began phase one of the his plan to reopen the state, allowing retailers to reopen at half of their capacity while still following social distancing and other safety protocols. Gatherings of 10 or fewer people outside also became permitted again. Restaurants haven't yet resumed dine-in services, however, and salons, barbers, gyms, movie theaters and other businesses remain closed. North Carolina has gradually ramped up its testing capacity, which could possibly account for the record number of daily cases. Health experts also point to the percentage of positive tests when looking to see if a state is effectively curbing the spread of the virus. The reopening guidelines rolled out by the White House and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention say that a state must demonstrate, among other things, a 14-day downward trajectory in either daily cases or percentage of positive cases before reopening. Since peaking at 17 percent in mid-April, North Carolina's percentage of positive cases comes to around 7 percent. It's stayed between 5 and 9 percent since the beginning of the month. Cooper has said that the state could possibly move on to the second phase of reopening on May 22 if it continues to show progress, but he has cautioned that it's not a guarantee. “Our COVID-19 decisions are guided by the data and science,” Cooper said this week, The News and Observer reported. “We’ll use the time in this phase to keep a careful eye on the indicators before we are ready to announce the start of Phase Two.” View the discussion thread.

Florida Gov. Ron DeSantisRonald Dion DeSantis Sunday shows preview: Leaders weigh in as country erupts in protest over George Floyd death The battle of two Cubas Disney World plans to reopen in July MORE (R) announced that gyms in the state would be allowed to reopen on Monday with the proper social distancing and sanitization efforts.  “Effective Monday, gyms can operate," DeSantis said at a press conference in Jacksonville, Fla., on Friday.  “Don’t we want people to be getting exercise?” he continued. “Don’t we want people to be getting in shape?” DeSantis stressed that gymgoers would need to social distance themselves and continue to sanitize machines after use. He also encouraged outdoor forms of exercise.  The news was a part of DeSantis's announcement that the state would enter a "full" phase one of his three-phase plan reopening on Monday.  “We went to phase one but made clear we’re going smart, safe and step-by-step,” the governor said. “We did an initial phase one. We did not exhaust everything we could have in phase one.” Additionally, the governor announced that restaurants and retailers would be able to operate at 50 percent capacity after operating at 25 percent capacity in the initial phase one process. However, movie theaters in the state will remain closed.  There were 43,210 positive coronavirus cases in the state on Thursday, with a death toll of 1,875, according to the Florida Department of Health.  South Florida has been hit hardest by the virus, with Miami-Dade County accounting for 35 percent of the state's coronavirus cases alone.  DeSantis said Thursday that he approved plans for restaurants and nonessential businesses to reopen in Miami-Dade and Broward counties, including allowing restaurants in Miami-Dade county to operate at 50 percent capacity.  View the discussion thread.

President TrumpDonald John TrumpDonald Trump and Joe Biden create different narratives for the election The hollowing out of the CDC Poll: Biden widens lead over Trump to 10 points MORE's Rose Garden press conference on Friday was scored to the sound of blaring horns as truck drivers nearby protested for fair wages. The horns, which could be heard clearly from Constitution Avenue outside the White House, persisted throughout the president's remarks on his administration's efforts to speed the development and production of a coronavirus vaccine. The horns were audible for close to 30 minutes, prompting Trump to acknowledge them. He claimed they were a "sign of love" for his presidency.  "And you hear that outside, that beautiful sound? Those are truckers that are with us all the way. They’re protesting in favor of President Trump, as opposed to against," he said. "That’s the sign of love, not the sign of your typical protest," Trump added. "So I want to thank our great truckers."  President Trump: "Vaccine or no vaccine, we're back." pic.twitter.com/xJm8VqRmn8  The protest coincided with Trump's press conference to detail Operation Warp Speed, a government-wide initiative to speed the timeline to produce a coronavirus vaccine. White House chief of staff Mark MeadowsMark Randall MeadowsTrump to return to Florida for rescheduled SpaceX launch Pence names new press secretary House leaders take vote-counting operations online MORE later ventured out to meet with some of the protesters, according to a spokeswoman. The demonstration by truckers mirrored one from earlier this month in which drivers lined the street near the White House and laid on their horns to protest low shipping rates, which drivers say are making it difficult to make a living wage. Truckers are facing economic hardship as the economy contracts due to the pandemic, and The Washington Post reported that freight brokers have imposed low rates, further driving down their wages. Congress has not provided targeted relief for the trucking industry, though Trump hosted truck drivers at a White House event last month to praise drivers for supporting U.S. commerce and supply chains amid the pandemic. Updated at 2:33 p.m. View the discussion thread.

New Jersey, the state with the second most number of confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the country, experienced its first days with less than 1,000 new cases this week for the first time since March 25. The state, which is planning to reopen in phases in the coming weeks, saw 798 new cases of the virus on Tuesday and 817 on Wednesday. On Thursday, however, 1,144 new cases were reported. On March 25, the state reported 727 new cases, bringing its total then to just over 4,400. From there, the Garden State's number of daily COVID-19 cases skyrocketed, staying over 1,000 for roughly the next month and a half. As of Friday, the state has almost 143,000 confirmed cases and nearly 10,000 deaths.  New Jersey's overall number of new cases for the week is down, and the daily number of cases has been trending downward, in general. This time last week the state had reported 9,918 new cases. This week, it's only 5,619. The downward trend of weekly and daily cases is encouraging to state leaders, and this week Gov. Phil Murphy (D) outlined two parts of his phased reopening for the state. On Wednesday, Murphy said that "non-essential construction, curbside pickup at non-essential retail businesses, and car gatherings for the purpose of drive-through and drive-in events," would be permitted to resume this coming Monday. "I've been clear that data will determine dates, and what we are seeing gives us confidence that we can begin the careful restart of our economy," Murphy said. "Over the past eight weeks, New Jerseyans have taken our stay-at-home order seriously and have created the conditions that make this next phase possible. The steps we are taking allow for important standards of social distancing to continue with the return of safe, responsible business operations." The governor further outlined his plan on Thursday, saying that the state's boardwalks, beaches, lakes and lakeshores would reopen next Friday, May 22, just in time for Memorial Day weekend. Social distancing will still be enforced, however, and some parts of the waterfronts such as picnic areas, playgrounds, pavilions and visitor centers will remain closed. "I'm thrilled to announce that the Jersey Shore will be open to families across our state and region in a way that is consistent with protecting the public health of every beachgoer," Murphy said. "This action will ensure that New Jerseyans can enjoy our state's greatest natural resource ahead of the summer months."  New York and Connecticut, which together with New Jersey create a huge tri-state area, also announced that they would also be opening their beaches for Memorial Day with restrictions. The three states, because of their interdependency, have frequently worked together to implement similar policies throughout the pandemic. View the discussion thread.

